Chapter 1 - General Provisions
City Code Index Page | Next Chapter



Chapter Contents:
§ 1-1. How Code designated and cited.
§ 1-2. Definitions and rules of construction.
§ 1-3. Catch lines of sections; provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances.
§ 1-4. Severability of parts of Code.
§ 1-5. Repeal of ordinance not to affect liabilities, etc.
§ 1-6. Repeal not to revive former ordinance.
§ 1-7. General penalty.
§ 1-8. City seal.
§ 1-9. City logo.
§ 1-10. Custody and distribution of copies of Code.
§ 1-11 to 1-15. Reserved.


Sec. 1-1. How Code designated and cited.
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and may be designated "The Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri" and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as "Rolla City Code."

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 1-2. Definitions and rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code and of all other ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless it shall be otherwise expressly provided in any section or ordinance, or unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council, or unless the context clearly required otherwise:

City. The words "the city" or "this City" shall mean the City of Rolla, Missouri.

City council. The words "city council" or "the council" shall mean the city council of Rolla.

Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, that shall be excluded.

County. The words "the county" shall mean the County of Phelps, State of Missouri.

Fiscal year. The word "fiscal year" shall mean the financial year of the city, and shall include that period of time from the first day of July of any calendar year to the thirtieth day of June of the next calendar year, both dates inclusive.

Gender. When any subject matter, party or person is described or referred to by words importing the masculine, females as well as males, and associations and bodies corporate as well as individuals, shall be deemed to be included.

Joint authority. Words importing joint authority to three or more persons shall be construed as authority to a majority of such persons.

Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month.

Number. When any subject matter, party or person is described or referred to by words importing the singular number, the plural and separate matters and persons and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included.

Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the word "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed."

Owner. The word "owner", applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land.

Person. The word "person" shall include a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit as well as individuals. It shall also include an executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or other representative appointed according to law. Whenever the word "person" is used in any section of this Code prescribing a penalty or fine as to partnerships or associations, the word shall include the partners or members thereof, and as to corporations, shall include the officers, agents or members thereof who are responsible for any violation of such section.

Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively.

Property. The word "property" shall include real and tangible and intangible personal property.

Public way. The words "public way" shall include any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway, sidewalk or other public thoroughfare.

Real property. The terms "real property," "premises," "real estate" or "lands" shall be deemed to be co-extensive with lands, tenements and hereditaments.

Shall, may. The word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive.

Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean that portion of the street between the curb line and the adjacent property line which is intended for the use of pedestrians.

Signature. Where the written signature of any person is required, the proper handwriting of such person or his mark shall be intended.

State. The words "the state" or "this State" shall mean the State of Missouri.

Street. The word "street" shall mean and include any public way, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley or other public thoroughfare, and each of such words shall include all of them.

Tangible personal property. "Tangible personal property" shall include goods, chattels and all personal property, except household goods, furniture, wearing apparel and articles of personal use and adornment owned and used by a person in his home or dwelling place, and intangible personal property.

Tenant, occupant. The words "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.

Term - Council Representation. Unless specified to the contrary the term of any Council Representative appointed to a committee or board shall be one year from May through April. An appointed Council Representative will continue until a successor is approved by the City Council. (Ord. 3373, 1)

Writing. The word "writing" and "written" shall include printing, lithographing or any other mode of representing words and letters.

Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year, unless otherwise expressed, and the word "year" shall be equivalent to the words "year of our Lord."

All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. (Ord. 1886, 2; Ord. 1900, 1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 1-3. Catch lines of sections; provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances.
The catch lines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface, italic or underlined type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such section, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catch lines, are amended or re-enacted.

The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of "The Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri," shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments.

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 1-4. Severability of parts of Code.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 1-5. Repeal of ordinance not to affect liabilities, etc.
Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified, either expressly or by implication, by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the ordinance repealing or modifying the same shall go into effect unless therein otherwise expressly provided; but no suit, prosecution, proceeding, right, fine or penalty instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal shall in anywise be affected, released or discharged but may be prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if such ordinance or provision had continued in force, unless it shall be therein otherwise expressly provided.

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 1-6. Repeal not to revive former ordinance.
When an ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall itself be repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former ordinance, clause or provision unless it be expressly so provided and such former ordinance, clause or provision is set forth at length.

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 1-7. General penalty.
Except as hereinafter provided, whenever in this Code or in any other ordinance of the city or in any rule, regulation or order promulgated pursuant to such Code or other ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or in such other city ordinance, rule, regulation or order the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefore, the violation of any such provision of this Code or of any other ordinance of the city or of any rule, regulation or order promulgated pursuant to such Code or other city ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for a period of not exceeding three months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

Whenever any provision of the Revised Statutes of Missouri or other statute of the state limits the authority of the city to punish the violation of any particular provision of this Code or other city ordinance or rule, regulation or order promulgated pursuant thereto to a fine of less amount than that provided in this Section or imprisonment for a shorter term than that provided in this Section, then the violation of such particular provision of this Code or other city ordinance, rule, regulation or order shall be punished by the imposition of not more than the maximum fine or imprisonment so authorized or by both such fine or imprisonment.

Each day any violation of this Code or any other city ordinance or rule, regulation or order promulgated pursuant thereto shall continue to constitute a separate offense, unless otherwise provided. (Ord. 1727, 1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 1-8. City seal.
The city seal heretofore used by the city shall be the seal of this city until changed by the city council, and shall be attached to all ordinances, resolutions and orders passed by the city council, and to the authentication of all official acts of the mayor and city clerk, and the city clerk shall be the custodian of such seal. (Ord. 29, 1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 1-9. City logo.
The City Council of the City of Rolla, MO does hereby accept and adopt the following designs representative of the City of Rolla, Missouri:

The Logo of the City of Rolla shall consist of the name of the City in color blue imposed horizontally to be followed by the graphic lines of two foothills containing a tree, a river and a cloud as illustrated in Exhibit A attached hereto and made a part hereof.

logo

The Flag of the City of Rolla shall consist of the name of the City, “Rolla Missouri” in color blue with blue stars separating the words and surrounding the outline of the Frisco Train logo containing the year "1861" also in color blue contained within a white triangle from the left side of the flag. The top half of the remaining flag design will be in color red with the lower half of the remaining flag design in color blue as illustrated in Exhibit B attached hereto and made part hereof.

flag
(Ord. 2072, §1; Repealed by Ord. 3992, §1)

 

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 1-10. Custody and distribution of copies of Code.
The city clerk is hereby designated as the custodial officer of the Code of the city.

The city clerk shall keep all copies of such Code in his possession until such time as copies of such Code shall be distributed or sold, as hereinafter provided. The city clerk shall keep a record in his office, which record will indicate the number of copies of such Code in his possession, the number of copies distributed and to whom distributed under the provisions of this Section, the number of copies sold under the provisions of this Section and the amount of money received from the sale of copies of such Code.

The city clerk is hereby authorized and directed to distribute copies of such Code to city officials, for their use.

Each elected official - One copy
City clerk - Three copies
Police department - Two copies
Fire department - One copy
City engineer - One copy
Board of public works - One copy
Rolla Public Library - One copy
Rolla Senior High School Library - One copy
University of Missouri at Rolla - One copy
Headquarters, Troop "I", Missouri State Highway Patrol - One copy

All copies of such Code distributed to city officials, under the provision of subsection (c) hereof, shall remain the property of the city. No elected or appointive officer of the city shall receive final payment of compensation which may be due from the city at the expiration of an elective or appointive term of office until such time as such officer has returned to the city clerk the copy or copies of such code which has been distributed to such officer by the city clerk under the provisions of this Section.

The city clerk is hereby authorized to sell copies of such Code for the following costs:
Unbound copy - $200.00
Bound copy - $225.00
Zoning Chapter (unbound) - $40.00
Zoning Chapter (bound) - $50.00
Annual supplement - $35.00
(Ord. 1210, 1-5; Ord. 2537, 1; Ord. 2660, 1.)

(Return to Contents)

Secs. 1-11 to 1-15. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)

Chapter 2 - Administration
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter


Chapter Contents:
Article I - City Council
§ 2-1. Number of members and term of office.
§ 2-2. Qualifications for councilman.
§ 2-3. City council to determine election in case of tie vote.
§ 2-4. Meetings and adjournments thereof.
§ 2-5. President pro tempore
§ 2-5.1 Duties: president pro tempore.
§ 2-6. Quorum - Generally.
§ 2-7. Same - Suspension of rules or order; when permitted.
§ 2-8. Robert's Rules of Order.
§ 2-9. Record of proceedings; attendance of members.
§ 2-10. Power of council to issue subpoenas generally; president to issue oaths to witnesses.
§ 2-11. Oath of office.
§ 2-12. Compensation.
§ 2-13. Vacancies.
§ 2-14. Procedure for enactment of ordinances.
§§ 2-15 to 2-18. Reserved.
Article II - City Officers and Employees Generally
Division 1 - Generally
§ 2-19. "Officer" defined.
§ 2-20. Salaries generally.
§ 2-21. Salary schedule.
§ 2-22. Worker's Compensation Act accepted by city.
§ 2-23. Mayor to file certain notice, etc., as to acceptance, etc., of worker's compensation.
§ 2-24. Reimbursement and compensation for expenses incurred outside of city.
§ 2-25. Abolishing the elective office of city assessor.
§ 2-26. Abolishing the elective offices of city collector and city treasurer.
§§ 2-27 to 2-28. Reserved.
Division 2 - Removal From Office
§ 2-29. Removal power - Elective officers.
§ 2-30. Same - Appointive officers.
§ 2-31. Generally.
§ 2-32. Charges against officers - How preferred; effect thereof; service on the accused.
§ 2-33. Same - Hearing date fixed; service of summons.
§ 2-34. Conduct of hearing on charges - Results of hearing.
§ 2-35. Same - Representation at hearing.
§ 2-36. Same - Power to subpoena witnesses; compel testimony.
§ 2-37. Records of hearing.
§§ 2-38 to 2-42. Reserved.
Division 3 - Social Security
§ 2-43. Extended to certain employees and officers.
§ 2-44. Persons authorized to execute and implement plan.
§ 2-45. Deductions from wages.
§ 2-46. Administration of plan.
§ 2-47. Contributions by city.
§§ 2-48 to 2-52. Reserved.
Division 4 - Retirement System
§ 2-53. Classification of eligible employees to be covered by state local government employees retirement system.
§ 2-54. Consideration of total prior employment for prior service credit.
§ 2-55. Deduction of member contributions; remittance of deductions and employer contributions to retirement system.
§ 2-56. Adoption of the Missouri Local Government Employee's Retirement System.
§ 2-57. Refunding of any and all accumulated member contributions from the Missouri Local Government Employees Retirement System.
§§ 2-58 to 2-60. Reserved.
Division 5 - Vacancies in Elective and Nonelective Offices
§ 2-61. Generally.
§§ 2-62 to 2-66. Reserved.
Article III - Elective Officers
Division 1 - Mayor
§ 2-67. Election; council to decide tie vote; term of office.
§ 2-68. Qualifications for mayor.
§ 2-69. Compensation.
§ 2-70. Repealed by Ord. 3100.
§ 2-71. Vacancy in office; temporary filling of vacancy; when special election required.
§ 2-72. Mayor as president of council; to vote in case of tie; exception; general duties.
§ 2-73. Veto and approval of ordinances - Authority; effect of failure to act.
§ 2-74. Same - Effect of approval; reconsideration by council; passage over veto.
§ 2-75. Veto power over resolutions and orders involving expenditures.
§ 2-76. Communications to council.
§ 2-77. Power to require accounting by city officers.
§ 2-78. Duty to sign commissions, bonds, drafts, etc.
§ 2-79. Power to appoint certain officers.
§ 2-80. Duty to enforce laws; power to conscript help.
§ 2-81. Power to remit fines, grant reprieves, etc., limitations on such power.
§ 2-82. Power to sign deeds.
§ 2-83. Ministerial duties.
§ 2-84. Administrative Oversight.
§§ 2-85 to 2-87. Reserved.
Division 2 - City Attorney
§ 2-88. Qualifications.
§ 2-89. Compensation.
§ 2-90. Duties generally.
§§ 2-91 to 2-127. Reserved.
Division 3 - Municipal Judge
§ 2-128. Establishment of position.
§ 2-129. Court established.
§ 2-130. Interim municipal judge.
§ 2-131. Term of office.
§ 2-132. Selection of judge.
§ 2-133. Vacation of office
§ 2-134. Qualifications for office.
§ 2-135. Compensation.
§ 2-136. Repealed by Ord. 3101, §1.
§ 2-137. Superintending authority.
§ 2-138. Report to the city council.
§ 2-139. Docket and court records.
§ 2-140. Powers and duties of municipal judge.
§ 2-141. Traffic violations bureau.
§ 2-142. Issuance and execution of warrants.
§ 2-143. Jury trials.
§ 2-144. Summoning of witnesses.
§ 2-145. Transfer of complaint to associate circuit judge.
§ 2-146. Confinement of defendants.
§ 2-147. Parole and probation.
§ 2-148. Right of appeal.
§ 2-149. Appeal from jury verdicts.
§ 2-150. Breach of recognizance.
§ 2-151. Disqualification of municipal judge.
§ 2-152. Temporary municipal judge.
§ 2-153. Compensation of temporary municipal judge.
§ 2-154. Court costs.
§ 2-155. Same, assess against prosecuting witness.
§ 2-156. Installment payment of fine.
§ 2-157. Court clerk.
§§ 2-158 to 2-162. Reserved.
Article IV - Appointive Officers
Division 1 - City Administrator
§ 2-163. Office of city administrator.
§ 2-164. Appointment and tenure.
§ 2-165. Qualifications.
§ 2-166. Bond.
§ 2-167. Compensation.
§ 2-168. Removal of city administrator.
§ 2-169. Repealed.
§ 2-170. Powers
§ 2-171. Interference by members of the city council.
§ 2-172. Severance clause.
§ 2-173. Operation of municipal utilities.
§§ 2-174 to 2-178. Reserved.
Division 2 - City Counselor
§ 2-179. Position established.
§ 2-180. Appointment; compensation.
§ 2-181. Qualifications.
§ 2-182. Duties.
§§ 2-183 to 2-186. Reserved.
Division 3 - City Clerk
§ 2-187. Appointment of city clerk.
§ 2-188. Repealed.
§ 2-189. Same - Authority to establish office rules.
§ 2-190. Bond.
§ 2-191. Duty to attest warrant, etc.; issuance of licenses.
§ 2-192. Preparation, etc., of tax books.
§ 2-193. Appointment, powers and duties of deputy city clerk.
§§ 2-194 to 2-198. Reserved.
Division 4 - City Engineer
§ 2-199. Appointment; term of office.
§ 2-200. Qualifications.
§ 2-201. Duties generally.
§ 2-202. Records to be kept.
§ 2-203. Assistants generally.
§§ 2-204 to 2-208. Reserved.
Division 5 - Public Works Director
§ 2-209. Position established; duties; appointment.
§§ 2-210 to 2-214. Reserved.
Division 6 - Airport Liaison Officer
§ 2-215. Position created.
§ 2-216. Duties.
§ 2-217. Reports and recommendations.
§ 2-218. Compensation.
§§ 2-219 to 2-229. Reserved.
Article V - City Ambulances
§ 2-230. Purposes for which city ambulances may be used.
§ 2-231. Use and service fees; disposition of fees.
§§ 2-232 to 2-236. Reserved.
Article VI - Conflict of Interest
§ 2-237. Procedure to disclose potential conflicts of interest and substantial interests for certain municipal officials.
§§ 2-238 to 2-242. Reserved.
Article VII - Boards And Commissions
§ 2-243. Tax Increment Financing Commission (TIF).
§ 2-244. Relocation assistance for certain redevelopment activities.
§ 2-245. Reserved.
Article VIII - Sunshine Law
§ 2-251 Custodian of records designated.
§ 2-252 How records are requested.
§ 2-253 Response desired to be noted on request.
§ 2-254 Response within 3 business days.
§ 2-255 Documentation of response.
§ 2-256 Request for searches.
§ 2-257 Fees for retrieval and copies.Fees for retrieval and copies.Fees for retrieval and copies.Fees for retrieval and copies.
§ 2-258 Inspection of records.
§ 2-259 Waiver of fees.
§ 2-260 Closed records and votes.
§ 2-261 Subpoenas for closed records.
§ 2-262 Public notice board.
§ 2-263 Penalty for disclosure of closed records.
§§ 2-264 to 2-307 Reserved.

Article I - City Council
Sec. 2-1. Number of members and term of office.
At the general election for the City of Rolla, Missouri in April 1984 there shall be elected twelve councilmen to represent the six wards as defined in Ordinance No. 2295.

Two councilmen shall be elected from each of the six wards for the following terms:
Councilman 1 from each ward shall serve a one-year term.

Councilman 2 from each ward shall serve a two-year term.

At the General Election, April 1984, the candidate receiving the highest total votes shall be elected to the councilman two (2) position as indicated in paragraph (b) above and the candidate receiving the second highest votes shall be elected to the councilman one (1) position as indicated in paragraph (b) above.

Thereafter, each ward shall elect annually one councilman, who shall hold his office for two years. (Ord. 2407, §§1 to 4.)


Sec. 2-2. Qualifications for councilman.
No person shall be councilman unless he is at least twenty-one years of age prior to taking office, a citizen of the United States, an inhabitant of the city for one year next preceding his election, and a resident of the ward from which he is elected six months next preceding his election. (Ord. 2521,§1.)


Sec. 2-3. City council to determine election in case of tie vote.
Whenever there shall be a tie in the election of a councilman, the matter shall be determined by the city council. (Ord. 1019, §2.)



Sec. 2-4. Council meetings and adjournments thereof.
Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held on the first and third Monday of each and every month at 6:30 p.m. at the Rolla City Hall or other so designated time, date or place. The Council may adjourn such regular meetings from time to time which shall be a continuance of the meeting as has been adjourned. Special meetings may also be called by the Mayor. At such meetings no business shall be transacted except that which is mentioned in the calling of the posted Agenda unless 2/3 of all the members of the Council shall consent to the transaction of other business by declaring same as an emergency. (Ord. 2328, §2; Ord. 3299, §1; Ord. 3334, §1; Ord. 3481, §1)



Sec. 2-5. President pro tempore.
At the first regular meeting of the city council after the election in each year, the council shall elect one of its members president pro tempore, who shall hold his office for a term of one year and who, in the absence of the mayor, shall preside at the meetings of the council; provided, that in the absence of the mayor and president pro tempore, the council may select one of its members present to preside at such meetings, who shall be styled "acting president pro tempore." (Ord. 1019, §4.)



Sec. 2-5.1 Duties: President pro tempore.
The president pro tempore shall assume the duties of the mayor during such times when the mayor shall delegate the authority of the mayor's office to the president pro tempore, and he/she shall have no additional duties other than those specified in subsection (b).

Additional duties: In addition to being a member of the city council, the president pro tempore shall, in the temporary absence of the mayor:

Preside as chairman of meetings of the city council;

Be deemed the head of city government for legal, ceremonial and military purposes.

Execute all bills, resolutions, contracts and documents on behalf of the city;

Have the responsibility of discussing with the city administrator any and all policy matters. (Ord. 3439, §1)

Sec. 2-6. Quorum - Generally.
A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of a majority of all the members of the city council, unless otherwise provided. (Ord. 1019, §6.)



Sec. 2-7. Same - Suspension of rules of order; when permitted.
The council may temporarily for the passage of ordinances or transaction of other business, by a vote of two thirds of the members present, suspend any of the rules and regulations governing it in the transaction of business; provided, that the action taken under such suspension be not in conflict with the statutes of the state concerning cities of the third class. (Ord. 1019, §6.)



Sec. 2-8. Robert's Rules of Order.
Unless otherwise specified or unless changed by a specific provision of this article, the city council shall be governed in all matters of procedure by that compilation of rules of procedure known as "Robert's Rules of Order."



Sec. 2-9. Record of proceedings; attendance of members.
The city council shall cause to be kept a journal of its proceedings and the ayes and nays of the members shall be entered on any question at the desire of any two members. The council may prescribe and enforce such rules as may be necessary to secure the attendance of its members and the expeditious transaction of its business. (Ord. 1019, §7.)



Sec. 2-10. Power of council to issue subpoenas generally; president to issue oaths to witnesses.
The council shall have power to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of papers relating to any subject under consideration in which the interest of the city is involved and shall have power to call on the proper officer of the city or of the county in which such city is located, to execute such process. The officer making such service shall be entitled to receive therefore such fees as are allowed by law for similar service to be paid by the city. The president of the council or president pro tem., shall have power to administer oaths to witnesses. (Ord. 1019, §8.)



Sec. 2-11. Oath of office.
The city clerk shall, at the first regular meeting in April of each year, proceed to call from a list prepared by him, the names of the councilmen whose terms of office are unexpired and of those appearing from the canvassed election returns to have been duly elected at the last election and if a quorum of the council shall appear in their place, the mayor shall call the members of the council to order and the new members shall take and subscribe to their oath of office. (Ord. 1019, §10.)



Sec. 2-12. Compensation.
The salary of the councilmen shall be fixed by ordinance and shall not be changed during the time for which they were elected.

Each council member shall receive the annual salary of two thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($2,250), which shall be paid bi-weekly.  Council members shall be reimbursed for expenses as outlined in Section 2-24 of the Municipal Code.  (Ord. 1019, §11; Ord. 1954, §1; Ord. 2471, §1; Ord. 2719, §1; Ord. 3226, §2, Ord. 4385, §1)


Sec. 2-13. Vacancies.
If a vacancy occurs in the office of councilman, such vacancy shall be filled according to State Statute. (Ord. 2503, §2.)



Sec. 2-14. Procedure for enactment of ordinances.
The City Council shall act through ordinances, resolutions and motions, as the case may be. An ordinance shall be read and may be discussed but the Council shall not vote thereon until the next regular Council meeting or at a special meeting of the Council called for that purpose at which time the ordinance shall be read again before being voted upon. The Council may suspend the Rules of Order as provided by City Code so as to read and vote upon an ordinance in a single meeting. Ordinances and resolutions may be read by title only if copies of the proposed ordinance or resolution is made available for public inspection not less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time it is considered by the Council. (Ord. 3057; Ord. 3088; Ord. 3229, §2)



Secs. 2-15 to 2-18. Reserved.

Article II - City Officers and Employees Generally
Division 1 - Generally
Sec. 2-19. "Officer" defined.
The term "officer" shall include any person holding any situation under the city government or any of its departments, with an annual salary, or for a definite term of office. (Ord. 2883, §2)



Sec. 2-20. Salaries generally.
The salaries of all officers of the city shall be prescribed by ordinance. (Ord. 1024, §29.)



Sec. 2-21. Salary schedule.
That the salary schedule as prepared in the "Position Classification, Job Evaluation, and Salary Plan Study" by the City of Rolla Job Evaluation Committee with the assistance of Commonwealth Personnel Management Services, a copy of which is attached hereto, and marked Exhibit "A", be and the same is hereby adopted as the salary schedule for the job classifications set forth therein for the City of Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 2652, §1.)



Sec. 2-22. Worker's Compensation Act accepted by city.
The city has elected to accept the provisions of the Missouri Worker's Compensation Act. (Ord. 944, §1; Ord. 2883, §2.)



Sec. 2-23. Mayor to file certain notice, etc., as to acceptance, etc., of worker's compensation.
The mayor of the city is directed to execute and file, for and on behalf of the city any required notice of the city election to accept the provisions of the Worker's Compensation Act, with the State Department of Labor, Division of Worker's Compensation.

The mayor is hereby authorized to make application for and on behalf of the city for appropriate compensation insurance through the city underwriters. (Ord. 944, §§2,3; Ord. 2883, §2.)



Sec. 2-24. Reimbursement and compensation for expenses incurred outside of city.
Officers of the city shall receive reimbursement and compensation for expenses incurred by such officers in attending any area, state or national meetings on municipal matters, or any schools or courses of instruction pertaining to municipal matters, or in visits to other cities and communities in behalf of the business affairs of the city; provided, however, such reimbursement and compensation has been budgeted.

The reimbursement and compensation to officers of the city, as set forth in subsection (a) hereof, shall be as adopted in the City of Rolla Personnel Rules and Regulations. (Ord. 1340, §§1,2; Ord. 1950, §1; Ord. 2883, §2.)

Sec. 2-25. Abolishing the office of city assessor.
The office of city assessor is hereby abolished and hereafter no election shall be had to fill such office. (Ord. 1786, §1.)



Sec. 2-26. Abolishing the elective offices of city collector and city treasurer.
Pursuant to Section 77.370 of the Revised Statutes of Missouri 1978 as amended, the following offices are hereby declared to be appointive and not elective: the city collector and city treasurer.

As and from the date of the April 1986 Municipal Election, the mayor, with the consent and approval of the majority of the members elected to the city council, shall have the power to appoint qualified persons to serve as city treasurer and city collector. The term of such appointment shall be for four years.

Persons appointed to the appointive offices of city collector and city treasurer shall be subject to removal from office in accordance with Section 77.340 Revised Statutes of Missouri 1978.

The requirements and qualifications for persons appointed to the office of city collector and city treasurer shall be established by ordinance in conformance with applicable State Statutes.

Compensation for officers appointed to the office of city collector and city treasurer shall be set forth by ordinance approved by the city council.

Effective at the end of their present terms, the elective offices of city collector and city treasurer are hereby abolished.

This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. (Ord. 2478, §§1-6.)

Secs. 2-27 to 2-28. Reserved.


Division 2 - Removal From Office
Sec. 2-29. Removal power - Elective officers.
The mayor may, with the consent of a majority of all the members elected to the city council, remove from office, for cause shown, any elective officer of the city, such officer being first given opportunity, together with his witnesses, to be heard before council, sitting as a court of impeachment. Any elective officer may, in like manner, for cause shown, be removed from office by a two-thirds vote of all the members elected to the council, independently of the mayor's approval or recommendation. (Ord. 1018, §12.)



Sec. 2-30. Same - Appointive officers.
The mayor may, with the consent of a majority of all the members elected to the council, remove from office any appointive officer at will and any such appointive officer may be so removed by a two-thirds vote of all the members elected to the council, independently of the mayor's approval or recommendation. The council may pass ordinances regulating the manner of impeachment and removals. (Ord. 1018, §12.)



Sec. 2-31. Generally.
The city council may remove any elective officer in the manner provided in this Division who shall be charged before them with a willful violation of any official obligation or with culpable negligence or dereliction of duty or with incompetency or with willful misconduct or with abuse of authority in his official capacity or under color of office or with any acts inconsistent with his official duty or character. (Ord. 27, §2.)



Sec. 2-32. Charges against officers - How preferred; effect thereof; service on the accused.
A charge against a city officer shall be made in writing and shall be preferred only by the mayor or some member of the city council. If the council shall deem it expedient to take action upon the charges so preferred, they shall make an order suspending the officer so charged from further exercising in the functions of his office. Such charges and order shall be filed with the city clerk, who shall forthwith make a copy thereof, and deliver the same, together with the original charge and order, to the chief of police, or his assistant, who shall at once serve such copies on the accused by delivering the same to him or by leaving them at his usual place of abode and shall return the original charges and order to the clerk, with his return in writing, of the time, place and manner of such service endorsed thereon and the officer so charged shall stand suspended from office from and after such service, until duly acquitted of such charge or otherwise ordered by the city council.

In case of suspension of the mayor, under this Section the president pro tempore of the city council shall be vested with the powers and duties of mayor until the disability of the mayor is removed. (Ord. 27, §3.)



Sec. 2-33. Same - Hearing date fixed; service of summons.
Immediately upon the suspension of any elective officer, the city council shall fix a time for hearing the cause and the chief of police shall serve the officer so charged with a written notice of the time and place of hearing the charge in the usual manner of serving summons, as provided by the statutes of the state. (Ord. 27, §4.)



Sec. 2-34. Conduct of hearing on charges - Results of hearing.
On the day set for the hearing of a case, as described in Section 2-24, the city council shall meet and proceed according to such rules as they may adopt, to hear the evidence against and in favor of the accused and they may adjourn from time to time as may be necessary, until all the evidence shall have been taken.

The city council shall vote by ayes and noes upon the charge separately, and the question voted on shall be: "Is the accused guilty?" If the council by a majority vote of all the members elected find the accused guilty on any charge or specification, such officer may, by resolution, be removed from office. Upon the adoption of such resolution, the office of the accused shall be vacant and the council shall order a special election to fill such vacancy; provided, that such vacancy shall occur more than six months before the next general election. (Ord. 27, §4.)



Sec. 2-35. Same - Representation at hearing.
On the trial of the accused he shall be entitled to be heard in person and by attorney and the city attorney, acting as such, shall attend the trial and prosecute on behalf of the city. (Ord. 27, §7.)



Sec. 2-36. Same - Power to subpoena witnesses; compel testimony.
Subpoenas for witnesses shall be issued by the mayor, and shall be served by the chief of police. The city council shall have the same powers to compel witnesses to testify as are conferred on magistrates by the general laws of the state. Depositions may be taken and read in the same manner as in circuit courts. (Ord. 27, §6.)



Sec. 2-37. Records of hearing.
The proceedings of the city council shall be entered at large upon the records of the city. (Ord. 27, §5.)



Secs. 2-38 to 2-42. Reserved.

Division 3 - Social Security
Sec. 2-43. Extended to certain employees and officers.
It is declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend, at the earliest date, to all eligible employees and officials of the city who are not excluded by law or by this Division and whether employed in connection with a governmental or proprietary function of the city, the benefits of the system of Federal Old Age and Survivors insurance as authorized by the Social Security Act Amendments of 1950 and Section 105.300 et seq. of the Revised Statutes of Missouri and amendments thereof, as the same may be now and hereafter in effect. (Ord. 884, §1.)



Sec. 2-44. Persons authorized to execute and implement plan.
The mayor and city clerk are authorized and directed, on behalf of the city, to prepare, execute and submit to the division of budget and comptroller of the state, as state agency of the state, a plan and agreement for extending such benefits to the eligible employees and officials of the city, in the form prepared by the state agency and approved and adopted by the city council, which plan and agreement are to become effective upon approval thereof by the state agency, and are further authorized and directed to execute agreements and modifications and amendments thereof with the state agency, providing for the extension of the benefits to the employees and officials as set forth in the plan and agreement, as provided for in Section 2-43. The plan and agreement shall provide that such extension of benefits is to be effective on January 1, 1951. (Ord. 884, §2.)



Sec. 2-45. Deductions from wages.
Commencing on the first day of the month following the date of the approval of the plan and agreement of the city, described in Section 2-44, by the state agency, there shall be deducted from the wages of all employees and officials of the city, to whom the benefits of the system of Federal Old Age and Survivors Insurance are extended, by virtue of the plan and agreement described in this Division, the amount of each employees' and officials' contributions, as determined by the applicable state and federal laws and by the plan and agreement, the aggregate amount of the deductions to be paid into the contributions fund created by Section 105.300 et seq. of the Revised Statutes of Missouri; provided, however, that from the first payment of wages made to each of the employees and officials after the benefits of the system have been extended to such employees and officials, there shall be deducted a sum equal to the amount which would have been due and payable from each of the employees and officials had extension of benefits been provided and effective on January 1, 1951. (Ord. 884, §3.)



Sec. 2-46. Administration of plan.
The city, from and after the approval of the plan and agreement of the city, described in Section 2-44, by the state agency, shall fully comply with and shall keep such records, make such reports and provide such methods of administration of the plan and agreement as may be required by all applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations, now and hereafter in effect with respect to the extension of the benefits of the Federal Old Age and Survivors Insurance System to the employees and officials of the city. For the purpose of administering the plan and agreement, the city clerk shall be the official who shall make all required reports, keep all records, and be responsible for the administration of the plan and agreement on behalf of the city. All notes and communications from the state agency to the city with respect to the plan and agreement shall be addressed to "City Clerk, City Hall, Rolla, Missouri." (Ord. 884, §5.)



Sec. 2-47. Contributions by city.
Commencing on the first day of the month following the date of the approval of the plan and agreement of this city, described in Section 2-44, by the state agency, there is authorized to be appropriated from the appropriate funds of the city the sums of money necessary to pay the contributions of the city which shall be due and payable by virtue of the extension of the benefits of the Federal Old Age and Survivors Insurance System to the eligible employees and officials of the city. The sums of money shall be paid into the contributions fund created by Section 105.300 et seq., of the Revised Statutes of Missouri; provided, however, that in making the first payment to the contributions fund, after the benefits of the system have been extended to such employees and officials, the first payment shall include a sum equal to the amount which would have been due and payable had extension of benefits been provided and effective on January 1, 1951. The funds from which appropriation is made will, at all times, be sufficient to pay the contributions of the city, by this Section, directed to be paid to the contributions fund. (Ord. 884, §4.)



Secs. 2-48 to 2-52. Reserved.

Division 4 - Retirement System
Sec. 2-53. Classification of eligible employees to be covered by state local government employees retirement system.
The city, as a "political subdivision" as defined in Sections 70.600 through 70.760, Revised Statutes of Missouri, supplement of 1967, hereby elects to have covered by the Missouri Local Government Employees Retirement System all its eligible employees in the following classes:

All present and future general employees.
All present and future policemen.
All present and future firemen. (Ord. 1413, §1.)


Sec. 2-54. Consideration of total prior employment for prior service credit.
The city hereby elects one hundred percent of prior employment be considered for prior service credit in computing benefits and contributions to the system. (Ord. 1413, §2.)



Sec. 2-55. Deduction of member contributions; remittance of deductions and employer contributions to retirement system.
The city clerk is hereby authorized and directed to deduct from the wages and salaries of each employee member the member contributions required by Section 70.750, Revised Statutes of Missouri, supplement of 1967, and to promptly remit the deductions to the retirement system, together with the employer contributions required by Section 70.730, Revised Statutes of Missouri, supplement of 1967. (Ord. 1413, §3.)



Secs. 2-56. Adoption of the Missouri Local Government Employee's Retirement System.
To adopt no change in the contributions from covered employees, keeping the requirement of no contributions from covered employees in accordance with the provisions of 70.705 and 70.730 RSMo. (2004)

To adopt no change in the method of determining a member’s final average salary, keeping a thirty-six consecutive month period for determining a member’s monthly salary in accordance with 70.600 and 70.656 RSMo. (2004)

To adopt a change in the Benefit Program of covered employees, changing to Benefit Program LT-14(65) in accordance with 70.655 RSMo. (2004)

To adopt no change in the Retirement Age Provision of covered employees, keeping member employees option of retirement under the "80 and out" option in accordance with 70.600, 70.645 and 70.646 RSMo. (2004)

That the City Clerk shall certify this election to the Missouri Local Government Employees Retirement System within ten days hereof. Such election shall be effective on the first day of January, 2009.
(Ord. 2502, §1; Ord. 2811, §§1-2.; Ord. 3426, §§1-3; Ord. 3888, §§1-2)


Sec. 2-57. Refunding of any and all accumulated member contributions from the Missouri Local Government Employees Retirement System.
That the city council on behalf of the City of Rolla, Missouri, an employer under the Missouri Local Government Employees Retirement System, hereby elects to refund any, and all accumulated member contributions resulting from employment with the City of Rolla, Missouri, in accordance with the provisions of Section 70.707 Revised Statutes of Missouri.

That the city clerk shall certify this election to the Missouri Local Government Employees Retirement System within ten (10) days hereof. Such election shall be effective on the 1st day of October 1993. (Ord. 2938, §1 & §2)

Secs. 2-58 to 2-60. Reserved.


Division 5 - Vacancies in Elective and Nonelective Offices
Sec. 2-61. Generally.
If a vacancy occurs in any elective office, other than the office of Councilman, the Mayor, or the person exercising the office of Mayor, shall recommend a person to fill the vacancy subject to approval by the City Council The successor shall serve until the next regular election.

If a vacancy occurs in any office not elective, the Mayor shall appoint a suitable person to discharge the duties of the same until the first regular meeting of the City Council thereafter, at which time such vacancy shall be permanently filled. (Ord. 1790, §3; Ord. 3300, §2)

Secs. 2-62 to 2-66. Reserved.

Article III - Elective Officers
Division 1 - Mayor
Sec. 2-67. Election; council to decide tie vote; term of office.
The mayor shall be elected by the qualified voters of the city for a four-year term, as provided by the statutes of the state, this Code and other ordinances of the city governing city elections. When two or more persons shall have an equal number of votes for the office of mayor, the matter shall be determined by the council. (Ord. 1018, §2.)



Sec. 2-68. Qualifications for mayor.
No person shall be mayor unless he be at least thirty years of age, a citizen of the United States and a resident of such city at the time of and for two years next preceding his election. (Ord. 2521, §2.)



Sec. 2-69. Compensation.
The mayor shall receive the annual salary of ten thousand dollars ($10,000) which shall be paid bi-weekly.  The mayor shall be reimbursed for expenses as outlined in Section 2-24 of the Municipal Code.  (Ord. 1954, §1; Ord. 2471, §1; Ord. 2719, §1; Ord. 2967, §1; Ord. 3225, §2; Ord. 4384, §1)



Sec. 2-70. Repealed by Ord. 3100.


Sec. 2-71. Vacancy in office; temporary filling of vacancy; when special election required.
When any vacancy shall happen in the office of mayor, by death, resignation, removal from office, refusal to qualify or otherwise, the president pro tempore of the council shall, for the time being perform the duties of mayor until such vacancy be filled and in case of temporary absence of the mayor or disability to perform duties of his office, the president pro tempore of the council shall act as mayor, and he shall receive the same compensation that the mayor would be entitled to. In case of vacancy other than a temporary absence or disability, the person exercising the office of mayor shall cause a new election to be held, giving forty days' notice thereof by proclamation published in some newspaper published in the city; provided, however, that when a vacancy in the office of mayor occurs within six months of a general municipal election, no election shall be called to fill such vacancy. (Ord. 1018, §3; Ord. 1790, §2.)



Sec. 2-72. Mayor as president of council; to vote in case of tie; exception; general duties.
The mayor shall be president of the city council and shall preside over same, but shall not vote except in case of a tie in the council, when he shall cast the deciding vote; provided, however, that he shall have no such power to vote in case he is an interested party. He shall have the superintending control of all the officers and affairs of the city and shall take care that this Code and other ordinances of the city and the state laws relating to such city are complied with. (Ord. 1018, §4.)



Sec. 2-73. Veto and approval of ordinances - Authority; effect of failure to act.
The mayor shall have the power to sign or veto any ordinance passed by the city council and shall also possess the power to approve all or any portion of the general appropriation bill or veto any item or all of the same; provided, that should he neglect or refuse to sign any ordinance and return the same with his objections, in writing, at the next regular meeting of the council, the same shall become law without his signature. (Ord. 1018, §5.)



Sec. 2-74. Same - Effect of approval; reconsideration by council; passage over veto.
Every bill presented to the mayor and returned to the city council with the approval of the mayor shall become an ordinance, and every bill presented as described, but returned with his objections thereto, shall stand reconsidered. The council shall cause the objections of the mayor to be entered at large upon the journal, and proceed at its convenience to consider the question pending, which shall be in this form: "Shall the bill pass, the objections of the mayor thereto not withstanding?" The votes on the question shall be taken by yeas and nays and the names entered upon the journal and if two-thirds of all the elected members shall vote in the affirmative, the president shall certify the fact on the roll and the bill thus certified shall be deposited with the proper officer and shall become an ordinance in the same manner and with like effect as if it had received the approval of the mayor. (Ord. 1018, §5.)



Sec. 2-75. Veto power over resolutions and orders involving expenditures.
The mayor shall also have the power to veto any resolution or order of the city council which calls for or contemplates the expenditure of the revenues of the city. Such vetoes shall be noted on the journal of the council and shall be effective and binding unless the council, at a subsequent session thereof, general or special, shall pass such resolution or order by a vote of three-fourths of all the members elected to the council. (Ord. 1018, §6.)



Sec. 2-76. Communications to council.
The mayor shall, from time to time, communicate to the council such measures, as may, in his opinion, tend to the improvement of the finances, the police, health, security, comfort and general prosperity of the city. (Ord. 1018, §7.)



Sec. 2-77. Power to require accounting by city officers.
The mayor shall have power to require, as often as he may deem it necessary, any officer of the city to exhibit his accounts or other papers or records and to make reports to the council, in writing, touching any subject or matter pertaining to his office. (Ord. 1018, §9.)



Sec. 2-78. Duty to sign commissions, bonds, drafts, etc.
The mayor shall sign the commissions and appointments of all city officers elected or appointed in the city and shall approve all official bonds. He shall sign all orders and drafts drawn on the treasury for money and cause the city clerk to attest the same and to affix the seal of the city and to keep an accurate record thereof in a book provided for that purpose. Should the mayor be absent or unable to sign such drafts, then the treasurer shall sign them in his place. (Ord. 2109, §1.)



Sec. 2-79. Power to appoint certain officers.
The mayor, with the consent and approval of a majority of the members elected to the city council, shall have power to appoint such officers as he may be authorized by state law, this Code or other ordinances to appoint. (Ord. 1018, §11.)



Sec. 2-80. Duty to enforce laws; power to conscript help.
The mayor shall be active and vigilant in enforcing this Code and all other ordinances for the government of the city. He shall cause all subordinate officers to be dealt with promptly for any neglect or violation of duty. He is hereby authorized to call on every male inhabitant of the city, over eighteen years of age and under fifty, to aid in enforcing the laws. (Ord. 1018, §13.)



Sec. 2-81. Power to remit fines, grant reprieves, etc.; limitations on such power.
The mayor shall have power to remit fines and forfeitures and to grant reprieves and pardons for offenses arising under this Code or other ordinances of the city; but this Section shall not be so construed as to authorize the mayor to remit any costs which may have accrued to any officer of the city by reason of any prosecution under the law, this Code, or other ordinances of the city. (Ord. 1018, §14.)



Sec. 2-82. Power to sign deeds.
The mayor shall sign and properly execute all deeds for the sale of real estate, which the city may sell, when properly authorized to do so by the council, and shall perform such other duties in connection therewith as may be imposed upon him by law. (Ord. 1018, §15.)



Sec. 2-83. Ministerial Duties.
The Mayor shall represent the City in a variety of ministerial capacities and serve as an active liaison with key community groups and organizations such as, but not limited to, Rolla Municipal Utilities, University of Missouri at Rolla, Ft. Leonard Wood, and Rolla Area Chamber of Commerce. (Ord. 3692, §1)



Sec. 2-84. Administrative Oversight.
As chief executive officer the Mayor shall make himself available at City Hall on a regular basis for effective oversight and coordination with the city Staff and the general public. (Ord. 3692, §1)



Sec. 2-85 to 2-87. Reserved.

Division 2 - City Attorney
Sec. 2-88. Qualifications.
The city prosecuting attorney shall be a person licensed to practice law in the State of Missouri and be a resident of the city.

(Ord. 2305, §1; Ord. 4386, §1)



Sec. 2-89. Compensation.
The city prosecuting attorney shall receive for his services an annual compensation of twenty eight thousand dollars ($28,000.00), which compensation shall be paid bi-weekly. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to mean the city prosecuting attorney is a general employee for purposes of Section 2-53.  (Ord. 1954, §1;  Ord. 2471, §1; Ord. 2719, §1; Ord. 3364, §2; Ord. 4386, §1)



Sec. 2-90. Duties generally.
The city prosecuting attorney shall prosecute all violations of municipal ordinances of the city in all courts of the state and shall do everything incidental thereto.

In the absence of the city counselor, the city prosecuting attorney may perform the duties of that office as established by ordinance at such compensation as may be by ordinance established.  (Ord. 2297, §1; Ord. 4386, §1)



Secs. 2-91 to 2-127. Reserved.

Division 3 - Municipal Judge
Sec. 2-128. Establishment of position.
There is hereby established pursuant to the provisions of Section 479.020 RSMo 1978, the office of municipal judge of Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 2131, §1.)



Sec. 2-129. Court established.
There is hereby established a municipal court, to be known as the "Rolla Municipal Court, a division of the Twenty-fifth Judicial Circuit of the State of Missouri." This court is a continuation of the police court of the city as previously established and is termed herein "the municipal court." (Ord. 2131, §2.)



Sec. 2-130. Interim municipal judge.
The person serving as police judge for the City of Rolla on the effective date of this Ordinance, shall serve as municipal judge of the City of Rolla, Missouri, and shall serve out the term for which he was elected as such judge. Such person shall continue to receive the compensation provided for such position prior to the effective date of this Ordinance for the remainder of said term. (Ord. 2131, §3.)



Sec. 2-131. Term of office.
The term of office for the municipal judge of Rolla, Missouri, shall be two (2) years. (Ord. 2131, §4.)



Sec. 2-132. Selection of judge.
The municipal judge of the City of Rolla, Missouri, shall be elected by the qualified voters of Rolla at the municipal election on the first Tuesday in April of 1980 and every two (2) years thereafter, and shall hold office for the term herein provided and until his successor has been duly elected and qualified. The procedures for filing declarations of candidacy, and other election procedures that are applicable to the office of mayor shall apply to the office of municipal judge, except that there is no limitation on the number of terms that a person may serve as municipal judge. (Ord. 2131, §5.)



Sec. 2-133. Vacation of office.
The municipal judge shall vacate his office under the following circumstances:

Upon removal from office by the State Commission on Retirement and Discipline of Judges, as provided in Missouri Supreme Court Rule 12; or

Upon attaining his/her 70th birthday; or

Should he fail, within six (6) months of the selection, to satisfactorily complete a course on instructions for municipal judges as prescribed by the Supreme Court.
(Ord. 2131, §6; Ord. 2966, §1)



Sec. 2-134. Qualifications for office.
The municipal judge shall possess the following qualifications before he shall take office:

He must be a licensed attorney qualified to practice law within the State of Missouri, except that the person serving as police judge on the effective date of this Ordinance does not have to be a licensed attorney if such person has served as such for at least three years.

He/she must reside within the City of Rolla, Missouri

He must be a resident of the State of Missouri.

He/she must be between the ages of 21 and 68 years.

He may serve as municipal judge for other municipalities.

He may not hold any other office within the government of the City of Rolla.

The municipal judge shall be considered holding a part-time position, and as such, may accept other employment within the requirements of the Code of Judicial Conduct, Missouri Supreme Court Rule 2.
(Ord. 2137, §7; Ord. 2966, §2; Ord. 3134, §1; Ord. 3363, §2)


Sec. 2-135. Compensation.
The municipal judge shall receive the annual salary of eighteen thousand dollars ($18,000.00), which salary shall be paid bi-weekly.  (Ord. 1954, § 1;  Ord. 2471, §1; Ord. 2719, §1; Ord. 2988, §1; Ord. 4387, §1)



Sec. 2-136. Repealed by Ord. 3101, §1.


Sec. 2-137. Superintending authority.
The municipal court of the city shall be subject to the rules of the Circuit Court of which it is a part, and to the rules of the State Supreme Court. The municipal court shall be subject to the general administrative authority of the presiding judge of the circuit court. (Ord. 2131, §8.)



Sec. 2-138. Report to the city council.
The municipal judge shall report, within the first ten (10) days of every month, the following:

A list of all cases heard and tried before the court during the preceding month, giving in each case the name of the defendant, the fine imposed, if any, the amount of cost, the names of defendants committed and in the cases where there was an application of trial de novo, respectively. The same shall be prepared under oath by the municipal court clerk or the municipal judge. This report shall be filed with the city clerk, who shall thereafter make available the same to the city council of the City of Rolla for examination. The municipal court shall, within ten (10) days after the first of the month, pay to the municipal treasurer the full amount of all fines collected during the preceding months, if they have not previously been paid. (Ord. 2131, §9; Ord. 2590, §1.)



Sec. 2-139. Docket and court records.
The municipal judge shall be a conservator of the peace. He shall keep a docket in which he shall enter every case commenced before him and the proceedings therein and he shall keep such other records as may be required. Such docket and records shall be records of the Circuit Court of Phelps County. The municipal judge shall deliver the docket and records of the municipal court, and all books and papers pertaining to his office, to his successor in office or to the presiding judge of the circuit. (Ord. 2131, §10.)



Sec. 2-140. Powers and duties of municipal judge.
The municipal judge shall be and is hereby authorized to:

Establish a Traffic Violations Bureau as provided for in the Missouri Rules of Practice and Procedure in Municipal and Traffic Courts and Section 479.050 of the Revised Statutes of Missouri.

Administer oaths and enforce due obedience to all orders, rules and judgments made by him, and may fine and imprison for contempt committed before him while holding court, in the same manner and to the same extent as a circuit judge.

Commute the term of any sentence, stay execution of any fine or sentence, suspend any fine or sentence, and make such other orders as the municipal judge deems necessary relative to any matter that may be pending in the municipal court.

Make and adopt such rules of practice and procedure as are necessary to implement and carry out the provisions of this chapter, and to make and adopt such rules of practice and procedure as are necessary to hear and decide matters pending before the municipal court and to implement and carry out the provisions of the Missouri Rules of Practice and Procedure in Municipal and Traffic Courts. Any and all rules made or adopted hereunder may be annulled or amended by an ordinance limited to such purpose; provided that such ordinance does not violate, or conflict with, the provisions of the Missouri Rules of Practice and Procedure in Municipal and Traffic Courts, or state statutes.

The municipal judge shall have such other powers, duties and privileges as are or may be prescribed by the laws of this state, this Code or other ordinances of this city. (Ord. 2131, §11.)

Sec. 2-141. Traffic violations bureau.
The municipal judge may establish a traffic violations bureau and if the same is established, the city shall provide all funding for the operation of such bureau. (Ord. 2131, §12.)



Sec. 2-142. Issuance and execution of warrants.
All warrants issued by a municipal judge shall be directed to the chief of police or any other police officer of the municipality or to the sheriff of the county. The warrant shall be executed by the chief of police, police officer, or sheriff any place within the limits of the county and not elsewhere unless the warrants are endorsed in the manner provided for warrants in criminal cases, and when so endorsed, shall be served in other counties, as provided for in warrants in criminal cases. (Ord. 2131, §13.)



Sec. 2-143. Jury trials.
Any person charged with a violation of a municipal ordinance of this city shall be entitled to a trial by jury, as in prosecutions for misdemeanors before an associate circuit judge. Whenever a defendant accused of a violation of a municipal ordinance demands trial by jury, the municipal court shall certify the case to the presiding judge of the circuit court for reassignment, as provided in Section 2 of Section 517.020, Revised Statutes of Missouri. (Ord. 2131, §14.)



Sec. 2-144. Summoning of witnesses.
It shall be the duty of the municipal judge to summon all persons whose testimony may be deemed essential as witnesses at the trial, and to enforce their attendance by attachment, if necessary. The fees of witnesses shall be the same as those fixed for witnesses in trials before associate circuit judges and shall be taxed as other costs in the case. When a trial shall be continued by a municipal judge it shall not be necessary to summon any witnesses who may be present at the continuance; but the municipal judge shall orally notify such witnesses as either party may require to attend before him on the day set for trial to testify in the case, and enter the names of such witnesses on his docket, which oral notice shall be valid as a summons. (Ord. 2131, §15.)



Sec. 2-145. Transfer of complaint to associate circuit judge.
If, in the progress of any trial before a municipal judge, it shall appear to the judge that the accused ought to be put upon trial for an offense against the criminal laws of the state and not cognizable before him as municipal judge, he shall immediately stop all further proceedings before him as municipal judge and cause the complaint to be made before some associate circuit judge within the county. (Ord. 2131, §16.)



Sec. 2-146. Confinement of defendants.
If, in the opinion of the municipal judge, the city has no suitable and safe place of confinement, the municipal judge may commit the defendant to the county jail, and it shall be the duty of the sheriff, if space for the prisoner is available in the county jail, upon receipt of a warrant of commitment from the judge to receive and safely keep such prisoner until discharged by due process of law. The municipality shall pay the board of such prisoner at the same rate as may now or hereafter be allowed to such sheriff for the keeping of such prisoner in his custody. The same shall be taxed as cost. (Ord. 2131, §17.)



Sec. 2-147. Parole and probation.
Any judge hearing violations of municipal ordinances may, when in his judgment it may seem advisable, grant a parole or probation to any person who shall plead guilty or who shall be convicted after a trial before said judge. (Ord. 2131, §18.)



Sec. 2-148. Right to appeal.
In any case tried before a municipal judge who is not licensed to practice law in this state, the defendant shall have a right to trial de novo, even from a plea of guilty, before a circuit judge or an associate circuit judge. In any case tried before a municipal judge who is licensed to practice law in this state, or before an associate circuit judge, except where there has been a plea of guilty or the case has been tried with a jury, the defendant shall have the right of trial de novo before a circuit judge or upon assignment before an associate circuit judge. An application for trial de novo shall be filed within ten days after judgment and shall be filed in such form and perfected in such manner as provided by supreme court rule. In any case tried with a jury before an associate circuit judge a record shall be made and appeals may be had upon that record to the appropriate appellate court. (Ord. 2153, §1.)



Sec. 2-149. Appeal from jury verdicts.
In all cases in which a jury trial has been demanded, a record of the proceedings shall be made, and appeals may be had upon that record to the appropriate appellant court. (Ord. 2131, §20.)



Sec. 2-150. Breach of recognizance.
In the case of a breach of any recognizance enter into before a municipal judge or associate circuit judge hearing a municipal ordinance violation case, the same shall be deemed forfeited and the judge shall cause the same to be prosecuted against the principal and surety, or either of them, in the name of the municipality as plaintiff. Such action shall be prosecuted before a circuit judge or associate circuit judge, and in the event of cases caused to be prosecuted by a municipal judge, such shall be on the transcript of the proceedings before the municipal judge. All monies recovered in such actions shall be paid over to the municipal treasury to the general revenue fund of the municipality. (Ord. 2131, §21.)



Sec. 2-151. Disqualification of municipal judge.
A municipal judge shall be disqualified to hear any case in which he is in anywise interested, or, if before the trial is commenced, the defendant or the prosecutor files an affidavit that the defendant or the municipality, as the case may be, cannot have a fair and impartial trial by reason of the interest or prejudice of the judge. Neither the defendant nor the municipality shall be entitled to file more than one affidavit or disqualification in the same case. (Ord. 2131, §22.)



Sec. 2-152. Temporary municipal judge.
If a municipal judge be absent, sick or disqualified from acting, the mayor may designate some competent, eligible person to act as municipal judge until such absence or disqualification shall cease; provided, however, that should a vacancy occur in the office of an elected municipal judge more than six (6) months before a general municipal election, then a special election shall be held to fill such vacancy; and in case of vacancy in the office of an elected municipal judge within less than six (6) months of a general municipal election, the office may be filled by a competent, eligible person designated by the mayor. (Ord. 2131, §23.)



Sec. 2-153. Compensation of temporary municipal judge.
Should the municipal judge be disqualified to act in any case and a temporary judge is designated as provided by this Ordinance, such person shall receive the sum of $35.00 per day of service, payable by the city. Persons designated to fill a vacancy in the office of municipal judge shall receive the same salary as the duly elected municipal judge. (Ord. 2131, §24.)



Sec. 2-154. Court costs.
In addition to any fine that may be imposed by the municipal judge there shall be assessed as costs in all cases the following:

Costs of court in the amount of $15.00, $3.00 of such sum to be used only to pay for the training required as provided in Sections 590.100 to 590.150 RSMo 1986, as amended, provided that any excess funds not needed to pay for such training may be used to pay for additional training for peace officers or for training for other law enforcement officers employed or appointed by the City of Rolla, provided $1.00 of such fees collected shall be deposited into the Peace Officer Standards and Training Commission Fund, to be used statewide for training law enforcement officers. (Ord. 3167, §2; Amended by Ord. 4005, §1)

An additional court cost of two dollars ($2.00) for the maintenance of a Domestic Violence Shelter pursuant to Section 488.607, RSMo. Said sums shall be collected by the clerk and disbursed to the City on a monthly basis. The City shall disburse the funds to Phelps County Family Crisis Services, Inc., as long as:

Said organization maintains its corporate status as a not-for-profit corporation under Missouri law; and

Said organization maintains a shelter within the city limits of Rolla, Missouri for battered persons as defined in Sections 455.200 through 455.230, RSMo. 1993 Supp.

If said organization ceases to comply with either of the above conditions, the City shall disburse said funds to the Phelps County Domestic Violence Shelter Board established pursuant to Chapter 455, RSMo. by general election held on April 5, 1983. Said funds shall be used by said board for sheltering City residents who are defined as battered persons under Sections 455.200 through 455.230, RSMo.

Costs assessed against the city by the county sheriff for the apprehension or confinement of a person in the county jail.

In addition to other court costs provided herein, a fee of $7.50 shall be assessed and collected in each court proceeding for the Crime Victim's Compensation Fund as provided by state law. This fee shall be assessed for municipal ordinance violations that are disposed of on or after August 13, 1988. The fee shall be collected and paid over to the state and city as provided in Sec. 595.045.3 RSMo. The fee shall not be collected for: violations of nonmoving traffic laws or ordinances; in a proceeding when the proceeding or the defendant has been dismissed by the court; or, when costs are to be paid by the city on behalf of an indigent defendant.

A $7.00 Court Automation Fee shall be assessed and collected, which shall be disbursed monthly to the Missouri Court Automation Fund, as provided in RSMo. Section 488.027. Ord. 4005, §1)

Sec. 2-155. Same, assess against prosecuting witness.
The costs of any action may be assessed against the prosecuting witness and judgment be rendered against him that he pay the same and stand committed until paid in any case where it appears to the satisfaction of the municipal judge that the prosecution was commenced without probable cause and from malicious motives.



Sec. 2-156. Installment payment of fine.
When a fine is assessed for violating an ordinance, it should be within the discretion of the judge assessing the fine to provide for the payment of a fine on an installment basis under such terms and conditions as he may deem appropriate. (Ord. 2131, §27.)



Sec. 2-157. Court clerk.
There shall be a municipal division clerk and such additional clerical staff as is necessary to aid the municipal division clerk. The municipal division clerk, under the supervision of the municipal judge and with the aid of the other clerical personnel, shall perform the following duties:

The duties provided for clerks for municipal divisions by subsection 1 of Section 479.060 and subsections 3 and 4 of Section 483.241, RSMo 1978;

Collect fines and court costs which are assessed by the municipal judge or in the traffic violations bureau;

Remit to the proper official fines and court costs which are collected within the time and in the manner provided by statute, court rule or ordinance. (Ord. 2131, §28.)

Secs. 2-158 to 2-162. Reserved.
Article IV - Appointive Officers
Division 1 - City Administrator
Sec. 2-163. Office of city administrator.
There is hereby created and established the office of city administrator for the City of Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 2019, § 1.)



Sec. 2-164. Appointment and tenure.
A qualified person shall be appointed city administrator for the City of Rolla, Missouri by the mayor; such appointment shall be approved by a majority of the full city council. The person so appointed shall serve for an indefinite period of time. (Ord. 2019, §2.)



Sec. 2-165. Qualifications.
The person appointed to the office of city administrator shall be at least twenty-five (25) years of age and shall be a resident of the City of Rolla, Missouri at the time of the effective date of such appointment; and shall be a graduate of an accredited university or college, majoring in public or municipal administration or shall have the equivalent qualifications and experience in financial, administrative and/or public relations fields. (Ord. 2019, §3.)



Sec. 2-166. Bond.
The city administrator, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall file with the city a bond in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00); such bond shall be approved by the city council and such bond shall insure the City of Rolla for the faithful and honest performance of the duties of the City of Rolla and for rendering a full and proper account of the city administrator for funds and property which shall come into the possession or control of the city administrator. The cost of such bond shall be paid by the City of Rolla; however, should the city administrator be covered by a blanket bond to the same extent, such individual bond shall not be required. (Ord. 2019, §4.)



Sec. 2-167. Compensation.
The city administrator shall receive such compensation as may be determined from time to time by the city council and such compensation shall be payable biweekly. (Ord. 2019, §5.)



Sec. 2-168. Removal of city administrator.
The city administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority. The mayor, with the consent of a majority of the full city council, may remove the city administrator from office at will, and such city administrator may also be removed by a majority vote of the full city council independently of the mayor's approval or disapproval. If requested, the mayor and city council shall grant the city administrator a public hearing within thirty (30) days following notice of such removal. During the interim, the mayor, with the approval of a majority of the full city council, or by a majority vote of the full city council without the mayor's approval, may suspend the city administrator from duty, but shall continue his salary and, if after the hearing, removal becomes final, shall pay his salary for two (2) calendar months following the removal date, provided however, that if the city administrator shall be removed for acts of dishonesty or acts of moral turpitude, such salary shall not be continued. (Ord. 2019, §6.)



Sec. 2-169. Duties.
(Ord. 2019, §7; Ord. 3036, §1.) (Repealed by Ord. 3399, §1)



Sec. 2-170. Powers.
Surplus property: The city administrator shall have responsibility for all real and personal property of the City of Rolla. He shall have responsibility for all inventories of such property and for the upkeep of all such property. Personal property and real property with a value of over $500.00 will be sold by the city administrator only with approval of the City Council and according to the rules set forth in the purchasing/procurement manual. Real property may be sold only with the approval of the City Council by resolution or ordinance. All sale or lease of real property will comply with State Statutes and will only be accomplished through the majority vote of the City Council.

Unsolicited offers for real property: Any unsolicited offer for the purchase or lease of City real property will be brought to the City Council for consideration of the offer. Said unsolicited offer shall be submitted in writing and should include a non-binding estimate of value and a proposed use of said property. At that time, the City Council will determine whether such an offer is in the best interest of the City. If the sale of real property is considered to be in the best interest of the City then a formal "Request for Proposal" process will be undertaken by City staff to provide other interested parties the opportunity to submit proposals. The City Council shall determine the solicitation process, but in no case shall the period of advertisement be less than 14 days. Every reasonable means of securing public knowledge of the solicitation process shall be pursued including formal advertisement and direct solicitation by certified mail of prospective parties. Any or all proposals may be rejected by the City Council following the opening of all sale or lease proposals. All sales or lease of real property shall be considered based on price, use, and best impact for the City of Rolla. City initiated proposals shall follow the same procedures as unsolicited proposals, and the City Council must approve such solicitations before advertisement. (Ord. 3400, §1)

Set administrative policies: The city administrator shall have the power to prescribe such rules and regulations as he shall deem necessary or expedient for the conduct of administrative agencies subject to his authority, and he shall have the power to revoke, suspend, or amend any rule or regulation of the administrative service except those prescribed by the city council.

Coordinate departments: The city administrator shall have the power to coordinate the work of all the departments of the city, and at times of an emergency, shall have authority to assign the employees of the city to any department where they are needed for the most effective discharge of the functions of city government.

Investigate and report: The city administrator shall have the power to investigate and examine or inquire into the affairs or operation of any department of the city under his jurisdiction, and shall report on any condition or fact concerning the city government requested by the mayor or city council.

Coordinate officials: The city administrator shall have the power to overrule any action taken by a department head, and may supersede him in the functions of his office.

At no time shall the duties or powers of the city administrator supersede the action by the mayor and city council. (Ord. 2019, §8; Ord. 3623, §1)

Sec. 2-171. Interference by members of the city council.
No member of the city council shall directly interfere with the conduct of any department or duties of employees subordinate to the city administrator except at the express direction of the city council or with the approval of the city administrator. (Ord. 2019, §9.)



Sec. 2-172. Severance clause.
The provisions of this Ordinance are declared to be severable and if any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Ordinance shall, for any reason, be held invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Ordinance but they shall remain in effect, it being the legislative intent of the city council that this Ordinance shall stand notwithstanding the validity of any part. (Ord. 2019, §10.)



Sec. 2-173. Operation of municipal utilities.
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to remove the operation of municipality owned utilities from the supervision and control of the board of public works as provided in Ordinance No. 630, Ordinance No. 1037, and Chapter 91 of the Revised Statutes of Missouri 1969. (Ord. 2019, §12.)



Secs. 2-174 to 2-178. Reserved.

Division 2 - City Counselor
Sec. 2-179. Position established.
There is hereby established the office of city counselor of the City of Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 2296, § 1.)



Sec. 2-180. Appointment, compensation.
The city counselor shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council and shall receive such compensation as the city council may establish from time to time. (Ord. 2296, §2; Ord. 3224, §1)



Sec. 2-181. Qualifications.
The city counselor shall be a person who is authorized to practice law in the State of Missouri by license and shall be a member in good standing of the Missouri Bar. (Ord. 2296, §3.)



Sec. 2-182. Duties.
The duties of the city counselor shall be established by ordinance and shall include the following:

He shall represent the City of Rolla in all courts of record in the state.

He shall prepare all ordinances, resolutions, contracts and other legal forms necessary for the operation of city government, including such forms as are requested by the mayor, city council or other officers of the city.

He shall give advice and counsel to the mayor, council and other officers of the city.

He shall perform such services as may be otherwise established by ordinance of the city. (Ord. 2296, §4.)
Secs. 2-183 to 2-186. Reserved.


Division 3 - City Clerk
Sec. 2-187. Appointment of city clerk.
The mayor with the approval of a majority of the city council shall appoint the city clerk. (Ord. 2543, §1.)



Sec. 2-188. Duties - Generally.
(Ord. 527, §2.) (Repealed by Ord. 3399, §1)



Sec. 2-189. Same - Authority to establish office rules.
Subject to the approval of the city council, the clerk may establish such rules and regulations for the transaction of business generally in his office as he may deem expedient and not consistent with state law, this Code or other city ordinances. (Ord. 527, §3.)



Sec. 2-190. Bond.
The clerk shall give bond to the city in such sum as may be required by the council. The cost of such bond shall be paid by the city; however, should the city clerk be covered by a blanket bond to the same extent, such individual bond shall not be required. (Ord. 527, §5; Ord. 2635, §1.)



Sec. 2-191. Duty to attest warrants, etc.; issuance of licenses.
The city clerk shall prepare and attest all warrants that may be ordered issued by the city council and present them to the mayor for his signature. He shall attest all other official acts of the council. He shall enroll all ordinances passed by the council and shall attest and seal the same; shall issue and sign all licenses as may be required by this Code or other ordinance of the city. (Ord. 527, §6.)



Sec. 2-192. Preparation, etc., of tax books.
As soon as the city council shall have established the rate of taxes for the year, the clerk shall make out a city tax book, and extend thereon from the certified abstract of the city assessor's books all property within the city made taxable by law, and upon which the taxes for the year have been established by ordinance; the amount of taxes due from each lot or tract of land, and each person, both real and personal, and shall extend opposite thereto in proper columns the amount of taxes levied by the council, which, when completed, he shall certify to be correct, and shall deliver the same to the collector upon his giving duplicate receipts therefore, and for the amount of taxes therein represented as due, one of which receipts shall be recorded in the records of the city. (Ord. 527, §7.)



Sec. 2-193. Appointment, powers and duties of deputy city clerk.
The city council may and shall have the power, in their discretion, to elect and appoint a suitable person as deputy city clerk.

The person appointed and elected deputy city clerk shall perform such duties as may be directed by the city clerk, which duties shall be performed under the supervision of the city clerk.

The deputy city clerk shall, in the absence of the city clerk, have the power and authority to execute, with the mayor, checks upon the city depository; attest all official acts of the council; issue and sign all licenses as may be required by this Code; and perform such other duties which are required of the city clerk by this Code. (Ord. 1986, §1.)



Secs. 2-194 to 2-198. Reserved.

Division 4 - City Engineer
Sec. 2-199. Appointment; term of office.
The mayor shall, by and with the consent of the city council, appoint a city engineer, who shall hold such office until the first Monday in May after his appointment, or until his successor is duly appointed and qualified. (Ord. 1064, §1.)



Sec. 2-200. Qualifications.
No person shall be appointed city engineer who shall not be a registered engineer. (Ord. 1064, §2.)



Sec. 2-201. Duties generally.
The duties of the city engineer shall be:

To establish the grades of all public streets, boulevards, parkways and alleys.

To supervise all engineering, construction and reconstruction work undertaken by the city and to supervise all such work in which the city is interested. All plans and specifications for such work shall be prepared under the direction of the city engineer and be subject to his approval.

To have charge of and supervise the construction, repairing, cleaning and maintenance of all public streets, boulevards, alleys, sidewalks and bridges, and to keep same free from all obstructions.

To have charge of and supervise the construction, repairing, cleaning and maintenance of all sewers and drains and the disposal of sewage.

To preserve in his office all books, papers, maps, plots and other things relating to his office and to keep full, accurate and systematic accounts of all expenditures made under his supervision.

To have charge and control of all machinery, trucks, tools and instruments belonging to the city and shall see that such are properly cared for and not abused.

To supervise all real property belonging to the city and see to the care and repairing of the same.

To devote his entire time to the office of city engineer and to make recommendations from time to time to the city council concerning the interests of the city.

To prepare, make and correct, from time to time, drainage plats and surveys as directed by the city council.

To supervise and approve the purchase of supplies, tools, equipment and material for use on the streets, sewers, sewage disposal plant and other city property, including property used by the fire department; provided, however, that all such purchases shall be authorized by the city council.

In addition to the above duties the city engineer shall perform such other duties as may be provided by this Code or other ordinances or by order of the city council. (Ord. 1064, §3.)

Sec. 2-202. Records to be kept.
All maps, plats and records pertaining to city matters, whatever kind and nature, that shall be made, prepared and kept by the city engineer during his term of office shall become and remain the property of the city and on the expiration of his term of office, the city engineer shall deliver all such property to his successor. (Ord. 1064, §6.)



Sec. 2-203. Assistants generally.
The mayor shall have the power, by and with the consent of the city council, to appoint such assistant city engineers as he shall deem necessary, who shall perform such duties as may be assigned by the city engineer. (Ord. 1064, §5.)



Secs. 2-204 to 2-208. Reserved.

Division 5 - Public Works Director
Sec. 2-209. Position established; duties; appointment.
The office of public works director is hereby established. In the absence of a city engineer, the public works director shall assume the responsibilities of that office.

The mayor shall have the power by and with the consent of the city council to appoint the public works director at a salary established by the city council. (Ord. 2488, §§1-2.)


Secs. 2-210 to 2-214. Reserved.

Division 6 - Airport Liaison Officer
Sec. 2-215. Position created.
There is hereby established the position of airport liaison officer for the City of Rolla at the Rolla National Airport. (Ord. 1844, §1.)



Sec. 2-216. Duties.
It shall be the duty of the airport liaison officer to:

Provide the city with information pertaining to the general operation and maintenance of the Rolla National Airport and condition of all property, equipment and supplies at such airport, including, but not necessarily limited to, the runway lighting system, the beacon, the storm drainage system, the sanitary sewer and water distribution systems, the fuel trucks and storage tanks, the hangers, the terminal, the taxi-ways, runways, aprons, office buildings and residential building.

Study and report to the city his evaluation of all current leases at such airport.

Determine and report to the city the current needs, if any, of all tenants residing at such airport.

Study and make recommendations to the city on the conditions and terms of any proposed leases at such airport.

Perform such other related tasks as may be assigned to him by the city relative to airport matters. (Ord. 1844, §2.)

Sec. 2-217. Reports and recommendations.
All reports and recommendations to be made to the city provided for in Section 2-216 shall be made in writing on a regular basis to the mayor, chairman of the airport advisory committee and the city engineer. (Ord. 1844, §3.)



Sec. 2-218. Compensation.
The person serving as airport liaison officer shall receive as compensation wages in the sum of eight hundred fifty dollars per month. (Ord. 1844, §4.)



Secs. 2-219 to 2-229. Reserved.

Article V - City Ambulances
Sec. 2-230. Purpose for which city ambulances may be used.
City ambulances which are owned or operated by the city shall be used for the following purposes only:

To transport injured from scene of any accident within the corporate limits of the city, to a hospital situated within the city.

To transport sick or injured in an emergency from any place within the corporate limits of the city, to a hospital situated within the city.

To respond to all fire calls within the corporate limits of the city, as a standby precaution. (Ord. 1505, §2.)


Sec. 2-231. Use and service fees; disposition of fees.
The following fees shall be charged and collected for the use and services of any ambulance owned or operated by the city, which such fees shall be paid into the general revenue of the city:

A fee of five dollars shall be charged for the use of any ambulance for services within the corporate limits of the city by all persons who are residents of the city.

A fee of ten dollars shall be charged for the use of any ambulance for services within the corporate limits of the city by all persons who are not residents of the city. (Ord. 1379, §1; Ord. 1447, §1, 2; Ord. 1505, §3.)

Secs. 2-232 to 2-236. Reserved.

Article VI - Conflict of Interest
Sec. 2-237.       Procedure to disclose potential conflicts of interest and substantial interests for certain municipal officials.

The proper operation of municipal government requires that public officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that government decisions and policy be made in the proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public gave confidence in the integrity of its government.  In recognition of these goals, there is hereby established a procedure for disclosure by certain officials and employees of private financial or other interests in matters affecting the City of Rolla.

The Mayor or any member of the City Council, who has a substantial personal or private interest, as defined by state law, in any bill shall disclose on the records of the City Council the nature of his interest and shall disqualify himself from voting on any matters relating to this interest.

The Mayor, each City Council member, the City Administrator, the City Finance Director, and the General Manager of the Rolla Municipal Utilities shall disclose the following information by May 1 if any such transactions were engaged in during the previous calendar year.

For such person, and all persons within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity of such person, the date and the identities of the parties to each transaction with a total value in excess of five hundred dollars ($500), if any, that such person had with the political subdivision, other than compensation received as an employee or payment of any tax, fee or penalty due to the City of Rolla, Missouri and other than transfers for no consideration to the City of Rolla, Missouri; and

The date and the identities of the parties to each transaction known to the person with a total value in excess of five hundred dollars, if any, that any business entity in which such person had substantial interest, had with the City of Rolla, Missouri, other than payment of any tax, fee or penalty due to the City of Rolla, Missouri, or transaction involving payment for providing utility service to the City of Rolla, Missouri, and other than transfers for no consideration to the City of Rolla, Missouri.

The Mayor, the City Administrator, City Finance Director and General Manager of Rolla Municipal Utilities also shall disclose by May 1 for the previous calendar year the following information:

The name and address of each of the employers of such person from whom income of one thousand dollars or more was received during the year covered by the statement;

The name and address of each sole proprietorship that he owned; the name, address and the general nature of the business conducted of each general partnership and joint venture in which he was partner or participant; the name and address of each partner or co-participant for each partnership or joint venture unless such names and addresses are filed by the partnership or joint venture with the Secretary of State; the name, address and general nature of the business conducted of any closely held corporation or limited partnership in which the person owned ten percent or more of any class of the outstanding stock or limited partnership units; and the name of any publicly traded corporation or limited partnership that is listed on a regulated stock exchange or automated quotation system in which the person owned two percent or more of any class of outstanding stock, limited partnership units or other equity interests;

The name and address of each corporation for which such person served in the capacity of a director, officer or receiver.

The reports, in the attached format, shall be filed with the City Clerk and with the State Ethics Commission prior to January 1 of each year.  The reports shall be available for public inspection and copying during normal business hours.

The financial interest statements shall be filed at the following times, but no person is required to file more than one financial interest statement in any calendar year:

Each person required to file a financial interest statement appointed to office shall file the statement within thirty days of such appointment or employment;

Every other person required to file a financial interest statement shall file the statement annually not later than May 1 and the statement shall cover the calendar year ending the immediately preceding December 31; provided that any member of the City Council may supplement the financial interest statement to report additional interest acquired after December 31 of the covered year until the date of filing of the financial interest statement. 

This Ordinance shall be filed with the State Ethics Commission as follows:  The City Clerk shall transmit a certified copy of said Ordinance prior to September 15, 2018. 

This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval and shall remain in effect until amended or repealed by the City Council.  (Ord. 2810, §1; Ord. 2949, §2; Ord. 3002, §2; Ord. 3073, §2; Ord. 3138, §2; Ord. 3204, §2; Ord. 3262, §2; Ord. 3330, §2; Ord. 3469, §1; Ord. 3574, §1; Ord. 3643, §1; Ord. 3744, §1; Ord. 3872, §1; Ord. 3961, §2; Ord. 4045; Ord. 4148, §2; Ord. 4284, §2; Ord. 4427, §2)
 
 


Secs. 2-238 to 2-242. Reserved.

Article VII - Boards and Commissions
Sec. 2-243. Tax Increment Financing Commission of Rolla, Missouri (TIF).
Creation of TIF Commission. The City Council hereby ratifies and confirms the creation of the Commission established pursuant to the Act (RSMo. 99.820(2)). The Mayor with the consent of the City Council shall appoint the prescribed number of City representatives, a majority of whom shall be residents of the city of Rolla (current non-residents serving on the Commission shall be allowed to continue to serve in that capacity). This commission shall be known as the "Tax Increment Financing Commission of Rolla, Missouri" (the "TIF Commission"). (Ord. 3548, §1; Ord. 3765, §1)

Authority of TIF Commission. The Commission shall serve as an advisory board to the City as it relates to the consideration of tax increment financing proposals submitted by interested parties or initiated by any public agency in accordance with the Act. The City Council hereby authorizes and approves the exercise by the TIF Commission of only those powers that are required by the Act to be exercised by the TIF Commission, as follows:

Each request for proposals shall state the primary objectives of the proposed redevelopment area or redevelopment project.

Each request for proposals shall provide reasonable opportunity for any person to submit alternative proposals or bids.

Each request for proposals shall be mailed to those persons or firms which the City determines might be interested in submitting a bid, and shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. Each request for proposals shall provide at least 15 days for the submission of a proposal.

Each proposal must demonstrate that "but for" the use of tax increment financing, the project is not feasible and would not be completed.

Criteria for the selection of proposals will include the impact of the proposed project on the City and other taxing jurisdictions, including the projected term for which tax increment financing will be utilized. The City or the TIF Commission may establish such additional criteria as it deems appropriate for the selection of bids and proposals. (Ord. 3548, §2)


Sec. 2-244. Relocation assistance for certain redevelopment activities.
Relocation Policy. The City adopts by reference as if fully set forth herein Sections 523.200 through 523.215 RSMo., as may be amended from time to time as the Relocation Policy for the City.

Implementation of Relocation Plan. In the event that property is to be acquired without federal assistance pursuant to Chapters 99 RSMo., as amended, the Mayor or his/her designee is directed to take all necessary steps to identify the special needs of displaced persons and accommodate those needs within the project's relocation plan. Furthermore, the Mayor or his/her designee is directed to develop a program for the referrals of displaced persons or businesses to suitable replacement accommodations in conformity with the requirements of the Relocation Assistance Act. (Ord. 3580, §§1-2)


Secs 2-245 to 2-250. Reserved
Article VIII - Sunshine Law
Sec. 2-251. Custodian of records designated.
The City Clerk is hereby designated as the "Custodian of Records" for the City of Rolla and such Custodian is located in Rolla City Hall, 901 North Elm Street, Rolla, Missouri 65401. Such designation does not mean that the City Clerk will necessarily have all the records in his or her possession, but simply is an indication to whom requests for copies of records and information regarding the City government shall be directed. Requests for records made to persons other than the City Clerk shall not be considered to be requests that are made pursuant to the Missouri Sunshine Law, Chapter 610 of the State Statutes. Nonetheless, any official or employee of the City who receives a request is directed to inform the City Clerk of the request in a timely fashion, so that a response may be made to the request. (Ord. 3943, §1)



Sec. 2-252. How records are requested.
All requests for records, notices, or information should be in writing and should be accompanied by a deposit of the estimated costs of reproducing the requested information. Oral requests, if received by the City Clerk, shall be immediately recorded in written form to document the same. Any request received by the City Clerk shall be initialed by the clerk, with the date and time of receipt noted. (Ord. 3943, §1)



Sec. 2-253. Response desired to be noted on request.
The requesting party shall indicate on the request the manner in which a response is desired. In absence of instructions to the contrary, it will be assumed that the requesting party wants to receive a response in the same form as the original request. (Example, if someone stops by City Hall and requests copies of documents, it will be assumed that the requesting party will stop by City Hall later to pick up the documents. But if someone mails a request to the City Hall, it will be assumed that a mailed response is desired). (Ord. 3943, §1)



Sec. 2-254. Response within 3 business days.
The Custodian of Records shall respond to the request within three (3) business days of its receipt. A "business day" is a day when the City Hall is open for the conduct of City business during its normal business hours. While it is desirable that the entire transaction be completed within three (3) business days, there may be circumstances where clarification or explanation of the request is necessary, or where it may be necessary to provide only part of the requested information while searches are made to find copies of other documents requested. (Ord. 3943, §1)



Sec. 2-255. Documentation of response.
The Custodian of Records shall document the response provided either by (1) making an extra copy of the response and attaching it to the original request, (2) noting on the request what documents were provided, or (3) keeping a copy of any letter or note requesting additional information in order to process the request. Additionally, the Custodian of Records shall maintain a log to determine if requests are completed timely and all requests are adequately filled, Necessary information includes, but is not limited to, the date of request, a brief description of the request, the date the request is completed or why the request cannot be completed, and any associated costs of filling the request. (Ord. 3943, §1)



Sec. 2-256. Request for searches.
A request for copies of "all documents" or "every document" of a particular sort involves a request to search through every record of the City in order for the City to certify that it has provided "all" or "every" document. Such searches are expensive. Similarly, a request for records compiled in a format differing from the format in which the records are customarily retained is a request for a search and compilation, and can be expensive. As a general rule, the Custodian of Records is not expected to engage in extensive searches or compilations. Any search request that will require more than 15 minutes of the Custodian’s time will be refused without a reasonable advance deposit for the estimated time required to search for the records. (Ord. 3943, §1)



Sec. 2-257. Fees for retrieval and copies.
Fees for search, retrieval, accompanying and returning to their proper storage all City documents shall be:

For a search of 15 minutes or less … no retrieval fee.

For a search, retrieval, accompanying, and return of documents requiring more than 15 minutes … may be charged the actual cost of research time.

Fees for copies of documents shall be:

For copies that can be made on the City’s copy machine or other equipment available at City Hall … 10 cents per side of page.

For copies that must be made elsewhere or copies that require significant time (15 minutes or more) … the actual charges imposed.
(Ord. 3943, §1)



Sec. 2-258. Inspection of records.
To reduce the cost to both the requesting party and the City, the Custodian of Records may permit a physical inspection of the records by the requesting party to help specify what documents are needed. The Custodian may impose such security as is deemed appropriate to guarantee that no record is removed from the City files. The requesting party shall pay the cost of that security at the rate provided in Section 2-257. (Ord. 3943, §1)



Sec. 2-259. Waiver of fees.
The Custodian of Records is empowered to waive the collection of any of the fees totaling less than $1 provided in Section 2-257 above to any citizen of the City requesting documents from the City, or to any representative of the news media that routinely sends a reporter to cover meetings of the City Council. No person or organization shall receive more than three (3) such waivers in any 12-month period. The fees may be waived if they contribute significantly to public understanding of the operations or activities of the public governmental body and is not primarily in the commercial interest of the requestor. Any request for documents may be furnished without charge or at a reduced charge by the City Council. (Ord. 3943, §1)



Sec. 2-260. Closed records and votes.
All records of the City which are permitted to be closed records by reason of the Sunshine Law or by any other statute of Missouri, or by any statute or regulation of the United States government shall be maintained as closed records. No such closed record shall be released to any person who is not a part of the City government, except that the City’s auditor may see such records as are reasonably necessary to prepare an audit report as requested by the City, and the City’s attorney may see such records as are reasonably necessary to represent the City. Requests that closed records be opened to the public inspection will be considered on a case-by-case basis by the City Council. (Ord. 3943, §1)



Sec. 2-261. Subpoenas for closed records.
No subpoena for a closed record shall be honored. All such subpoenas shall be referred to the City attorney for a response, and for a motion to quash the subpoena. The only exception to this requirement that will be recognized is a subpoena from a grand jury. (Ord. 3943, §1)



Sec. 2-262. Public notice board.
The Custodian of Records shall establish a fixed place where all public notices and agendas will be posted. This notice board should be in a place that is accessible to members of the public at times when the City Hall is open and (if possible) should be lighted and available for public inspection even at times when the City Hall is closed. This notice board shall have the notion "PUBLIC NOTICES" printed in letters at least four inches in height at the top of said board. A window or glass door at the entrance to the city Hall may be used as the notice board, provided such notices are placed in such a fashion that they can be read by persons on the outside of the City Hall. (Ord. 3943, §1)



Sec. 2-263. Penalty for disclosure of closed records.
Any person employed or working for the City, or who has been entrusted with a record that is marked to indicate that it is "confidential" or a "closed record," or who has been invited to participate in a closed meeting who nonetheless discloses any closed record, or any information about the contents of any closed meeting to any person shall be guilty of an offense under the ordinances of the City, and upon conviction therefore may be punished as provided by law. Any such person who is employed or working for the City may also be subject to the termination of their employment as a result of such disclosure. Any such person who is an elected official may also be subject to impeachment from their office as a result of such disclosure. (Ord. 3943, §1)



Sec. 2-264 to 2-307. Reserved.

Chapter 3 - Airports & Aircraft
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter


Chapter Contents:
Article I - Advisory Committee
§ 3-1. Established; membership; appointment of members.
§ 3-2. Term of office, Directors and compensation of members.
§ 3-3. Duties generally.
§ 3-4. Deposit of certain revenue, etc., in airport account.
§ 3-5. Repealed.
§ 3-6. Authority to lease, etc., airport.
§ 3-7. to 3-13 Reserved

Article I - Advisory Committee
Sec. 3-1. Established; membership; appointment of members.
The Airport Advisory Committee is hereby established consisting of eight members. The members of this Committee shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the consent and ratification of the City Council. One member of such Committee shall be a member of the City Council, three members of such Committee shall be persons known to have had experience in aviation, two members of the Committee shall represent leasehold or land interests at the Airport, and two members will be appointed at-large, who shall be residents of the city of Rolla. The City Administrator or his designee shall serve as ex-officio member and assist the Committee in all areas of responsibility. (Ord. 1371, §1; Ord. 3269, §1; Ord. 3763, §1, Ord. 4107 §1)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 3-2. Term of office, Directors and compensation of members
Members of the Airport Advisory Committee shall serve two year terms, and shall be eligible to succeed themselves. The members of the Airport Advisory Committee shall receive no compensation. The Airport Advisory Committee shall, immediately after appointment, meet and between themselves elect a Chairman and Vice-Chairman. The Chairman shall preside at all meetings. The city shall keep the minutes and records thereof and duly transmit same to the City Council for their review. (Ord. 1371, §1; Ord. 3269, §1, Ord. 4107 §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 3-3. Duties generally
The Airport Advisory Committee shall advise and counsel the City on all matters pertaining to the management, control and operation of the Rolla National Airport (RNA) including the RNA Industrial & Technology Park; including the establishment of rules and regulations for the use of the Airport, maintenance and further development of same, and shall assist Administration in supervising and enforcing terms of any contract entered into by the City for the operation and control of such Airport. (Ord. 1371, §1; Ord. 3269, §1, Ord. 4107 §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 3-4. Deposit of certain revenue, etc., in airport account
All money received from any source by reason of ownership of the airport facilities or operation contract shall be deposited by the city collector in a fund known as the "Airport Fund". (Ord. 1371, §1; Ord. 3269, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 3-5. Repealed
(Ord. 1371, §1; Ord. 3269, §1) (Repealed by Ord. 3399, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 3-6. Authority to lease, etc., airport
The City Administrator and the advisory committee shall have the authority to negotiate for the rental of any portion of the premises of the Rolla National airport not required for the efficient operation of the airport, whether it be for agricultural purposes, or for any other desirable purpose; provided, that no agreement shall be made except with the approval of the city council. (Ord. 1371, §1; Ord. 3094; Ord. 3269, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 3-7 to 3-13. Reserved
(Return to Contents)


Chapter 4 - Alcoholic Beverages
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter


Chapter Contents:
Article I - In General
§ 4-1. Definitions
§ 4-2. Drinking in public
§ 4-3. Hours of operation.
§ 4-4. Purchase or possession by a minor – Prohibited; penalty provisions.
§ 4-5. Sale or supplying liquor to minors – Prohibited; penalty provisions
§ 4-6 to 4-14. Reserved
Article II - License
§ 4-15. License - Required.
§ 4-16. Compliance with State law and compliance with all City Codes.
§ 4-17. Annual license fees.
§ 4-18. Prorating of license fees.
§ 4-19. Issuance.
§ 4-20. Term.
§ 4-21. Transfer.
§ 4-22 to 4-26. Reserved


Article I - In General
Sec. 4-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Intoxicating liquor - means and includes alcohol for beverage purposes, alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented, malt or other liquors, or combinations of liquors, a part of which is spirituous, vinous or fermented, and all preparations or mixtures for beverage purposes, containing in excess of one-half of one percent by volume, except for non-intoxicating beer as defined in RSMo 312.010. All beverages having an alcoholic content of less than one-half of one percent by volume shall be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter, but subject to inspection as provided by RSMo 196.365 – 196.445.

Malt liquor - means and includes all beer having an alcoholic content of more than three and two-tenths percent by weight and not in excess of five percent by weight.

Wine - means and includes light wines containing not in excess of fourteen percent of alcohol by weight exclusively from grapes, berries and other fruits and vegetables.

Non intoxicating beer - means and includes any beer manufactured from pure hops or pure extract of hops and pure barley malt or other wholesome grains or cereals and wholesome yeast and pure water and free from all harmful substances, preservatives and adulterants and having an alcoholic content of more than one-half of one percent by volume and not exceeding 3.2 percent by weight.

Amusement Places - As used in this Code section, the term "amusement place" means any establishment whose business building contains a square footage of at least ten thousand square feet, and where games of skill commonly known as bowling or soccer are usually played, and which has annual gross receipts of at least two hundred thousand dollars of which no more than fifty percent may be derived from the sale of alcoholic beverages. (Ord. 2826, §2; Ord. 3015, §3; Ord. 3587, §1) (Ord. 452, §1; Ord. 495, §1; Ord. 496, §1; Ord. 1829, §1; Ord. 2825, §2; Ord. 2826, §2; Ord. 3015, §3; Ord. 3587, §1’ Ord. 3683, §1)



Sec. 4-2. Drinking in public.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drink, expose or display any beer or alcoholic liquors in open containers upon the public streets or within any public place of the city; provided, however, that this Section shall not apply to public places legally licensed and where such drinking is permitted. Exceptions to this section may be granted by City Administration on a case-by-case basis. The administrative procedures shall be as follows:

Required. Approval from City Administration is required before beer and/or wine are allowed on public property.

Application. A person seeking authorization for alcohol in public shall file an application with the City Administrator or his/her designee. The application shall contain:

Name and address of applicant sponsoring the activity.

Location, date and time for desired activity.

Type of activity and is alcohol to be served. If yes, name caterer or alcohol provider, responsible party.

Estimated number of attendance.

Any other information found to be reasonably necessary by Administration.

Standards of issuance. City Administration shall grant authorization when:

The proposed activity shall include a Rolla Police Officer for security services to reduce the possibility of disorderly conduct. The cost of services shall be the responsibility of the applicant.

The proposed activity is supported by a certificate of insurance naming the City of Rolla as additional insured. The policy shall cover general liability and alcohol if applicable. The person responsible shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained related to the activity.

The proposed activity will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment at the activity location.

The location desired has not been reserved for other use at the date and time specified on the application.

Effect of authorization. Once authorized, the responsible party shall be bound by all location rules and regulations and all applicable ordinances set by the City of Rolla.

Revocation. City Administration shall have the authority to revoke an application upon any finding of violation of any rule, ordinance or upon good cause shown.

Appeal. If an application is rejected, City Administration shall apprise the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for refusing the application. Any applicant shall have the right to appeal the City Administration’s decisions to the City Council at the next Council meeting. The decision of City Council shall be final. (Ord. 1008, §1; Ord. 3683, §1)


Sec. 4-3. Hours of operation.
Sales of malt liquors or intoxicating liquor. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give away or otherwise dispose of, or suffer the same to be done in, upon or about his/her premises, any malt liquor, whether intoxicating or non-intoxicating or any intoxicating liquor in any quantity between the hours of 1:30 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. on weekdays and between the hours of 1:30 A.M. Sunday and 9:00 A.M. Sunday and 12:00 A.M. Monday to 6:00 A.M. Monday. (Ord. 2333, §1; Ord. 2576, §1; Ord. 2933, §2; Ord. 3015, §1; Ord. 3587, §1)

Sales of non-intoxicating beer during certain hours. No person having a license under this Chapter shall sell, give away or otherwise dispose of or suffer the same to be done, upon or about his/her premises, any nonintoxicating beer in any quantity between the hours of 1:30 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. (Ord. 452, §10; Ord, 495, §10; Ord. 1332, §1; Ord. 1345, §1-2)

Sunday sales. It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the selling of non-intoxicating beer and intoxicating liquor by the drink at retail for consumption on the premises of any restaurant bar to sell between the hours of 1:30 A.M. and 9:00 A.M. Sunday pursuant to Section 4-3 of this Code. (Ord. 1975, §1; Ord. 2825, §4; Ord. 3015, §2; Ord. 3587, §1) (Ord. 452, §10; Ord. 1345, §2; Ord. 2333, §1; Ord. 2576, §1; Ord. 2933, §2; Ord. 3015, §1; Ord. 3587, §1; Ord. 3683, §1)



Sec. 4-4. Purchase or possession by a minor - Prohibited; penalty provisions.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to knowingly purchase or attempt to purchase or knowingly have in his possession any intoxicating liquor as defined in Section 311.020 (RSMo) or who is visibly in an intoxicated condition as defined in Section 577.001 (RSMo), or has a detectable blood alcohol content of more than two-hundredths of one percent or more by weight of alcohol in such persons body.
Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this Section shall be subject to a fine of not to exceed three hundred and no/100 ($300.00) dollars. (Ord. 2381, §1; Ord. 3683, §1; Ord. 4443, §1)


Sec. 4-5. Sale or supplying liquor to minors - Prohibited; penalty provisions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly sell, vend, give away or otherwise supply any intoxicating liquor as defined in Section 311.020 RSMo. 1978 in any quantity whatsoever to any persons under the age of twenty-one (21) years.

Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this Section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred and no/100 ($500.00) dollars, or be subject to imprisonment in jail for a period not to exceed three (3) months, or by both such fine and confinement. (Ord. 2382, §1; Ord. 3683, §1)


Sec. 4-6 to 4-14. Reserved.


Article II - License
Sec. 4-15. License - Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or expose for sale, either at wholesale or retail, within the city any intoxicating liquor, in any quantity, without having first procured a license from the Finance Department in accordance with the provisions of this Article. Nothing in this Article shall be construed as limiting the right of a physician to prescribe intoxicating liquor in accordance with his/her professional judgment for any patient at any time or prevent a druggist from selling intoxicating liquor, lawfully acquired, to a person on prescription from a regularly licensed physician as above provided. (Ord. 496, §5; Ord. 3683, §1)



Sec. 4-16. Compliance with State law and compliance with all City Codes
Before any applicant shall be entitled to procure a license from the city, the applicant must first satisfy all the requirements of the State liquor laws and obtain a license from the State supervisor of liquor control to engage in such business. Any person, having proven to satisfy the requirements of the liquor laws of the State and compliance with all City ordinances, including the correct City property zone as prescribed in Chapter 42 of the Rolla City Code, shall be eligible to make application for a license to sell intoxicating liquors within the City, at retail or wholesale, for consumption on the premises where sold in the original package, in accordance with the type of license obtained from the state supervisor of liquor control.. (Ord. 396, §4; Ord. 496, §2-6; Ord. 1288, §1; Ord. 2597, §1; Ord. 3053, §2; Ord. 3519, §1; Ord. 3683, §1)



Sec. 4-17. Annual license fees.
The annual fee for a liquor license required by this Chapter shall be as follows:

1.	5% Beer/Wine in original package	$75.00 – Monday – Saturday
2.	5% Beer/Wine in original package	$375.00 – Monday – Sunday
3.	5% Beer/Wine by the drink	$75.00 – Monday – Saturday
4.	5% Beer/Wine by the drink	$375.00 – Monday – Sunday
5.	5% Beer original package	$75.00 – Monday – Sunday
6.	5% Beer by the drink	$75.00 – Monday – Sunday
7.	Liquor packaged	$150.00 – Monday – Saturday
8.	Liquor packaged	$450.00 – Monday – Sunday
9.	Liquor by the drink	$450.00 – Monday – Saturday
10.	Liquor by the drink	$750.00 – Monday – Sunday
11.	Original Package Tasting	$35.00 – Monday – Sunday
12.	Retail Liquor by Drink Picnic	$35.00 – Monday – Sunday
13.	5% Beer by Drink Wine Picnic	$150.00 – Monday – Sunday
14.	Retail Liquor by Drink Caterer	$15.00 – per day
15.	Retail Liquor by Drink Caterer	$1,500.00 – Unlimited
16.	Retail Liquor by Drink Caterer	$750.00 – 50 Events
17.	5% Beer Wine Caterer	$15.00 – per day
(Ord. 2934, §1; Ord. 3587, §1; Ord. 3683, §1)



Sec. 4-18. Prorating of license fees.
On approval of the application for the issuance of any license for the first time under this Chapter, the applicant shall pay a license fee of as many twelfths of the total license tax as there are months, part of the total month counts as a month, remaining from the date of the issuance of the license to the next succeeding July first. (Ord. 1012, §1; Ord. 3053, §2; Ord. 3313, §2; Ord. 3587, §1; Ord. 3683, §1)



Sec. 4-19. Issuance
The license required by Section 4-15 shall be issued by the Finance Department upon payment of the license fee and the funds shall be deposited into the credit of the general revenue fund. Every license issued under this Article shall particularly describe the premises at which intoxicating liquors may be sold there under, and such license shall not be deemed to authorize the sale of intoxicating liquors at any other place than that described therein. (Ord. 496, §4; Ord. 3683, §1)



Sec. 4-20. Term
A license issued under this Article shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from July 1 to the following June 30. (Ord. 3683, 11)



Sec. 4-21. Transfer.
Transfer to other person. No license for the sale of intoxicating liquor shall be transferable to another person.

Transfer to different location. No license for the sale of intoxicating liquor shall be transferable to another location. An application must be completed for each location. (Ord. 3683, §1)



Sec. 4-22 to 4-26. Reserved


Chapter 5 - Animals & Fowl
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter


Chapter Contents:
Article I - In General
5-1. Definitions
5-2. Domestic animals or fowl running at large
5-3. Impounding animals and fowl
5-4. Redemption of impounded animals
5-5. Sale of impounded animals
5-6. Disposition of proceeds of sale of impounded animals
5-7. Turning out animals to cause impounding
5-8. Keeping of stallion or jack
5-9. Keeping of goats, horses, or other forms of livestock; keeping of hogs, swine or pigs - Prohibited
5-10. Keeping of rabbits, chickens, ducks, turkeys, or other domestic small animals or fowl
5-11. Confinement of livestock and fowl within city.
5-12. Cleanliness of barns, sheds, hutches, pens, or yards
5-13. Loading and transporting of livestock and fowl
5-14. Possession and sale of exotic or wild animals - Prohibited
5-15. Cruelty to or mistreatment of animals
5-16. Humane treatment of animals
5-17. Trapping
5-18. Disposing of unwanted animals
5-19. Incineration services
5-20. Defecation on public or private property prohibited
5-21 to 5-23. Reserved
Article II - Small Animals
5-24. Rabies vaccinations/rabies tags
5-25. (Repealed by Ord. 3217, 2)
5-26. Dogs at large
5-27. Penalty for dogs at large
5-28. Impoundment of animals
5-29. Redemption and fees
5-30. Humane destruction of impounded animals
5-31. Cats damaging shrubs, gardens and property
5-32. Animals damaging property
5-33. Apprehension of cats running at large in violation of Section 5-31
5-34. Humane destruction at request of owner
5-35. Animal bite procedures
5-36. Injury to humans
5-37. Dogs, cats, or ferrets without current vaccination
5-38. Animals annoying humans by barking, howling, yelping, jumping, threatening, spreading garbage or attacking other domestic animals or fowl
5-39. Adoption rate for the shelter
5-40 to 5-55. Reserved
Article III - Abandonment of Animals
5-56. Abandonment of an animal within the municipality
5-57 to 5-61. Reserved
Article IV - Commercial Kennels
5-62. License required of commercial kennels; veterinarian kennels exempt
5-63. Requirements for operation
5-64 to 5-65. Reserved
Article V - Pet Shops
5-66. Standards
5-67 to 5-71. Reserved
Article VI - Diseased or Injured Animals
5-72. Sale of known diseased animals
5-73. Disposition of diseased or injured animals
5-74. Prohibiting the distribution of animals in public places
5-75 to 5-78. Reserved
Article VII - Dangerous Animals
5-79. Definitions of dangerous animals
5-80. Procedure for declaring a dangerous animal
5-81. Action to be taken for dangerous animals
5-82. Owner's responsibilities
5-83. Penalty for noncompliance
5-84 to 5-89. Reserved
Article VIII - Penalties
5-90. Penalties for violations
5-91. Responsibility of enforcement
5-92 to 5-96. Reserved


Article I - In General
Sec. 5-1. Definitions.
The following terms as used in this Chapter shall be deemed to have the following meanings:

Animal - any live vertebrate creature, domestic or wild other than humans.

Animal shelter or pound or dog pound - a facility operated by the city for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized, stray, homeless, abandoned, or unwanted animals.

At large - any animal shall be deemed to be at large when it is off the property of its owner and not under the control of a responsible person.

Confinement - confinement or confined as used in this chapter shall mean constant and continuous, sole and segregated, physical enclosure of the animal.

Control - under immediate and effective restraint of a responsible person, to include leashes and voice control.

Dog - any member of the canine family more than six months of age.

Exotic or wild animal - any animal which, when in its wild state, is capable, while at large, of inflicting serious physical harm upon human beings including, but not limited to the following:

Apes, monkeys and related forms;
Poisonous reptiles, amphibians and other poisonous animals including poisonous spiders and insects;
Any deadly or dangerous snake or reptile over eight (8) feet in length;
Cats from the wild family, including, but not limited to, bobcats, cheetahs, cougars, jaguars, leopards, lions, lynxes, mountain lions, panthers, pumas, tigers;
Non-domesticated, carnivorous animals including hybrid crosses of non-domesticated carnivorous animals, including, but not limited to, raccoons, opossums, skunks, foxes, coyotes, wolfs, etc.
Crocodylia, including, but not limited to, crocodiles and alligators;
Piranha fish over 4 inches in length;
Chondrichthyes, including, but not limited to, sharks over 12 inches in length;
Struthio, including, but not limited to, ostriches;
Proboscidea, including, but not limited to, elephants;
Perissodactyla, including, but not limited to, rhinoceros and other animals with an odd number of toes (not horses or donkeys or mules);
Artiodactyls, including, but not limited to, camels and other hoofed mammals with an even number of toes (not cattle or swine or sheep or goat);
Birds of prey, including, but not limited to, eagles, hawks, falcons, buzzard;
Ursidae, all bears;
Edentata, including, but not limited to, anteaters, sloths, armadillos;
Viverridae, including, but not limited to, mongoose, civets, and genets.
(Ord. 3812, §1)

Exposed to rabies - any animal whether licensed or vaccinated for rabies or not, which has been bitten by, or fought with, or has come in close contact with an animal showing symptoms of rabies.

Kennel - commercial - any persons, group of persons or corporations engaged in the commercial business of breeding, buying or selling or boarding dogs and pets.

Puppy - any member of the canine family less than six months of age.

(Ord. 2203, 1; Ord. 2247, 1; Ord. 2970, 1; Ord. 3264, 2)



Sec. 5-2. Domestic animals or fowl running at large
It shall be unlawful for any person possessing, owning or otherwise having under his custody or control any domestic or fowl of any kind to permit the same to run at large in or upon any of the streets and public places or upon the land of any person in the city or tether the same in such a way that such animals or fowl may go across or upon any of such places. This Section and the succeeding four sections shall not apply to dogs, cats, or ferrets. (Ord. 2203, 2; Ord. 3264, 2)



Sec. 5-3. Impounding animals and fowl
Any domestic animals or fowl found running at large or tied, staked, or pastured in, on or along any street, alley, railroad right of way, unenclosed land or public place in the city shall forthwith be taken up by the city and impounded in some secure place to be provided by the city. (Ord. 2203, 2; Ord. 3264, 2)



Sec. 5-4. Redemption of impounded animals
It shall be the duty of the city to make diligent search for the owner of any animal or fowl impounded and, when found, to notify him of such impounding; and thereupon such owner may appear at any time before such animal or fowl is sold as provided in the following section and reclaim such animal or fowl upon payment to the city of the expense and penalties fixed and prescribed. (Ord. 2203, 2; Ord. 3264, 2)



Sec. 5-5. Sale of impounded animals
The city may sell for cash at public sale to the highest bidder all impounded animals not reclaimed by the owner after having first given four days notice of the time and place of sale and the property to be sold and the cause of sale by printed or written handbills posted at five public places in the city, two of which places shall be the city hall and county courthouse. Every such sale shall pass title to the purchaser of the animal or fowl sold. The purchaser shall be entitled to receive a certificate of purchase from the chief of police. (Ord. 2203, 2; Ord. 3264, 2)



Sec. 5-6. Disposition of proceeds of sale of impounded animal
The amount received from the sale of an impounded animal or fowl shall be paid into the general fund of the city. (Ord. 2203, 2; Ord. 3264, 2)



Sec. 5-7. Turning out animals to cause impounding.
No person shall turn loose from any pen or enclosure any animal for the purpose of causing the same to be impounded. (Ord. 2203, 2; Ord. 3264, 2)



Sec. 5-8. Keeping of stallion or jack
It shall be unlawful within the city for any person to keep any stallion or jack. (Ord. 2203, 2; Ord. 3264, 2)



Sec. 5-9. Keeping of goats, horses, or other forms of livestock; keeping of hogs, swine or pigs - Prohibited
No person shall keep a cow, bull, mare, horse, goat, or sheep in an outdoor enclosure or pasture, the exterior boundary of which is within 100 feet of any residence, business or other such structure intended for human habitation on a permanent or temporary basis. The pen, pasture or enclosure in which such animals are kept shall provide an area of at least 900 square feet for each such animal. This Section shall not apply to animals kept in the conduct of commercial enterprise or business at locations where such enterprise or business is permitted. Any such animals kept within the city prior to the effective date of this Ordinance shall be permitted to remain in similar number and kind. No hogs, swine, or pigs shall be kept within the city under any conditions. (Ord. 2203, 2; Ord. 3264, 2),



Sec. 5-10. Keeping of rabbits, chickens, ducks, turkeys, or other domestic small animals or fowl
No person shall keep rabbits, small animals or fowl in such numbers as to create a health or unsanitary condition. Sections 5-11 and 5-12 of this Chapter shall apply to the keeping of such animals. (Ord. 2203, 2; Ord. 3264, 2)



Sec. 5-11. Confinement of livestock and fowl within city.
Every person owning land within the city upon which livestock are kept or permitted to be kept by the landowner or otherwise shall confine or restrict such livestock, fowl, or small animals at all times to such property. Failure to so confine or restrict livestock, fowl, or small animals kept or permitted to be kept in the city shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2203, 2; Ord. 3264, 2)



Sec. 5-12. Cleanliness of barns, sheds, hutches, pens, or yards
Every person keeping or maintaining animals or domestic fowl shall keep the barn, shed, hutch, pen, or yard in which such animals or fowl are kept or maintained in a clean and sanitary condition so that the same will not emit foul or disagreeable odors and shall not permit any concentration of manure. (Ord. 2203, 2; Ord. 3264, 2)



Sec. 5-13. Loading and transporting of livestock and fowl
No person shall, within the city, load, unload or transfer from one vehicle to another vehicle any hogs, sheep, cattle or other livestock or fowl in any public place, street or thoroughfare. No person shall park or stand any vehicle in which hogs, sheep, cattle or other livestock are loaded on any public place, street or thoroughfare or any unenclosed private premises for a longer period than one hour. Nothing continued in this Section shall prohibit loading, unloading or transferring of hogs, sheep, cattle or livestock or fowl at any established and maintained stockyard, slaughterhouse, or sale barn or in any unenclosed building. (Ord. 2203, 2; Ord. 3264, 2)



Sec. 5-14. Possession and sale of exotic or wild animals - Prohibited
No person or corporation shall possess, house, shelter, pen, sell or offer for sale within the limits of the City of Rolla, any exotic animal as defined in Article I, Section 5-1 Definitions hereof.

It shall be unlawful for the owner, possessor, or any other person in control of a lot, tract, or parcel of land within city limits or any residence or business premises situated thereon to knowingly permit any other person to be in possession of an exotic animal upon the property, residence or premises.

Any animal that is determined by an animal control officer or police officer to be an exotic and/or wild animal and is found inside of the city limits of Rolla shall be immediately impounded at the shelter until arrangements can be made to remove the animal from city limits. The owner shall pay a boarding fee of $10.00 per day plus any additional cost incurred by the city in feeding and caring for the animal.

Section 5-14 shall not apply to the following:
What is commonly known as a "pocket pet", including, but is not limited to ferrets, guinea pigs, gerbils, mice, hamsters, chinchillas, rabbits, sugar glider, domestic rats and hedgehogs;
Non-poisonous reptiles and amphibians, which are commonly considered pets, including, but not limited to green iguanas, chameleons, turtles, frogs, bearded dragons and small snakes, kept in a secure enclosure;
Small to large caged birds, including but not limited to parrots, cockatoos, cockatiels;
The animal shelter or any agent or official thereof, acting in an official capacity;
Any agency or official of the federal, state, or local government, acting in an official capacity;
Circuses and performing animal exhibitions with current city exhibitors permit;
State universities, other state agencies, medical research facilities, and local schools working with wild or exotic animals for teaching or research purposes only;
Licensed veterinarians tending to injured or sick wild and/or exotic animals;
Zoological parks and aquariums that are accredited by the American Association of Zoological Parks and Aquariums;
Wildlife rehabilitations who are in compliance with City Zoning Code and possess a valid city and state and federal permit for capture and possession of injured, infirm, orphaned wild animals for the purpose of treatment and release.

The Animal Control Manager is authorized to release any endogenous wild and/or exotic animal, which has been deemed capable of survival in the wild and approved by an official of the Missouri Department of Conservation.

A wild and/or exotic animal possessed or maintained in violation of this Chapter may be subject to euthanasia if any of the following exigent circumstances are deemed to exist by the Animal Control Manager and/or any Police Officer:

The wild and/or exotic animal presents an imminent likelihood of serious physical harm to the public and there is no other reasonably available means of abatement; or
There is no reasonable basis to believe that the violation can be or in good faith will be corrected and after reasonable search or inquiry by the animal control authority no facility as authorized by local, state or federal law is available to house the exotic animal; or
The wild and/or exotic animal suffers from a communicable disease injurious to other animals or human beings; provided that this section shall not apply if the animal is under treatment by a licensed veterinarian and may reasonably be expected to recover without infecting other animals or human beings.

Any wild and/or exotic animal impounded under the provisions of this Article and not reclaimed by the owner within five days may be humanely destroyed by a veterinarian or a qualified person designated by the city by injection of a substance that is considered to be humane, or released to a zoological park or to any other person or agency deemed appropriate.

Any person desiring to possess a wild or exotic animal within city limits may apply in writing for an exception to the animal control manager. The animal control manager will research the possibility of an exception and then forward the request to the chief of police and the city administrator within ten (10) working days. The chief of police and the city administrator shall then be responsible to review the application and within ten (10) working days approve or decline the application. A person desiring to possess a wild or exotic animal which, in the opinion of the chief of police and the city administrator, is prohibited under this section shall have the right to request a hearing before the city council. The hearing shall take place at the city councils next regularly scheduled meeting. The decision of city council shall be the final decision.

In the event a wild or exotic animal escapes from the custody or the owner and/or possessor, the owner and/or possessor shall, upon conviction by a court of the City of Rolla, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined and/or imprisoned according to the provisions of the General Penalty Code of the City of Rolla (Sec. 1-7).

Conduct made unlawful by Section 5-14 of the Code of the City of Rolla constitutes an offense punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for a period of not exceeding three month, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 2203, §2; Ord. 3264, §2; Ord. 3812, §2)



Sec. 5-15. Cruelty to or mistreatment of animals
A person commits an offense if he intentionally or knowingly tortures or seriously overworks an animal; fails unreasonably to provide necessary food, care, or shelter for an animal in his custody; abandons unreasonably an animal in his custody; transports or confines an animal in a cruel manner; kills, injures, or administers poison to animals belonging to another without legal authority or the owner's effective consent; causes one animal to fight with another; or treats any animal in an inhumane or improper manner or exercises any control over an animal inconsistent with rights of ownership of the animal. (Ord. 2203, 2; Ord. 3264, 2)



Sec. 5-16. Humane treatment of animals
No person shall collect, purchase or solicit dogs, cats, or other domestic animals for resale to serum plants, laboratory supply houses, or for other experimental, research teaching purposes. The provisions of this Section shall not be applicable to pet shops or commercial kennels. (Ord. 2203, 2; Ord. 3264, 2)



Sec. 5-17. Trapping
No person shall within the city, kill, wound, injure or capture or attempt to kill, wound, injure or capture any animal or bird; provided that the owner, tenant or authorized agent of real estate in the city frequented by animals or birds which would deprive. The owner of full enjoyment of such property or real estate, may by humane methods, trap such animals or birds. No traps shall be set in any manner that could in any way unreasonably jeopardize the life or health of any person. (Ord. 2203, 2; Ord. 3264, 2)



Sec. 5-18. Disposing of unwanted animals
Any person wishing to turn in or relinquish unwanted animal(s) may do so by delivering the animal(s) to the Rolla Animal Shelter.  A $10.00 impound fee shall be assessed per animal to residents residing within the Rolla city limits.   A $45.00 impound fee shall be assessed per animal to residents of Phelps County, and who do not reside within the Rolla city limits.   If the citizen wishes to relinquish a mother and puppies, the puppies must be older than eight weeks of age and a fee of $65.00 will be assessed.  No animals will be accepted outside of Phelps County.  In accordance with RSMo. 578.005 and the Code of State Regulations 2 CSR 30-2.020, any citizen who is the legal owner of an animal or has harbored an animal for three or more consecutive days, must have the animal vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian with the anti-rabies serum prior to relinquishing the animal to the Rolla Animal Shelter.  A current metallic rabies tag and supporting documentation (proof) must accompany the animal. (Ord. 3264, §2; Ord. 3448, §1, Ord. 4096)



Sec. 5-19. Incineration services
Any animal owner may request the City to provide incinerator services for a pet.  A communal (standard disposal) cremation may be provided at a cost of $20.00 per animal.  Pet owners may request a private cremation through a veterinarian.  The Rolla Animal Shelter shall not provide private cremations.
(Ord. 3264, §2, Ord. 4096)



Sec. 5-20. Defecation on public or private property prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or in control of any animal to permit or allow such animal to defecate upon any public property or private property of another unless such person shall remove immediately all feces so deposited by such animal, and dispose such feces in an appropriate trash receptacle. (Ord. 3815, §1)

Secs. 5-21 to 5-23. Reserved


Article II - Small Animals
Sec. 5-24. Rabies' Vaccinations/Rabies Tags
Every person owning, keeping, harboring or permitting a dog, cat, and/or ferret four months or older to remain on his premises is required to have the animal vaccinated annually with an anti-rabies vaccine by a veterinarian licensed to practice in the State of Missouri. Every such person owning or controlling such animal shall be required to display on the animal the metallic tag issued by the veterinarian showing the animal has a current vaccination and shall see that the tag is worn constantly. This section shall not apply to an animal whose owner is a non-resident, temporarily in the City not to exceed thirty days, nor to "leader", seeing eye dogs or other animals which have been vaccinated and are trained and actually used to assist a handicapped person. No person shall remove or cause to be removed the tag from any animal without consent of the owner or keeper thereof. (Ord. 2203, 3; Ord. 2247, 5; Ord. 3217, 1; Ord. 3264, 2)



Sec. 5-25. Repealed by Ord. 3217, 2.


Sec. 5-26. Dogs at Large
It shall be a violation of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, for an owner or keeper of a dog to permit such dog to be found running at large, which is defined to mean off the premises of the owner and not under the control of the keeper, owner, or responsible member of the household. A dog is under control if it is under the immediate and effective restraint of a responsible person by means of a leash attached to its collar or harness and said leash is directly controlled by the keeper or owner. This section shall not apply to law enforcement personnel working with any police K-9. (Ord. 2203, §3; Ord. 3264, §2; Ord. 3814, §1)



Sec. 5-27. Penalty for dogs at large
Any dog found running at large within the city will be humanely handled and captured by the animal control officer, or other appropriate officer, and returned to the person making claim for the dog. The person making claim for the dog shall be considered the owner or keeper of said dog by virtue of the claim made, and may be cited for permitting a dog to run at large. The offense is punishable as authorized by Section 1-7 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 2464, 1; Ord. 2704, 1; Ord. 3264, 2)



Sec. 5-28. Impoundment of animals
Any dog running at large within the City of Rolla, Missouri whose owner or keeper cannot be found, or not wearing a collar bearing a metallic rabies tag as provided and described in Section 5-24, shall be captured by the animal control officer or other appropriate officer, and impounded at the animal shelter or some other suitable place. When a dog is found running at large and its ownership is known to the animal control officer, such dog shall be returned to the owner and the provisions of the foregoing section shall be followed.
Every female dog in heat shall be kept confined in a building or secure enclosure, or in a veterinary hospital or boarding kennel, in such manner that she cannot come in contact with another animal except for breeding purposes.
The animal control officer may impound any animal found on public property, and if necessary a warrant may be obtained from the appropriate court enabling the officer to enter upon private property for the purpose of inspecting, caring for, or impounding neglected or abused animals as defined by Chapter 578 Sections 578.009 and 578.012 of the Revised Missouri Statutes of the State of Missouri.
In any event upon impounding dogs or other animals, the animal control officer will make every possible effort to notify the owner of such dog or animal so impounded and inform the owner of the conditions whereby ownership of the animal may be regained. Any animal routinely considered to be a pet will be impounded for five calendar days, during which time it shall be the responsibility of the animal control officer to see that such animal is fed and watered. (Ord. 2203, 3; Ord. 2704, 2; Ord. 3264, 2)



Sec. 5-29. Redemption and fees
The owner of a small animal shall be entitled to resume possession of said impounded animal before it is disposed of, upon compliance with the provisions in Section 5-24 and the payment of the impoundment fees set forth in this Article. The chief of police or his designee shall require that such small animal be vaccinated with anti-rabies vaccine as a condition for the release of such animal, and may require such vaccination in the case of any other animal when deemed necessary. Any small animal impounded under the provisions of this Article may be reclaimed upon the payment by the owner to the city of $10.00 for each day or fraction thereof such animal is kept. (Ord. 2282, 1; Ord. 3264, 2)



Sec. 5-30. Humane destruction of impounded small animals
Any small animal impounded under the provisions of this Article and not reclaimed by the owner within five days may be humanely destroyed by a veterinarian or a qualified person designated by the city by injection of a substance that is considered to be humane, or placed in the custody of some person deemed by the chief of police to be a responsible and suitable owner who will comply with the provisions of this Article and pay the adoption fees, and if such small animal is a dog or cat that is not spayed or neutered will agree to have such animal spayed or neutered within 30 days as outlined in Section 273.400 of the Revised Statutes of the State of Missouri. Diseased or dying animals may be humanely destroyed at the time of collection except that if the owner can be discovered from the tags on the animal he will be notified prior to disposing of the animal. (Ord. 2203, 3; Ord. 3264, 2)



Sec. 5-31. Cats damaging shrubs, gardens and property
Cats in the city that do damage to shrubs, gardens or property shall be subject to the same regulations regarding dogs as set forth in Sections 5-26 through 5-30 of this Article. (Ord. 2203, 4; Ord. 3264, 2)



Sec. 5-32. Animals damaging property
No person shall own, keep, or harbor any animal which does damage to shrubs, gardens or property. (Ord. 2203, 3; Ord. 3264, 2)



Sec. 5-33. Apprehension of cats running at large in violation of Section 5-31
Apprehension of cats running at large in violation of Section 5-31 shall be the responsibility of the effected person. The city will make available humane box traps to be used by the complainant to apprehend such cats. A reasonable deposit will be required for use of such traps. The city will pick up all cats apprehended and handle them in accordance with Sections 5-26 through 5-30 upon receipt of a signed complaint noting violation of Section 5-31. (Ord. 2203, 4; Ord. 3264, 2)



Sec. 5-34. Humane destruction at request of owner
Any person having the right to have any small animal killed and who shall request the humane destruction of said animal, shall be charged a fee of $10.00 for humane destruction of a small animal or $20.00 for humane destruction plus disposal of the body. (Ord. 2203, 3; Ord. 3264, 2)



Sec. 5-35. Animal bite procedures
Required confinement and notice of authorities: Any animal that shall bite any person or other animal, causing an abrasion of the skin, shall be immediately confined for a period of ten days. It shall be the duty of the person owning, harboring or permitting any animal to be about his premises to notify the city police immediately upon knowledge or notice that such animal has bitten any person or other animal and if such animal has been or will be delivered to a veterinarian.
Required immediate veterinarian examination: All animals subject to confinement will as quickly as practicable be transported by the owner or if the owner is unavailable or unwilling, by the animal control officer to a licensed veterinarian for examination.
Home confinement: If upon examination the first offender animal is free of apparent signs of central nervous system disease and has received rabies vaccination more than 30 days prior to the bite and not more remotely than one year, or has received a vaccination more remotely than one year and has a certificate from a licensed veterinarian certifying the continuing effectiveness of such vaccination, the owner with facilities to and who will assure the animal control officer of his commitment to do so, will be permitted to confine the animal for ten days conditioned upon his undertaking to have the animal examined by a licensed veterinarian on the tenth day, with reports of the examination to be made expeditiously to the police department. If in home confinement an animal is not maintained in confinement, it will be picked up by the animal control officer and confined in the facilities of a licensed veterinarian.

Veterinarian confinement: In all cases other than those described in subsection (c) above, the animal will be confined in the facilities of the licensed veterinarian.
Payment of all veterinarian charges: All inspection confinement charges of the veterinarian will be paid by the person owning or harboring the animal. If the animal is not claimed by the owner at the end of confinement period, the animal will be impounded by the city and released to the owner only upon payment of all veterinary charges and fees in Section 5-29. If not claimed within five days, Section 5-30 will apply.
Disposition of animal without quarantine observation - Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person with notice or knowledge that an animal owned, harbored or permitted to remain about his premises has bitten any person, to dispose of such animal in any manner.
Death while confined; duty to notify police department: The animal control division or a veterinarian or owner shall notify the police department immediately of the death of any animal while under his observation or care. All animals which have bitten any person shall be secured in such a manner so as to prevent their biting other animals while such animal remains in the city pound or in the care of a veterinarian.
Destruction of dangerous animal prior to quarantine; laboratory examination of brain: If any dangerous, fierce or vicious animal cannot be safely taken up or impounded, such animal may be slain by any policeman. In all cases where the animal that has bitten a person or caused an abrasion of the skin is slain by any policeman, whether by order of court or otherwise, and a period of less than 15 days has elapsed since the day upon which such animal bit any person or caused an abrasion of the skin of any person, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to cause to be delivered without delay, the head with brain of such animal to the state division of health laboratory or other authorized laboratory for analysis.
Emergency epidemic controls: It shall be the duty of the mayor, whenever in his opinion the danger to the public safety from rabid animals is great and imminent, to publish his proclamation order requiring all persons owning, keeping or harboring any animal to securely muzzle or confine same, for the period prescribed in the proclamation. All animals not so muzzled or confined during such period shall be presumed to be abandoned or unowned.
Disposition of animal bitten or scratched by another animal: If an animal which has either not been vaccinated for rabies or has not received timely booster vaccinations for same is bitten or scratched by an animal adjudged to be rabid, such animal shall be forthwith destroyed or held under six months quarantine by the owner the same manner as other animals are quarantined. If an animal which has been vaccinated for rabies is bitten or scratched by an animal adjudged to be rabid, such animal shall be given a rabies booster vaccination and shall be watched for abnormal behavior for a period of 30 days. If an animal is bitten or scratched by an animal, and it is not known whether that animal is rabid, the bitten or scratched animal shall be quarantined for a period of six months.
Disposition of animals after quarantine: Any animal which becomes rabid during the period it is confined shall be killed, and the health officer may order the chief of police to deliver the head with the brain of such animal to the state laboratory or other authorized laboratory for analysis. (Ord. 2203, §3; Ord. 2247, §6-8; Ord. 3264, §2)


Sec. 5-36. Injury to humans
No person will own, keep, possess, or harbor an animal which has a history of inflicting to any human being injury on more than two separate incidents reported to the animal control officer. No section of this Chapter shall be construed as preventing a person from exercising reasonable self-defense tactics to prevent an animal attack. (Ord. 2203, §3; Ord. 3264, §2)



Sec. 5-37. Dogs, cats, or ferrets without current vaccination
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, harbor or permit a dog, cat, or ferret on his premises that has not been vaccinated within one year immediately preceding the date of an alleged injury. (Ord. 2203, 3; Ord. 3264, 2)



Sec. 5-38. Animals annoying humans by barking, howling, yelping, jumping , threatening, spreading garbage or attacking other domestic animals or fowl
No person shall own, keep or harbor any animal which, by loud, frequent or habitual barking, howling or yelping, shall annoy or disturb any neighborhood or persons, or by habitually jumping upon or threatening persons upon public streets shall cause persons thereon to be put in fear or injury or habitually spreads garbage or habitually attacks other domestic animals, pets or domestic fowl. A written complaint, signed by no less than two witnesses from separate households, shall be filed with an animal control officer or a police officer, alleging any of the circumstances set forth herein. An animal control officer or police officer personally observing any of the circumstances set forth herein may also initiate such a complaint. (Ord. 2203, §3; Ord. 3264, §2; Ord. 4358, §1)



Sec. 5-39. Adoption rate for the shelter
The adoption rate for animals at the Rolla Animal Shelter shall be $35.00 per animal. This rate includes a current anti-rabies vaccination.  (Ord. 3264, §2, Ord. 4096)

Secs. 5-40 to 5-55. Reserved
(Return to Contents)

Article IV - Abandonment of Animals
Sec. 5-56. Abandonment of an animal within the municipality
The abandonment of any animal within the corporate limits of this municipality is hereby prohibited. (Ord. 2203, 5; Ord. 3264, 2)

Secs. 5-57 to 5-61. Reserved


Article V - Commercial Kennels
Sec. 5-62 License required of commercial kennels; veterinarian kennels exempt
All persons operating commercial kennels as defined in Article I, Section 5-l, Definitions, shall obtain a license from the city clerk for operation of such kennel. Kennels operating in conjunction with a veterinarian licensed by the city shall be exempt from this provision. The annual licensing fee shall be $50.00 in addition to any other applicable business license fees. (Ord. 2203, 6; Ord. 3264, 2)



Sec. 5-63. Requirements for operation
(a) Permittee shall operate a kennel so as to eliminate excessive or untimely noise from animals and offensive odors from kennel. An isolation ward sufficiently removed so as not to endanger the health of other animals shall be provided for animals sick with a communicable disease. Permittee shall retain name, address and telephone number of the owner of each boarded small animal, and the license number, if applicable, of each small animal. This registration must be exhibited to any representative of the city upon demand. Permittee shall retain name and address of each person selling, trading or giving any small animal to kennel. Permittee shall notify owner of boarded animal when animal refuses to eat or drink causing it to lose flesh or when animal is injured or becomes weak or ill.

(b) No commercial kennel shall operate within 300 feet of any residential use or any residential zoning district. (Ord. 2203, 6; Ord. 3264, 2)

Secs. 5-64 to 5-65. Reserved


Article VI - Pet Shops
Sec. 5-66. Standards
All pet shops, as defined herein, including pet shops run in conjunction with another holding facility, shall in addition to the other requirements of this Article comply with the minimum standards of this Section.

Water: There shall be available water for washing cages and disinfecting easily accessible to all parts of the shop. Fresh drinking water shall be available to all species at all times. All water containers shall be mounted so the animal cannot turn them over and be removable for cleaning.
Room temperature: The room temperature of the shop shall be maintained at a level that is healthful for every species of animal kept in the shop.
Cages and enclosures: Any enclosure having wires or bars for confining birds or animals. Any enclosure used to confine animals.
Feeding: All animals under three months of age are to be fed at least three times per 24 hours, if appropriate for the species. Food for all animals shall be served in a clean dish so mounted that the animal cannot readily tip it over or defecate or urinate in same.
Birds: Each bird must have sufficient room to sit on a perch. Perches shall be placed horizontal to each other in the same cage. Cages must be cleaned every day, and cages must be disinfected when birds are sold. Parrots and over large birds shall have separate cages from smaller birds.
Fish: The water temperature shall be maintained at a constant temperature that is healthful.
Bedding: There shall be sufficient clean, dry beading to meet the needs of each individual animal.
Care: All animals must be fed (if appropriate for the species), watered, and cages cleaned every day, including Sundays and holidays.
Fee: An annual business licensing fee shall be required. Said fee shall be the same amount required of merchants for licenses to do business in the city. (Ord. 2203, 7; Ord. 2608, 1; Ord. 3264, 2)
Secs. 5-67 to 5-71. Reserved


Article VII - Diseased or Injured Animals
Sec. 5-72. Sale of known diseased animals
No animal known to be diseased shall be sold or accepted for sale while the disease is active. (Ord. 2203, 8; Ord. 3264, 2)



Sec. 5-73. Dispositions of diseased or injured animals
In all instances in which a diseased or injured animal, whether domestic or wild, is suffering as a result of such disease or injury, and the owner thereof is unknown or the animal is a stray, such animal may be adopted, if deemed appropriate by a veterinarian, or shall be humanely destroyed. (Ord. 2247, 9; Ord. 3264, 2)



Sec. 5-74. Prohibiting the distribution of animals in public places
So as to promote the City's spay/neuter program and the prevention of disease, the offering for free or for sale of animals in parking lots or similar public locations shall be prohibited. (Ord. 3264, 2)

Secs. 5-75 to 5-78. Reserved


Article VIII - Dangerous Animals
Sec. 5-79. Definitions of dangerous animals
For the purposes of this Article, a "dangerous animal" shall be any animal with the following characteristics:

Any animal which has inflicted severe or fatal injury on a human being. "Severe injury" means any physical injury resulting directly from an animal's bite which results in broken bones, or lacerations requiring stitches, or inpatient hospitalization.
Any animal which has inflicted severe or fatal injury to a domestic animal, livestock or poultry without provocation while outside the owner's property.
Any animal owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of animal fighting or any animal trained for animal fighting.
Any animal which has bitten a human being, without provocation, on public or private property other than the property of the owner.
Any animal which, while on the owner's property, has bitten, without provocation, a human being other than the owner or a member of the owner's family who normally resides at the place where the animal is kept.
Any animal which, when unprovoked, chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds, or private property other than the property of the owner, in a menacing fashion or an apparent attitude of attack, regardless of whether a person is injured by said animal. (Ord. 2599, §1; Ord. 3264, §2; Ord. 3959 §1)

Sec. 5-80. Procedure for declaring a dangerous animal
Should a written complaint be filed with an animal control officer or a police officer, alleging any of the circumstances set forth in Section 5-79; or an animal control officer or police officer personally observe any of the circumstances set forth in Section 5-79, the animal control officer or police officer shall issue a notice to the owner or possessor of said animal that said animal will be designated a dangerous animal subject to the regulations of this Article and advise the owner or possessor of said animal that he has five working days to request a hearing before the appeals board to appeal such classification. The appeals board will consist of the chief of police, the city administrator, and the mayor, or their delegates. If no request for hearing is timely filed, the animal that is the subject of the complaint shall be deemed a dangerous animal, and said animal and its owner shall be subject to the provisions of this Article.
Once a written complaint has been filed and or an animal control officer or police officer has personally observed any violation or can provide sufficient probable cause, as provided in the preceding paragraph, the animal shall be confined pending a determination that said animal is a dangerous animal. Such confinement shall be on the owner's premises if the owner complies with the requirements of Section 5-82(d) or with a licensed veterinarian or if the owner's premises are insufficient to comply with Section 5-82, at the Rolla Animal Shelter at the owner's expense.
The appeals board shall meet within seven working days of the date of appeal to determine whether the animal in question is dangerous within the meaning of this Article. Testimony of the complainant, witnesses, the owner of the animal, and any other person possessing information pertinent shall be permitted in an informal setting.
Should a hearing be held by the appeals board, and the board determines that the animal is a dangerous animal, then the animal and its owner shall be subject to the provisions of this Article.
The hearing board shall issue a written finding within five working days after the hearing.
The decision of the appeals board shall be effective immediately. The animal owner may appeal an adverse decision by petition to the circuit court within 30 days. Notwithstanding an appeal, the decision of the appeals board shall take effect immediately except that any animal seized pending appeal shall be confined at the expense of the owner and not destroyed until 10 days after the circuit court decision becomes final unless the owner has complied with the requirements of Section 5-82.
(Ord. 2599, §2; Ord. 3264, §2; Ord. 3648, §1; Ord. 3813, §1)

Sec. 5-81. Action to be taken for dangerous animals
An animal responsible for an unprovoked severe or fatal injury shall be destroyed.

In all other cases, a dangerous animal shall be removed from the city and shall not be permitted to be harbored, kept, or possessed within the city limits of Rolla, Missouri, unless the owner of such animal satisfies all of the requirements of this Article. (Ord. 2599, 3-4; Ord. 3264, 2)


Sec. 5-82. Owner's responsibilities
The owner of the dangerous animal that desires to maintain the animal within the city limits of Rolla, Missouri rather than remove the animal from the city shall:

Annually register said animal with the city clerk by paying a license fee of $50.00.
Provide to the city clerk during registration, two color photographs of the animal showing left and right profiles.
Cause said animal to wear at all times a bright orange collar with a metal registration tag attached to it so that it can be readily identified as a dangerous animal.
Confine such animal upon the owner's premises either indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. Such pen must be at least five feet by ten feet (5 ft. x 10 ft.) and must have secure sides and a secure top. If the pen has no bottom that is secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded into the ground no less than 12 inches. The enclosure, when occupied by the dangerous animal, must not be occupied by any other animal. When the dangerous animal is a female and has a litter of young which are under three months of age, the young may occupy the same enclosure as the mother.
Display a sign upon his premises stating that there is a dangerous animal on the property. The sign shall be visible and capable of being read from the public street that abuts the property.
Provide at registration to the city clerk proof of liability insurance coverage in an amount of at least $100,000.00 covering any loss or injury caused by the animal that has been designated a dangerous animal. The insurance policy shall require a notice to be sent to the city clerk should the policy be canceled, terminated, or expired. (Ord. 2599, 5; Ord. 3264, 2)

Sec. 5-83. Penalty for noncompliance
It shall be unlawful for a person to keep a dangerous animal within the city limits of Rolla, Missouri and fail to comply with the provisions of this Article. Persons found guilty of violating the provisions of this Article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500) or a jail sentence not to exceed thirty (30) days or both such fine and confinement.

Any animal found to be a dangerous animal and kept in the City of Rolla, Missouri in violation of the provisions of this Article may be seized and impounded until the owner thereof complies with the provisions of this Article. If the owner fails to comply with the provisions of this Article within 10 days of the date of seizure of the animal, or if the animal is returned to the city limits after being removed, the dangerous animal shall be humanely euthanized. (Ord. 2599, §6; Ord. 3264, §2; Ord. 3648, §1; Ord. 4359, §1)
Secs. 5-84 to 5-89. Reserved


Article IX - Penalties
Sec. 5-90. Penalties for violations
Whenever by the terms of this Chapter the doing of an act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefore, the violation of such provisions shall be punished pursuant to the guidelines defined in the General Provisions of the Code of the City of Rolla. (Ord. 2203, 9; Ord. 3264, 2)



Sec. 5-91. Responsibility of enforcement
Except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter, the chief of police shall be responsible for the enforcement of this Chapter. The chief of police may assign an employee or employees to be responsible for enforcing the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 2203, 9; Ord. 3264, 2)

Secs. 5-92 to 5-99. Reserved

Chapter 6 - Buildings
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter


Chapter Contents:
Article I - In General
§6-1 Street numbers required of property owners on dwelling or structure
§6-2 Fire limits
§§6-3 to 6-7 Reserved
Article II - Board of Appeals
§6-8 Established
§6-9 Composition; appointment; term of office
§6-10 Qualifications; duties; meetings
§§6-11 to 6-15 Reserved
Article III - Building Regulations
§6-16 International Building Code/International Existing Building Code
§6-17 Same - Amendments
§6-18 Moving buildings - Permit required
§6-19 Same - Special permit for certain buildings
§6-20 Burglar, etc., alarm system between residences, etc., and police, etc., station -Authorized
§6-21 Same - Responsibility of owner for installation, damages, etc
§6-22 Same - Responsibility of city engineer for installation, etc
§6-23 Same - Service charge
§6-24 Same - Same - Disconnection, etc., upon failure to pay
§6-25 Unsafe buildings: Purpose; Definitions.
§6-26 Unsafe Buildings Prohibited; Constitute Nuisances.
§6-27 Penalties and Enforcement; Remedies Cumulative.
§6-28 Unsafe Building Conditions Described.
§6-29 Enforcement Administration.
§6-30 Abatement Administration upon Hearing.
§6-31 Appeals Under Administrative Review Act.
§6-32 Duty of Public Officers Is To City.
§6-33 Storage; Redemption; Sale.
§6-34 Technical Codes.
§6-35 Home or Business Inspections.
§6-36 Building permit fee development incentive: purpose.
§6-36.1 Minimum requirements.
§§6-37 to 6-39 Reserved
Article IV - Mechanical Code
§6-40 International Mechanical Code - Adopted
§6-41 Same - Amendments
§§6-42 to 6-46 Reserved
Article V - Plumbing Code
§6-47 International Plumbing Code - Adopted
§6-48 Same - Amendments
§6-49 Cross-connection control
§6-50 Sewer laterals
§§6-51 to 6-54 Reserved
Article VI - Residential Code
§6-55 International Residential Code Adopted/International Swimming Pool & Spa Code
§6-56 Same - Amendments
§§6-57 to 6-60 Reserved

Article I - In General
Sec. 6-1. Street numbers required of property owners on dwelling or structure.
Dwellings: The owner of each single family, multi-family or other dwelling at which people reside shall display, in a conspicuous place on that portion of such dwelling which faces a public street the street number of such dwelling in Arabic numerals at least four inches in height and in colors that contrast with the color of the dwelling upon which such numbers are placed. Such numbers shall be displayed regardless of whether the dwelling is vacant or occupied by tenants.

Business or commercial buildings: The owner of each business or commercial building, including warehouses, factories, service stations, motels, hotels, shops, shopping centers, garages, office buildings, and all other properties in which commercial or business enterprises are doing business and all government and scholastic buildings, dorms, residences, classroom buildings and structures appurtenant thereto, and all church buildings and structures, shall display, in a conspicuous place on that portion of such structure that faces a public street, the street number of said structure in Arabic numerals at least six inches in height and in colors that contrast with the color of the structure upon which such numbers are displayed. Such numbers shall be displayed regardless of whether such structures are vacant or occupied by tenants.

Specific numbers: The numbers required to be displayed under the provisions of this Ordinance shall be those numbers that are determined by Public Works Department of the City of Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 3259, 1)

Applicability: The provisions of this Ordinance shall be applicable to private and non dedicated streets situated within developments that require plat approval under the ordinance of the City of Rolla, Missouri.

Minimum distance: In any instance in which a house or other structure described in this Ordinance is situated a distance of 100 feet or more from the roadway, such street number shall be displayed in a like manner as provided herein on a sign located not more than 25 feet from said roadway.

Type of numerals: It is specifically required by the provisions of this Ordinance that Arabic numerals be displayed and that the displaying of script , Roman or other form of numerical connotation shall not satisfy the requirements of this Ordinance.

Penalties: A violation of the requirements of this Ordinance shall constitute an offense which shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $50.00. Each day such dwelling or structure shall remain in violation of the requirements of this Ordinance shall subject the owner thereof to prosecution for a separate offense. (Ord. 2350, 7.)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 6-2. Fire Limits.
Fire limits are established as follows: Beginning at intersection of Cedar and Fourth Street; thence down center of Fourth Street to intersection of Fourth and Main Streets; thence north middle of Main Street to intersection of Main Street and Twelfth Street; thence east down middle of Twelfth Street to intersection of Twelfth Street and Cedar Street; thence down middle of Cedar Street to point of beginning. (Ord. 932, 101.)

Sec. 6-3 to 6-7. Reserved
(Return to Contents)


Article II - Board of Appeals
Sec. 6-8. Established
There is hereby established a board to be known as the Board of Appeals pursuant to the International Building Code. (Ord. 2596, 3; Ord. 2164, 1; Ord. 2927, 2; Ord. 3151, 2; Ord. 3764, 1)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 6-9. Composition; appointment; term of office
The Board of Appeals shall consist of five members appointed by the Mayor and shall serve a term of five years or until his successor has been appointed. (Ord. 2164, 2; Ord. 2227, 1; Ord. 2927, 2; Ord. 3764, 1)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 6-10. Qualifications; duties; meetings
Such board members shall have the qualifications and shall conduct their duties and meetings pursuant to the International Building Code and shall be residents of the city of Rolla, except that non-residents currently serving on the Board shall be allowed to continue to serve in that capacity (Ord. 2596, 3; Ord. 2927, 2; Ord. 3151, 2; Ord. 3764, 1)


Secs. 6-11 to 6-15. Reserved
(Return to Contents)


Article III - Building Regulations
Sec. 6-16.  International Building Code/International Existing Building Code

There is hereby adopted by the City, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations applicable to and governing all building and construction in the City, that certain code known as the International Building Code, 2018 Edition, and the Appendix Chapters A, B, I, and K, of which code not less than two copies have been and now are filed in the office of the City Clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated in the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, as if set out at length herein.

This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after January 1, 2019.  (Ord. 2277, §2; Ord. 2596, §2-3; Ord. 2927, §2; Ord. 3151, §2; Ord. 3549, §2; Ord. 4454, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 6-17. Same - Amendments
101.1 Title is hereby amended by inserting the words "City of Rolla, Missouri".

105.2 Work exempt from permit. Change the following:


Building:

1.     One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided that the floor area is not greater than 200 square feet.

7.     Roof covering, siding, painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, countertops, and similar finish work.

105.5
Expiration. Every permit issued shall be valid for one year after issuance unless work authorized by the permit is not commenced within 180 days after issuance, or if the authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. At that time the permit would become void and re-application would need to be made. A one-time, one-year extension of a valid permit may be obtained at a cost of one-half of the original permit fee.

109.2
Schedule of permit fees.

Insert the following:
New Construction - BOCA Permit Fee Schedule (gross area x gross area modifier (72) x type of construction x permit fee multiplier (0.0041) = permit fee.

Flat Rate Fee Schedule

Portable storage building over 200 sq. ft.	$50	 
Portable Carport 	$50	 
Deck, Porch or Stairs 	$50 (residential) 	$100 (commercial)
Electric Service	$50 (residential) 	$100 (commercial)
Mechanical, Electric, Plumbing Work	$50 (residential)	$100 (commercial)
Pool or Spa (residential)	$50 (above-ground)	$150 (in-ground)
Pool or Spa (commercial)	 	$300
Mobile Home	 	$100
Alterations less than 500 sq. ft.	$50 (residential)	$100 (commercial)
Alterations 501 - 1499 sq. ft. 	$100 (residential)	$200 (commercial)
Alterations 1500 sq. ft. and larger	$150 (residential)	$300 (commercial)
Signs 50 sq. ft. and under 	 	$75
Signs over 50 sq. ft.  	 	$150
Communication Tower	 	$300
Demolition	$50 (residential)
(plus $200 deposit)	
$100 (commercial)
(plus $500 deposit)
Excavation	$750	 
Sewer connection and/or tapping fees and excavation deposit will remain unchanged.
When construction has commenced without a permit, the permit fee shall be twice the original amount to cover the additional inspections and the time necessary to insure compliance with the code. When construction has begun under the authorization of a permit, but the permit holder has failed to obtain the required inspection, and the construction has passed the stage in which the inspection can be reasonably done, then an additional 25% of the original permit fee ($25 minimum) will be charged. A $200 deposit will be required on all residential permits and a $500 deposit will be required on all commercial construction permits with estimated construction costs greater than $2,500. This deposit shall be refunded after final inspection has been approved under a valid and current permit and the Public Works Department has approved all work and the condition of the right-of-way. Should the permit expire or final inspection not be obtained and approved within this timeframe, the deposit shall be forfeited. (Ord. 4024, §2)

114.4
Violation penalties.  Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a Misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.

115.3
Unlawful Continuance. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $500.00.

903.2.8.1
Exceptions.

An automatic sprinkler system shall not be required in Group R as adopted by Missouri State Statute 67.281 “Any governing body of any political subdivision that adopts the 2009 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings or a subsequent edition of such code without mandated automatic fire sprinkler systems in Section R313 of such code shall retain the language in section R317 of the 2006 International Residential Code for two-family dwellings (R317.1) and townhouses (R317.2).”
An automatic sprinkler system shall not be required in Group R when the habitable space is less than 3,750 sq. ft. for a three unit multiple family home (Three-Plex), or less than 5,000 sq. ft. for a four unit multiple family home (Four-Plex), and no more than 1 story above grade.  Each individual apartment, must be constructed with a 1 hour fire separation between individual units and all garage areas must be protected by a one hour fire separation.
(Ord. 2596, §3; Ord. 2742, §2; Ord. 2803, §1; Ord. 2927, §2; Ord. 3284, §2; Ord. 3549, §2; Ord. 4454, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 6-18. Moving buildings - Permit required
Any person desiring to move any structure over, along or through the public streets or thoroughfares of the city shall obtain a permit from the city engineer to move such structure. (Ord. 1014, 2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 6-19. Same - Special permit for certain buildings
If any structure sought to be moved under Sections 6-18 exceeds twenty feet in height and twenty-four feet in width, a special permit to move such structure shall be obtained from the city engineer and the city engineer shall designate the route to be used in the moving of the structure, and if, in the opinion of the city engineer, the structure cannot be safely moved to its new location without creating traffic hazards or damaging property of the city or others, then the city engineer shall refuse to issue such permit. (Ord. 1014, 3)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 6-20. Burglar, etc., alarm system between residences, etc., and police, etc., station - Authorized
Permission and authorization is granted to the owners of any business establishment, business property or residential property within the city to install and maintain an electrical burglar or fire alarm system with alarm signal at the police station or fire station of the city. (Ord. 1104, 1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 6-21. Same - Responsibility of owner for installation, damages, etc
The electrical alarm system permitted by Section 6-20 shall be installed and maintained by such person at his expense; and the city shall not, in any manner whatsoever, be responsible for the installation or maintenance of such alarm system, and the city shall not be liable to any person for any damages or injuries which may arise from the installation or maintenance of such alarm system. (Ord. 1104, 2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 6-22. Same - Responsibility of city engineer for installation, etc
That portion of the equipment of the electrical alarm system, permitted by Section 6-20, which may be placed on or within any premises which are the property of the city shall be installed and maintained under the supervision, direction and approval of the city engineer. (Ord. 1104, 3)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 6-23. Same - Service charge
For the right of having the electrical signal located at the police station or fire station, there shall be paid a service charge to the city in the amount of ten dollars per month. Such service charge shall be payable in advance, and such service charge shall be paid for each installation, that is to say, a service charge for an installation at the police station, and a separate service charge for an installation at the fire station. (Ord. 1104, 4)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 6-24. Same - Same - Disconnection, etc. upon failure to pay
In the event the service charge required by Section 6-23 shall not be paid within a period of thirty days after such charge shall become due and payable, the city engineer is authorized and directed to disconnect and make inoperative the signal for such electrical alarm system. (Ord. 1104, 5)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 6-25. Unsafe buildings: Purpose; Definitions
Sections 6-25 through 6-34 shall be known as the "Unsafe Buildings Code". Sections 6-25 through 6-34 establish necessary procedures to (a) prosecute the owner, occupant, resident, or other person in possession, charge or control of improperly maintained or otherwise unsafe buildings within the City for failing to properly maintain or otherwise abate and/or remove such conditions, (b) provide procedures allowing the City to abate or remove unsafe conditions resulting from improperly maintained or kept buildings and structures as they are found to exist within the City, (c) allow the City to charge the costs of City implemented abatement or removal action to the owners of the property upon which the improperly maintained or otherwise unsafe buildings exist and to impose a lien against the property upon which the condition are abated or removed, and (d) provide for procedures for permanent removal of such unsafe conditions. This Code is an exercise of the City's general police power and shall be liberally construed. The following definitions shall apply to the terms used herein:

"Building" means any house, building, garage, structure or other erected improvement permanently affixed to property within the City regardless of whether used for residential or commercial purposes.

"City" shall mean the City of Rolla, Missouri.

"Code" as used herein shall mean the Unsafe Building Code.

"Administrator" as used herein shall mean the City's Building Codes Administrator or any qualified designee.

"Hearing Board" shall mean the City's then appointed and serving board of adjustment sitting under this Code, however, as an administrative hearing panel whose decisions shall be subject to review under the Missouri Administrative Procedure and Review Act, Chapter 536, RSMo.

"Owner" shall mean any person or entity then shown as the legal owner of the property hereby affected as reflected in the records of the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. It shall not include any mortgagee or any beneficiary or trustee under a recorded deed of trust or any person with a leasehold interest in the Property under either a written or oral lease, whether recorded or unrecorded.

"Occupant" means any person or entity in possession of and occupying a building hereby affected for purpose, whether as an owner, resident, lessee or licensee under any lease, license or other permit.

"Unsafe building" as used in the Code shall mean any building hereby affected having those specific qualities or conditions discussed and described in Section 6-28 hereof.

"Unsafe building condition" shall be a building having any of the qualities or conditions described in Section 6-28 hereof.

"Person" shall mean both the owner and any occupant of the property hereby affected.

"Property" shall mean real estate situated within the City upon which an unsafe building is located.
(Ord. 4008, §1)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 6-26. Unsafe Buildings Prohibited; Constitute Nuisances.
No owner or occupant of any property within the City shall keep, maintain, cause or permit any of the conditions declared to constitute or create as unsafe building under this Code to exist upon such property. It shall be the duty of every owner and occupant of any building within the City to maintain the same so as not to permit the creation, maintenance or existence of an unsafe building condition as defined hereunder. Any building in the City determined to be an unsafe building is hereby declared a nuisance. (Ord. 4008, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 6-27. Penalties and Enforcement; Remedies Cumulative.
Any person who/which violates any provision of this Code shall be subject to the following penalties, and the City may pursue any or all of the following remedies, which shall be deemed to be cumulative and not mutually exclusive.

Prosecution. The owner, occupant, resident, or other person in possession, charge or control of any condition defined hereunder as a nuisance who shall fail to comply with any notice or order to repair, vacate or demolish such building issued hereunder shall be deemed to have violated this Code and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), unless the owner of the property is not also a resident of the property, in which case such fine may not exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days; or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. The City through its City Prosecutor may prosecute an alleged violation of any provision or requirement of this Code as hereinafter provided. It shall be a separate offense for each day the nuisance is allowed or continues to exist.

Abatement or Removal. Upon determination that an unsafe building exists, the City may abate or remove the unsafe building condition and assess the costs thereof in accordance with the provisions of this Code.
Injunction. In order to eliminate, remove or prevent an unsafe building condition which is in violation of this Code, the City Counselor, or other attorney(s) employed by the City for such specific purpose, may obtain such civil redress as may be appropriate under the circumstances, including restraining orders and injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction.(Ord. 4008, §1)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 6-28. Unsafe Building Conditions Described.
Any building upon any property within the City which has any of the following defects or conditions shall be deemed an "unsafe building" to the extent that the life, property, or safety of the public or occupants of the building are endangered, and shall be declared an unsafe building hereunder:

Those buildings which have exterior or interior walls or other vertical structural members that list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity of any such wall or vertical structure members fall outside of the middle third (3rd) of its base.

Those buildings which, exclusive of the foundation, (i) show any evidence of damage or deterioration to the supporting member or members, or (ii) any evidence of damage or deterioration of the non-supporting enclosing or outside walls or coverings that prevent the building from being secured against unauthorized entrance.

Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged or to collapse and thereby posing a risk of injury to persons or damage to other property.

Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, cracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquake than is required in the case of similar new construction.

Those buildings, or any portion thereof, which because of (i) dilapidation, deterioration or decay, (ii) faulty construction, (iii) the removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building, or (iv) the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation is reasonably likely in the opinion of the Administrator to partially or completely collapse.

Those buildings, as determined by any official law enforcement agency, used for the illegal manufacture or storage of a controlled substance as defined by this Article.

Those buildings under construction, or a fire damaged building upon which no current building permit is held and no substantial work shall have been performed for the immediately preceding thirty (30) days, and in the opinion of the Administrator conditions or defects exist to the extent that the life, property or safety of the public or its occupants are endangered.

Those portions of any building which remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building unless the portion remaining constitutes the proper and secure storage of salvage materials to be removed within thirty (30) days of the original demolition or destruction.

Those buildings used or intended to be used for residential dwelling purposes which are, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, as reasonably determined by the Administrator, unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition as is likely to cause sickness, disease or injury.

Those buildings which because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus, or other cause are reasonably determined by the Administrator to be a fire hazard.

Those buildings where any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.

Those buildings where the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic. (Ord. 4008, §1)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 6-29. Enforcement Administration.
The following provisions set forth the procedures for notice, administrative hearings and enforcement of the Unsafe Buildings Code:

Complaints. The Administrator shall receive any complaint regarding an alleged unsafe building condition hereunder and, based upon such a complaint or said Administrator's own observations, inspect and make initial determinations of the existence of an unsafe building condition and issue a notice to abate or remove the unsafe building condition, and /or require that the building be vacated until the unsafe building condition has been remedied, all as hereafter provided.

Inspections; Right of Entry upon Property for Inspections. The Administrator shall be permitted to enter upon private property for the purpose of making such inspection if necessary to conduct said inspection but only upon the express written consent of the owner of said property or under the specific authority granted pursuant to a lawful warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction as provided herein.

Requirement of Abatement Notice. Notice of the existence of an unsafe building condition shall be required in order to require abatement of the condition described hereunder or for the prosecution of a violation or the finding of a violation of any provision of the Unsafe Buildings Code in the Municipal Court of the City of Rolla. Notice shall not be required, and shall not be a prerequisite, to an action for injunctive relief hereunder.

Standards for Abatement. The following standards shall determine whether a building shall be ordered to be repaired, vacated or demolished under the terms of this Code:

If the unsafe building can be reasonably repaired so that it does not constitute a unsafe building, as herein defined, it may be ordered repaired.

If the unsafe building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health, safety or general welfare of human occupants, but it is reasonably capable of being repaired so that it will not constitute a dangerous building, it shall be ordered to be vacated until repaired and ordered repaired.

If the unsafe building cannot be reasonably repaired so that it will not constitute an unsafe building as herein defined, it shall be ordered to be demolished.

When Abatement Notice Given; to Whom. When the Administrator has made an initial determination of the existence of an unsafe building condition as defined hereunder, he/she shall as soon as possible thereafter notify the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee and any other person or entity having a legal or equitable interest in the property as shown by the land records of the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds.

Contents of Abatement Notice. The abatement notice shall state: (1) the specific provision(s) of the Unsafe Buildings Code violated; (2) the address and the legal description of the property where the condition exists; (3) the name of the Administrator and the address and telephone number of his/her office; (4) the actions necessary to remove or abate the unsafe condition, the time within which abatement must occur or commence, which shall not be fewer than twenty (20) days from the date of service of the notice if notice is made personally or by certified mail, or not fewer than forty-five (45) days of first publication if notice is made by publication; (5) whether the property must be vacated during repairs or, if demolition is required, that the property must be immediately vacated; and (6) that the City may request a hearing before the Hearing Board requesting authority to abate or remove the unsafe building condition upon not less than twenty (20) days notice if corrective action to abate or remove the unsafe condition is not otherwise undertaken by the owner or occupant, or same other person on his/her/its behalf as required.

City Initiated Abatement; Hearing Required. Upon failure of the owner and/or occupant to abate or remove the unsafe building condition upon notice as aforesaid, the City may proceed to abate or remove the condition. However, no such abatement or removal action shall be commenced by the City until a hearing has been conducted before the Hearing Board pursuant to this Code. Upon any such failure of the owner and/or occupant of the property to undertake the corrective action as described in the notice to abate or remove given as aforesaid, the Administrator may request in writing to the City Clerk a hearing before the Hearing Board. Upon receipt of a request for hearing from the Administrator; the City Clerk shall request the Hearing Board to issue written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing, which shall be not less than twenty (20) days after service of such hearing notice if made by personal service or by certified mail, or not less that forty-five (45) days of first publication if service is made by publication.

Contents of Hearing Notice. The hearing notice shall state: (1) the specific provision(s) of the Unsafe Buildings Code allegedly violated; (2) the address and the legal description of the property where the condition exists; (3) the name of the Administrator and the address and telephone number of his/her office; (4) the date, time and place of the hearing to be held; (5) that the City is seeking an order authorizing it to cause said unsafe building condition to be abated or removed at the owner's expense; and (6) that the costs of abatement or removal of the unsafe building condition shall be assessed as a special tax bill, shall be deemed a personal debt against the property owner and, in addition, shall be a lien on the property until paid.

Service of Notice. Notice of the Administrator's request for abatement or removal of an unsafe building condition under this Code, and notice of any hearing requested by the Administrator before the Hearing Board, shall be served as follows:

Upon Who Served. Service shall be upon each and every owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee and any other person or entity having a legal or equitable interest in the property as shown by the land records of the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds.

How Served; Posting; Personal Delivery or Certified Mail. Service of any notice required under this code in all cases shall be made by posting any notice required hereunder upon the affected property in a conspicuous place. Service of any required notice shall also be attempted by either personally delivering the written notice to the person to be served, or by delivering said notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person to be served. If service is had by personal delivery, the same shall be attested to by the person making service, to include the name and signature of the person making service, the name of the person served, the date, time and location of service, and a description of the notice so served. If service is by certified mail, the City Clerk shall be responsible for keeping the signed return receipt and the same shall constitute proof of service by certified mail.

Service Cannot be had by Personal Delivery or Certified Mail. If service by personal delivery or by certified mail as described above is not possible, the person responsible for making service shall attest in writing to the lack of personal service or service by certified mail. Said writing shall include the name and signature of the person attempting service, the name of the person to have been served, a description of the reasonable attempts to obtain service by personal delivery or certified mail, including a description of the date and nature of the attempts at service. Said writing shall be retained by the City Clerk along with any other documents associated with the unsuccessful service attempts.

Service by Publication; When. If service of any notice required hereunder cannot be made as aforesaid, service shall be made by publication. The publication shall contain the full test of the hearing notice, as required by this Code, and shall be published at least once each week for four (4) consecutive weeks on the same day of the week in a newspaper of general circulation published in Phelps County, Missouri. The time, date, and place of the specified in the notice of hearing to be held, or for the commencement of abatement or removal work or for any other thing to be done, shall be at least forty-five (45) days from the date of the first publication of notice. The person causing the service of the notice by publication shall be responsible for obtaining from the publisher an affidavit of publication, which shall be retained by the City Clerk and which shall constitute proof of service by publication.

Conduct of Hearing. At the hearing before the Hearing Board, any party may be represented by counsel, and all parties shall have an opportunity to be heard and present such evidence as shall be relevant to a determination of whether or not an unsafe building condition exists under the terms of the Unsafe Buildings Code. An official court reporter shall make a written record of the hearing. All testimony shall be under oath, which may be administered by the City Clerk or by the court reporter making a written record of the hearing. The cost of the court reporter shall be paid by the City should the proceeding be eventually held against the City, and by the owner if it should not. In the latter case, the cost of such reporting shall be added to the cost of abatement or removal of the unsafe building condition as undertaken by the City, and shall be added to the costs of the abatement or removal in the event the City shall be required to do so, and payable as provided for such costs.

Findings of Hearing Board; Vote. Within twenty (20) days from the date of the hearing required hereunder, the Hearing Board shall upon the basis of competent and substantial evidence offered at the hearing make written findings of fact as to whether or not the property in question has upon it an unsafe building condition under the terms of the Unsafe Buildings Code. Specifically, if it is found that an unsafe building condition exists, the written findings shall state the condition or conditions which constitute the unsafe building. The concurring vote of three (3) members of the Hearing Board shall be necessary to find that an unsafe building condition exists. The Hearing Board may make such further orders as just and necessary to cause abatement or removal of the unsafe building condition found to exist. If the Hearing Board finds that an unsafe building condition does not exist, the proceeding shall be dismissed.

The City Finance Director shall establish procedures wherein twenty-five percent (25%) of the proceeds payable under any insurance policy resulting from a casualty loss to any building upon property within the City, where the loss exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the face value of the policy covering the building, is withheld. The insurer shall, upon the written request of the City, pay said twenty-five (25%) of the proceeds to the City which shall be deposited in an interest bearing account. The City shall release the proceeds and any interest which has accrued on such proceeds received hereunder to the insured or as the terms of the policy and endorsements thereto provide within thirty (30) days after receipt of such insurance moneys, unless the City has enforcement proceedings under the provisions of subparagraph (f) of this Section. If the City has hereunder proceeded with abatement or removal proceedings, all moneys in excess of that necessary to comply with the provisions this Code for City initiated abatement or removal of unsafe building conditions, less salvage value, shall be paid to the insured. If there are no proceeds of any insurance policy as set forth in this subparagraph, at the request of the taxpayer, the tax bill described herein may be paid in installments over a period of not more than ten years. This subparagraph shall apply to fire, explosion, or other casualty loss claims arising on all buildings. This subparagraph does not make the city a party to any insurance contract, and the insurer is not liable to any party for any amount in excess of the proceeds otherwise payable under its insurance policy. (Ord. 4008, §1)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 6-30. Abatement Administration upon Hearing.
The following provisions set forth the procedures for abatement or removal of violations of the Unsafe Buildings Code upon hearing held as aforesaid:

Abatement. If an unsafe building condition is found to exist upon the required hearing, the Administrator shall proceed to cause the condition which constitutes a violation hereunder to be abated or removed in compliance with any orders made by the Hearing Board; provided that if the estimated cost of the abatement or removal exceeds $1,000.00, the Administrator shall not proceed until he/she has obtained the consent of the City Council to incur the cost of abatement or removal. If presented to the City Council, it may direct the Administrator to pursue alternative relief, such as prosecution or injunctive relief, to cause abatement of the nuisance, any orders issued by the Hearing Board to the contrary notwithstanding. The City shall not enter upon the property to commence abatement activities except upon the express written consent of the owner of said property or under the specific authority granted pursuant to a lawful warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction as provided herein.

Emergency measures. In cases where it reasonably appears that there is an immediate danger to the health, safety or welfare of any person, the Administrator may take emergency measures to vacate, repair, board up or demolish an unsafe building, provided that written notice shall be given to the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent and all other persons having an interest in such building or structure as promptly as possible, even if only after the emergency measures are taken. The cost of any such emergency work shall be collected in the same manner as herein provided. Unless serious bodily injury or death is likely to occur without emergency action, the City shall not enter upon the property to commence emergency measures except upon the express written consent of the owner of said property or under the specific authority granted pursuant to a lawful warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction as provided herein.

Securing Buildings. In all cases where a building does not meet the standards for unsafe buildings as set forth in section 6-28, but which constitutes a nuisance to the general public because it is vacant and open to unauthorized entry, the Administrator may notify the owner to secure the building within twenty-four (24) hours. In the event the owner fails to secure the building within that time, the Administrator may take whatever measures are necessary to secure the building. The cost of such measures shall be recovered in the same manner as herein set forth.

Standards for Securing Buildings. The following are the standards to be met when a building is secured as provided in Section 6-30(c):

All doors and other openings other than windows shall be securely locked, boarded, barricaded or otherwise secured.

All windows shall be locked or otherwise secured by the installation of security screens or grills. No windows shall be secured by covering them with boards or planks of wood or similar material, except as may be provided herein.

In the event that a vacant building should pose a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the public, the Administrator shall order the building to be boarded up on all sides with the cost of such work to be the responsibility of the owner of the building. The building shall be secured by the application of one half-inch thick exterior grade plywood. Such plywood shall be painted with a neutral color to match the building.

In the event a building is damaged by fire, tornado or other such catastrophe, the owner of the damaged building may board the windows thereof for a period not to exceed six (6) weeks.

Assessment of Abatement Costs. If the abatement is performed by City employees, the cost of the abatement shall be calculated according to the schedule of costs promulgated by the Administrator and kept on file in the office of the City Clerk. This schedule is to be determined after an analysis by the Administrator and other officers and department heads of the City deemed necessary by the Administrator to determine an accurate estimation of the costs incurred by the City to abate conditions subject to the provisions hereof. If the abatement or removal is performed by independent contractors hired by the City, the costs charged for the abatement or removal will be the actual amount paid to the contractor for the abatement or removal performed. Any and all direct fees and costs, including, but not limited to, landfill fees, hearing costs, and publication fees shall be included in the cost hereof.

Tax Bills for Work; Manner of Payment. Whenever the City shall have caused abatement or removal work to be performed as provided hereunder, the Administrator shall certify the cost of the work to the City Clerk who shall cause the certified costs to be included in a special tax bill to be issued against the property from which the condition was removed or added to the annual real estate tax bill for said property, at the City Clerk's option. Said certified costs shall be collected by the County Collector or other officials designated by the City to collect real property taxes. If the certified costs are not paid, the tax bill shall be considered delinquent. The collection of the delinquent bill shall be governed by the laws governing delinquent and back taxes. The special tax bill from the date of its issuance shall be deemed a personal debt against the owner of the property, and in addition shall be a lien on property until paid. Any tax bill hereunder shall bear interest at a rate of nine percent (9%) per annum until paid.

Enforcement of Tax Bills. Tax bills issued under this Code shall be prima facie evidence of the validity of the bill, the doing of the work and the liability of the property and owner thereof for the charges stated in the bill and may be collected, if default should occur, by enforcement of the City's tax lien in accordance with State law, and/or by suit brought in a court of competent jurisdiction by the City Counselor or by an attorney contracted with for the purpose on behalf of the City. Judgment in any such suit shall be satisfied by any means authorized by statutes or rules of court of the State.

Warrant Application. Any warrant to enter upon property when required hereunder for the purpose of inspection of property, emergency measures, or for the purpose of initiating abatement activities shall be applied for by written affidavit of the Administrator to either the Municipal or Associate Division of the Circuit of Phelps County, Missouri. Such affidavit shall set forth (i) the legal description of the property for which the warrant is applied, (ii) the name and address of the owner of the property, (iii) specific facts constituting probable cause that an unsafe building as defined by this Code exists for which entry is required or that the existence of an unsafe building has been determined upon full and adequate hearing as herein required, and (iv) that entry upon the property is necessary to fully investigate the nature and extent of the unsafe conditions, or to take emergency measures, or to abate said unsafe conditions upon order of the Hearing Board where the owner of the property has failed to comply with such order. (Ord. 4008, §1)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 6-31. Appeals Under Administrative Review Act.
Any owner of property who is adversely affected by a decision of the Hearing Board may appeal from the order and findings made under the provisions of this Code. The appeal shall be to a Circuit Court of Phelps County, Missouri, as required under Chapter 536 of the Revised Statutes of Missouri. (Ord. 4008, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 6-32. Duty of Public Officers Is To City.
No officer, agent or employee of the City shall be personally liable for any damage that may occur to any persons or property as a result of any act required of him or permitted to be taken by him under the terms of this code. It hereby further declared that no officer, agent or employee of the City owes any duty under the provisions of this Code to any citizen or other individual but that the duties prescribed herein and imposed upon officers, agents or employees of the City are duties to be performed for and on behalf of the government of said City. (Ord. 4008, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 6-33. Storage; Redemption; Sale.
After the determination that an unsafe building condition exists upon due hearing as herein required, items having any apparent monetary value, beyond salvage value, removed during any City undertaken abatement or removal shall be transported to a storage area or lot at the expense of the owner or person in custody thereof. Such items shall then be stored for a period of at least thirty (30) days and the person entitled to possession thereof may redeem the items by payment to the City of the actual cost of removal, transportation and storage. If any item is unredeemed after the expiration of the thirty (30) day period, the Administrator, or his/her designee, may sell such items to the highest bidder or, if the items have no sale value, may otherwise dispose of them. Any money received from the disposal of any items shall be applied to the costs charged to the owner or person in charge thereof. (Ord. 4008, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 6-34. Technical Codes.
After the determination that an unsafe building condition exists upon due hearing as herein required, items having any apparent monetary value, beyond salvage value, removed during any City undertaken abatement or removal shall be transported to a storage area or lot at the expense of the owner or person in custody thereof. Such items shall then be stored for a period of at least thirty (30) days and the person entitled to possession thereof may redeem the items by payment to the City of the actual cost of removal, transportation and storage. If any item is unredeemed after the expiration of the thirty (30) day period, the Administrator, or his/her designee, may sell such items to the highest bidder or, if the items have no sale value, may otherwise dispose of them. Any money received from the disposal of any items shall be applied to the costs charged to the owner or person in charge thereof. (Ord. 4008, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 6-35. Home or Business Inspections.
A home or business inspection is an objective visual examination of the physical structure and systems of a home, from the roof to the foundation performed for the purpose of a real estate transaction or prospective real estate transactions.

The home or business inspection report will generally review the condition of the home's or businesses' heating system, central air conditioning system (temperature permitting), interior plumbing and electrical systems; the roof, attic, and visible insulation; walls, ceilings, floors, windows and doors; the foundation, basement, and visible structure.

Home or business inspections, which are made for the purpose of a real estate transaction or prospective real estate transactions will be done by the Building Official or appointed representative for a fee of $150.00.

Any home or business inspections requested because of specific safety, health or welfare concerns would be performed by the Building Official or appointed representative at no charge. (Ord. 3293, §1)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 6-36. Building permit fee development incentive: purpose.
The City of Rolla is committed to the promotion of high quality private and public development in all parts of the City and to an ongoing improvement in the quality of life for its citizens. As one means to achieve this purpose, the Rolla City Council may, in special instances, consider proposals to reduce or waive building permit fees. The purpose of this action being to encourage the creation of new private sector jobs, to increase property tax valuation, to promote the retention and expansion of existing industry and to assist in the attraction of new businesses to Rolla. Specifically, the employment of this incentive shall be limited to businesses classified under the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) manual as Sector 31-33 Manufacturing; Section 51, Sub-sector 514, Information Services and Data Processing Services; and Section 54 Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services. Warehouse and distribution facilities will not be eligible for this incentive unless they are ancillary or accessory to an eligible business located in or near Rolla. (Ord. 3649, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 6-36.1 Minimum requirements.
Within the context of the purpose stated above, the City Council may, on a case-by-case basis, give consideration to the waiver or reduction of building permit fees as a stimulus for economic development. It is the intent of the City Council that said consideration shall be provided in accordance with the criteria outlined in this document. Nothing herein shall obligate the Rolla City Council to provide this incentive to any applicant.

To be considered eligible for the waiver or reduction of building permit fees, a proposed project must meet the criteria outlined under (a) or (b), as follows:

The project involves a minimum increase in real property value of three hundred (300) percent for a new eligible business; twenty five (25) percent for an expansion of an existing eligible business; or an investment of at least three million in taxable assets; or

The project will result in the creation of at least ten (10) new jobs within a twenty-four (24) month period, directly attributed to the completion and occupancy of the proposed project. (Ord. 3649, §1)
(Return to Contents)



Secs. 6-37 to 6-39. Reserved
(Return to Contents)


Article IV - Mechanical Code
Sec. 6-40. International Mechanical Code - Adopted
There is hereby adopted by the City, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations applicable to and governing all building and construction in the City, that certain code known as the International Mechanical Code, 2018 Edition, and the Appendix Chapter A, of which code not less than two copies have been and now are filed in the office of the City Clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated in the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, as if set out at length herein.

This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after January 1, 2019.  (Ord. 2276, §1; Ord. 2596, §2; Ord. 2729, §1; Ord. 2927, §2; Ord. 3151, §2; Ord. 3549, §2; Ord. 4454, §2)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 6-41. Same - Amendments
101.1
Title is hereby amended by inserting the words "City of Rolla, Missouri".

106.4.3
Expiration. Every permit issued shall be valid for one year after issuance unless work authorized by the permit is not commenced within 180 days after it's issuance, or if the authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. At that time the permit would become void and re-application would need to be made. A one-time, one-year extension of a valid permit may be obtained at a cost of one half of the original permit fee.

106.5.2
Fee schedule. Refer to fee schedule provided in Section 108.7 of the International Building Code.

108.4
Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a Misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.

108.5
Unlawful Continuance. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe conditions, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $500.00.

(Ord. 2276, §§2 to 8; Ord. 2596, §2; Ord. 2729, §2; Ord. 2927, §2; Ord. 3151, §2; Ord. 3284, §4; Ord. 3549, §2, Ord. 4454, §2)

Sec. 6-42 to 6-46. Reserved
(Return to Contents)


Article V - Plumbing Code
Sec. 6-47. International Plumbing Code - Adopted
There is hereby adopted by the City, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations applicable to and governing all building and construction in the City, that certain code known as the International Plumbing Code, 2018 Edition, and the Appendix Chapter B, D, and E, of which code not less than two copies have been and now are filed in the office of the City Clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated in the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, as if set out at length herein.

This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after January 1, 2019.  (Ord. 2274, §1; Ord. 2596, §2-3; Ord. 2927, §2; Ord. 3151, §2; Ord. 3549, §2; Ord. 4454, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 6-48. Same - Amendments
101.1
Title, is hereby amended by inserting the words "City of Rolla, Missouri".

106.5.3
Expiration. Every permit issued shall be valid for one year after issuance unless work authorized by the permit is not commenced within 180 days after it's issuance, or if the authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. At that time the permit would become void and re-application would need to be made. A one-time, one-year extension of a valid permit may be obtained at a cost of one half of the original permit fee.

106.6.2
Fee schedule. Refer to fee schedule provided in Section 108.7 of the International Building Code.

108.4
Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a Misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.

108.5
Unlawful Continuance. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe conditions, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $500.00.

904.1
Roof extension. Insert the number 12 inches.

904.4
Prohibited use. Vent terminals shall not be used as a flag pole or to support flag poles, television aerials or similar items.

917.0
Air admittance valves. Air admittance valves shall only be allowed in remodel or modification of the existing plumbing system when the vent cannot connect into the existing vent system or terminate to the outside.

(Ord. 2730, §2; Ord. 2927, §2; Ord. 3151, §2; Ord. 3284, §6; Ord. 3549, §2; Ord. 4454, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 6-49. Cross-connection control
I. CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL - GENERAL POLICY.
Purpose: The purpose of this Ordinance is:

To protect the public potable water supply from contamination or pollution by containing within the consumer's internal distribution system or private water system contaminants or pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public potable water supply system.

To promote the elimination, containment, isolation or control of existing cross connections, actual or potential, between the public or consumer's potable water system and nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures, and industrial process systems.

To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross connection control which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems.

Application: This Ordinance shall apply to all premises served by the public potable water system of the City of Rolla.

Policy: This Ordinance will be reasonably interpreted by the water supplier. It is the water supplier's intent to recognize the varying degrees of hazard and to apply the principle that the degree of protection shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard.

The water supplier shall be primarily responsible for protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to backflow or contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. The cooperation of all consumers is required to implement and maintain the program to control cross connections. The water supplier and consumer are jointly responsible for preventing contamination of the water system.

If, in the judgment of the water supplier or his authorized representative, cross connection protection is required through either piping modification or installation of an approved backflow prevention device, due notice shall be given to the consumer. The consumer shall immediately comply by providing the required protection at his own expense; and failure, refusal, or inability on the part of the consumer to provide such protection shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such protection has been provided.

If, in the opinion of the water supplier or his authorized representative, a real and serious threat to public health is posed, the water supplier may discontinue service without notice.
II. DEFINITIONS
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this Ordinance:

Air gap separation - means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the overflow level rim of the receptacle, and shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically.

Approved - means that a backflow prevention device or method has been accepted by the water supplier as defined by Missouri Department of Natural Resources as suitable for the proposed use.

Auxiliary water supply - means any water source or system, other than the public water supply, that may be available in the building or premises.

Backflow - means the flow other than the intended direction of flow, or any foreign liquids, gases, or substances into the distribution system of a public water supply.

Backflow prevention device - means any device, method or type of construction intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system.

Consumer - means protection of the public water supply by installing a cross connection control device or air gap separation on the main service line to a facility.

Consumer's water system - is any water system, supplied by or connected to a public water system, from the point where it taps into the main supply line to the user's facilities. A household plumbing system is considered a consumer's water system.

Containment - means protection of the public water supply by installing a cross connection control device or air gap separation on the main service line to a facility.

Contamination - means an impairment of the quality of the water by sewage, process fluids, or other wastes to a degree which could create an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through spread of disease by exposure.

Cross connection - is a physical connection or arrangement between two otherwise separate piping systems; one of which contains potable water, the other a nonpotable fluid, or water or unknown quality, where there could be flow from one system to the other, the direction depending on the pressure differential between the two. Cross connections may be considered as direct or indirect. A direct connection is where the potable water system is physically joined to a system containing unsafe water, sewage, or other waste that could contaminate the safe water system. An indirect cross connection is a condition where a source of contaminated water may be blown across, sucked, or diverted into the potable system.

Hazard, degree of - means an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system.

Hazard, health - Any condition, device or practice in the water supply system and its operation which could create or may create a danger to the health and well being of the water consumer.

Hazard, plumbing - a plumbing type cross connection in a consumer's potable water system that has not been properly protected by a vacuum breaker, air gap separation or backflow prevention device.

Hazard, pollutional - an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or to the potability of the public or the consumer's potable water system but which would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to health.

Hazard, system - an actual or potential threat of severe damage to the physical properties of the public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system, or of a pollution or contamination which would have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system.

Industrial process system - means any system containing a fluid or solution, which may be chemically, biologically, or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, system, pollutional, or plumbing hazard if introduced into a potable water supply.

Interchangeable connection - is an arrangement or device that will allow alternate but not simultaneous use of two sources of water.

Isolation - means protection of a facility service line by installing a cross connection control device or air gap separation on an individual fixture, appurtenance, or system.

Pollution - means the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, or biological) in water which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such waters for domestic use.

Public potable water system - means any publicly or privately owned water system supplying water to the general public which is satisfactory for drinking, culinary, and domestic purposes and meets the requirements of the Missouri Department of Natural Resources.

Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device - is a device that contains a minimum of two independently acting check valves with an automatically operated pressure differential relief valve between the two check valves. During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two checks is less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, maintains the pressure between the check valves at less than the supply pressure. The unit includes tightly closing shut-off valves at each end of the device, and each device is fitted with test cocks.

Service connection - means the terminal end of a service line from the public water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service, then the service connection means the downstream end of the meter.

Water supplier - means Rolla Municipal Utilities.

III. CROSS-CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to any premises where actual or potential cross connections to the public potable or consumer's water system may exist unless such actual or potential cross connections are abated or controlled to the satisfaction of the water supplier and as required by the laws and regulations of the Missouri Department of Natural Resources.

Connection shall be installed or maintained, whereby an auxiliary water supply may enter a public potable or consumer's water system unless such auxiliary water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the water supplier and the Missouri Department of Natural Resources.

No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to any premises in which the plumbing system, facilities, and fixtures have not been constructed and installed using acceptable plumbing practices considered by the water supplier as necessary for the protection of health and safety.
IV. SURVEY AND INVESTIGATIONS
The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the water supplier, or his authorized representative, for the conduction of surveys and investigations of water use practices within the consumer's premises to determine whether there are actual or potential cross connections to the consumer's water system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into the public potable water systems.

On request by the water supplier or his authorized representative, the consumer shall furnish information on water use practices within his premises.

It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to conduct periodic surveys of water use practices on his premises to determine whether there are actual or potential cross connections to his water system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his or the public potable water system.
V. TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED
The type of protection required by this Ordinance shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists, as follows:

An approved air gap separation shall be installed where the public potable water system may be contaminated with substances that could cause severe health hazard.

An approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the public potable water system may be contaminated with a substance that could cause a system or health hazard.

An approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device or an approved double check valve assembly shall be installed where the public potable water system may be polluted with substances that could cause a pollutional hazard not dangerous to health.
VI. WHERE PROTECTION IS REQUIRED
An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving premises where, in the judgment of the water purveyor or the Missouri Department of Natural Resources, actual or potential hazards to the public potable water system exist. The type and degree of protection required shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard.

An approved air gap separation or reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed at the service connection or within any premises where, in the judgment of the water supplier or the Missouri Department of Natural Resources, the nature and extent of activities on the premises, or the materials used in connection with the activities, or materials stored on the premises, would present an immediate and dangerous hazard to health should a cross-connection occur, even though such cross-connection may not exist at the time the backflow prevention device is required to be installed. This includes but is not limited to the following situations:

Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless the quality of the auxiliary supply is acceptable to the water supplier and the Missouri Department of Natural Resources.

Premises having internal cross connections that are not correctable, or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impractical to ascertain whether or not cross-connections exist.

Premises where entry is restricted so that inspection for cross connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short notice to assure the cross connections do not exist.

Premises having a repeated history of cross connections being established or reestablished.

Premises, which due to the nature of the enterprise therein, are subject to recurring modification or expansion.

Premises on which any substance is handled under pressure so as to permit entry into the public water supply, or where a cross connection could reasonably be expected to occur. This shall include the handling of process waters and cooling waters.

Premises where materials of a toxic or hazardous nature are handled such that if backsiphonage or back pressure should occur, a serious health hazard may result.

The following types of facilities fall into one or more of the categories of premi ses where an approved air gap separation or reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device is required by the water supplier and the Missouri Department of Natural Resources to protect the public water supply and must be installed at these facilities unless all hazardous or potentially hazardous conditions have been eliminated or corrected by other methods to the satisfaction of the water supplier and the Missouri Department of Natural Resources.

Aircraft and missile plants
Automotive plants
Auxiliary water systems
Beverage bottling plants
Canneries, packing houses, and reduction plants
Car washing facilities
Chemical manufacturing, processing, compounding or treatment plants
Cold storage plants, dairies
Film laboratories
Fire protection systems
Hazardous waste storage and disposal sites
Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics
Irrigation and sprinkler systems
Industries using toxic substances
Laundries and dye works
Metal manufacturing, cleaning, processing and fabricating plants
Nursing or convalescent homes and clinics
Oil and gas production, storage or transmission properties
Paper and paper products plants
Plating plants
Power plants
Printing and publishing facilities
Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors
Research and analytical laboratories
Rubber plants, natural and synthetic
Stockyards
Sewage and storm drainage facilities - pumping stations
Water front facilities and industries
Water loading stations
Backflow prevention devices:
Any backflow prevention device required by this Ordinance shall be of a model or construction approved by the water supplier and the Missouri Department of Natural Resources.

Air gap separation to be approved shall be at least twice the diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel, but in no case less than one inch.

A double check valve assembly or a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be approved by the water supplier and shall appear on the current "list of approved backflow prevention devices" established by the Missouri Department of Natural Resources.

Existing backflow prevention devices approved by the water supplier at the time of installation and properly maintained shall, except for inspection and maintenance requirements, be excluded from the requirements of this Ordinance so long as the water supplier is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the water system. Whenever the existing device is moved from its present location, or requires more than minimum maintenance, or when the water supplier finds that the maintenance constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by a backflow prevention device meeting the requirements of this Ordinance.
Installation:
Backflow prevention devices required by this Ordinance shall be installed at a location and in a manner approved by the water supplier and shall be installed at the expense of the water consumer.

Backflow prevention devices installed on the service line to the consumer's water system shall be located on the consumer's side of the water meter, as close to the meter as is reasonably practical, and prior to any other connection.

Backflow prevention devices shall be located so as to be readily accessible for maintenance and testing, protected from freezing and where no part of the device will be submerged or subject to flooding by any fluid.
Inspection and maintenance:
It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow prevention devices required by this Ordinance are installed to have inspection, tests, and overhauls made in accordance with the following schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need.

Air gap separations shall be inspected at the time of installation and at least every twelve months thereafter.

Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested for tightness at the time of installation and at least every twelve months thereafter. They shall be dismantled, inspected internally, cleaned, and repaired whenever needed and at least every thirty months.

Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices shall be inspected and tested for tightness at the time of installation and at least every twelve months thereafter. They shall be dismantled, inspected internally, cleaned, and repaired whenever needed and at least every five years.

Inspections, tests, and overhauls of backflow prevention devices shall be made at the expense of the water consumer and shall be performed by a State of Missouri certified backflow prevention device tester.

Whenever backflow prevention devices required by this Ordinance are found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the consumer without delay.

The water consumer must maintain a complete record of each backflow prevention device from purchase to retirement. This shall include a comprehensive listing that includes a record of all tests, inspections, and repairs. Records of inspections, tests, repairs, and overhauls shall be made available to the water supplier upon request.

Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative, removed, or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the water supplier.
Violations:
The water supplier shall deny or discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupants thereof, the water service to any premises wherein any backflow prevention device required by this Ordinance is not installed, tested, and maintained in a manner acceptable to the water supplier or if it is found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross connection exists on the premises.

Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance with this Ordinance to the satisfaction of the water supplier. (Ord. 2596, 2.)
VII. EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after August 15, 1988. (Ord. 2596, 3; Ord. 2730, 1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 6-50. Sewer laterals
All sanitary sewer laterals installed within the City of Rolla, 4" in diameter or less, will be SDR-40, plastic pipe. (Ord. 2596, 2.)

This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after August 15, 1988. (Ord. 2596, 3; Ord. 2730, 1.)
Secs. 6-51 to 6-54. Reserved
(Return to Contents)
Article VI - Residential Code
Sec. 6-55. International Residential Code - Adopted
There is hereby adopted by the City, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations applicable to and governing all building and construction in the City, that certain code known as the International Residential Code/International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2018 Edition, and the Appendix Chapter A, B, C, E, G, H, J, N, P, Q and S, of which code not less than two copies have been and now are filed in the office of the City Clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated in the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, as if set out at length herein.

This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after January 1, 2019.

(Ord. 3549, §2; Ord. 4454, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 6-56. Same - Amendments
R 101.1 Title, is hereby amended by inserting the words "City of Rolla, Missouri".

R 105.2 Work exempt from permit. Change the following:

Building:
6.     Roof covering, siding, painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, countertops, and similar finish work.

R 105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued, shall be valid for one year after issuance unless work authorized by the permit is not commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. At that time the permit would become void and re-application would need to be made. A one-time, one-year extension of a valid permit may be obtained at a cost of one half of the original permit fee.

R 108.2 Schedule of Permit Fees. Refer to fee schedule provided in Section 108.7 of the International Building Code.

R 113.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a Misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.

R 114.2 Unlawful Continuance.  Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe conditions, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $500.00.

318.2 Chemical Termiticide Treatment.  Chemical termiticide treatment shall include soil treatment or field-applied wood treatment.  The concentration, rate of application and method of treatment of the chemical termiticide shall be in strict accordance with the termiticide label. When chemical protection against termites is used a certificate or proof of treatment from a licensed exterminator will be required.

R502.3.1 Sleeping Areas and Attic Joist. Delete.

R2433.1 Log lighters. Delete and replace with "Not allowed."

P2805.1 Water heater sizing chart. Insert chart from 1995 CABO.

 
1 to 1-1/2 Bathrooms	Fuel Type (G/E/O = Gas/Electric/Oil)	G	E	O	G	E	O	G	E	O
Number of Bedrooms	1	2	3
Storage (gal)	20	20	30	30	30	30	30	40	30
Input (BTU/h or kw)	27k	2.5	70k	36k	3.5	70k	36k	4.5	70k
Draw (gph)	43	30	89	60	44	89	60	58	89
Recovery (gph)	23	10	59	30	14	59	30	18	59
 
2 to 2-1/2 Bathrooms	Fuel Type (G/E/O = Gas/Electric/Oil)	G	E	O	G	E	O	G	E	O	G	E	O
Number of Bedrooms	2	3	4	5
Storage (gal)	30	40	30	40	50	30	40	50	30	50	66	30
Input (BTU/h or kw)	36k	4.5	70k	36k	5.5	70k	38k	5.5	70k	47k	5.5	70k
Draw (gph)	60	58	89	70	72	89	72	72	89	90	88	89
Recovery (gph)	30	18	59	30	22	59	32	22	59	40	22	59
 
3 to 3-1/2 Bathrooms	Fuel Type (G/E/O = Gas/Electric/Oil)	G	E	O	G	E	O	G	E	O	G	E	O
Number of Bedrooms	3	4	5	6
Storage (gal)	40	50	30	50	66	30	50	66	30	50	80	40
Input (BTU/h or kw)	38k	5.5	70k	38k	5.5	70k	47k	5.5	70k	50k	5.5	70k
Draw (gph)	72	72	89	82	88	89	90	88	89	92	102	99
Recovery (gph)	32	22	59	32	22	59	40	22	59	42	22	59
For S1: 1 gallon = 3.785 L. 1 gallon per hour = 1.05 mL/s. 1 Btu/h = 0.2931 W. °F = 1.8°C. - 32

NOTE: Storage capacity input and the recovery requirements indicated in the table are typical and may vary with each individual manufacturer. Any combination of these requirements to produce the 1-hour draw stated will be satisfactory. Recovery is based on 100°F Water temperature use.

P3102.1 Required Vent Extension. Every building shall have a main vent a minimum of three (3) inches in diameter that is either a vent stack or stack vent. Such vent shall run undiminished in size and as directly as possible from the building drain through to the open air above the roof. All other vent extensions to the outside shall be not less than two (2) inches in diameter.

P3103.1 Roof extensions. All open vent pipes which extend through a roof shall be terminated at least twelve (12) inches above the upslope side of the penetration, except that where a roof is to be used for any purpose other than weather protection, the vent extension shall be run at least 7 feet above the roof.

P3114.3 Where permitted.  Air admittance valves shall only be allowed in remodel or modification of the existing plumbing system when the vent cannot connect into the existing vent system or terminate to the outside.

E3902.16 Replace With. All branch circuits that supply 125-volt, single-phase, 15- and 20-ampere receptacle outlets installed in dwelling unit bedrooms shall be protected by an arc-fault circuit interrupter(s). This requirement shall become effective January 1 2019.

(Ord. 3549, §2; Ord. 4454, §2)

Secs. 6-57 to 6-60. Reserved
(Return to Contents)

Chapter 7 - Cemeteries and Burials
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter


Chapter Contents:
Article I - In General
§ 7-1. Authorized cemeteries designated.
§ 7-2. Cemetery curfew.
§ 7-3. Burials to be in authorized cemeteries only.
§ 7-4. Establishment or extension of cemeteries-Permit required.
§ 7-5. Same - Plats and records.
§ 7-6. Depth of graves.
§ 7-7. Destruction, injury, etc., of cemetery property, etc.; misuse of cemetery.
§ 7-8. Digging or opening graves.
§ 7-9. Prices of grave lots; portion of proceeds designated to Eternal Care Fund.
§§ 7-10 to 7-16. Reserved.
Article II - City Cemetery Department
§ 7-17. Abolishment of cemetery board.
§ 7-18. Powers and duties.
§ 7-19. Funds - Perpetual care account.
§§ 7-20 to 7-24. Reserved.
Article III - Burial Permits
§ 7-25. Required.
§ 7-26. Fees.
§ 7-27. Waiver of fee.
§ 7-28. Compliance.
§ 7-29. Issuance.
§§ 7-30 to 7-31. Reserved.


Article I - In General
Sec. 7-1. Authorized cemeteries designated.
The cemetery of the city, and the Weber Cemetery are recognized as legal and proper places of interment of persons who may die in the city, or who may be brought to the city for burial. (Ord. 923, §1.)



Sec. 7-2. Cemetery curfew.
(a) Curfew: No person shall be within or loiter upon the grounds of the Rolla Cemetery from one hour after sunset to one hour before sunrise.

(b) Penalties: Violation of this Ordinance shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-7 of the General Ordinances of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 2217, §§1, 2.)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 7-3. Burials to be in authorized cemeteries only.
It shall be unlawful to bury deceased persons in the city, except in a cemetery or burying ground which has been recognized by the city council as legal and proper places of interment. (Ord. 923, §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 7-4. Establishment of extension of cemeteries-Permit required.
No cemetery or burial ground shall be laid out, established or the limits of an unauthorized cemetery or burial ground extended without a permit for same to be issued by and at the direction of the city council. (Ord. 923, §4.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 7-5. Same - Plats and records.
Every person owning any cemetery or burial ground not private, or having in his charge or control, or exercising supervision over such cemetery or burial ground, in which bodies are allowed to be buried, shall file in the office of the city clerk a plat of such cemetery or burial ground, showing its walks, ways, roads and the number and sizes of the burial lots therein, the names of their respective owners, so far as such cemetery has been laid out and sold. Annually, on or about the first day of January, such person shall file, so as to continue from year to year the original plat until it shall show the whole tract subdivided into lots and the owners' names, a corrected plat showing new thoroughfares and places, if any have been laid out, and all lots, with the names of the owners and size indicated on each lot, sold since the previous January first. (Ord. 923, §7.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 7-6. Depth of graves.
No body of any deceased person shall be buried in any cemetery within the city at less depth than that permitted by the state board of health. Burial vaults or tombs shall be erected for the reception of deceased persons. (Ord. 923, §12; Ord. 4025, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 7-7. Destruction, injury, etc., of cemetery property, etc.; misuse of cemetery.
No person shall willfully destroy, disfigure or injure any wall, fence, ledge, monument, tombstone, tree or shrubbery around or within any cemetery, graveyard or burial ground nor shall any person use such a cemetery, graveyard or burial ground for any purpose other than a burying ground. (Ord. 923, §14.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 7-8. Digging or opening graves.
No person, except as provided in Section 7-27, shall dig or open a grave in the cemetery of the city. Such work shall be done by the city upon the payment of the fees required in Section 7-26. (Ord. 923, §10.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 7-9. Prices of grave lots; portion of proceeds designated to Eternal Care Fund.
There is hereby established for use in the sale of grave lots situated in Rolla Cemetery, the following price list:

A single-grave lot $ 1,100.00
Cremation $ 750.00

The above listed grave lot prices include the following amounts to be placed in the eternal care fund:

Single-grave lots $ 600.00
Cremation $ 250.00

Payment of the eternal care fee shall relieve the lot owner of any future liability for annual maintenance payments. These eternal care fees shall be placed in the eternal care fund, which will be invested in a manner to earn the highest interest return on the investment consistent with city fund investment policies. Interest earned from the investment shall be used only for maintenance purposes at the Rolla Cemetery. At no time shall any portion of the principal of the eternal care fund be used for any purpose other than investment.

This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after January 1, 2012. (Ord. 2234, §§3, 4; Ord. 2319, §1; Ord. 2777, §2; Ord. 3896, §2; Ord. 4025, §2)
(Return to Contents)



Secs. 7-10 to 7-16. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)


Article II - CITY CEMETERY DEPARTMENT
Sec. 7-17. Abolishment of cemetery board.
Sections 2-92 through 2-98*, inclusive, of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, are hereby repealed, thus dissolving and abolishing the Rolla Cemetery Association Board. (Ord. 2233, §1.)

*Reference to sections of the 1971 City Code of Ordinances.
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 7-18. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties heretofore borne by the cemetery board shall hereafter be performed by the parks and recreation department of the City of Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 2233, §2; Ord. 2790, §4.)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 7-19. Funds - Perpetual care account.
The funds now in existence in the Rolla Cemetery Association Board's perpetual care account, together with all sums hereafter acquired as cemetery eternal care maintenance fees, shall be deposited in an interest-bearing account, with such interest income to be used solely for the continual upkeep, care, maintenance, and beautification of the Rolla Cemetery. The principal of said funds shall be kept intact, shall not be subject to transfer or diversion to any other account, and at no time shall any portion of principal of the eternal care fund be used for any purpose other than investment. (Ord. 2233, §3.)
(Return to Contents)


Secs. 7-20 to 7-24. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article III - BURIAL PERMITS
Sec. 7-25. Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry the body of any deceased person to any of the cemeteries or burying grounds within the city, or for the parks and recreation director, or other person in charge of such cemetery or burying ground to receive the body of any deceased person, unless accompanied by a burial permit, properly signed and certified by the city clerk or his deputy. (Ord. 923, §8; Ord. 2790, §6.)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 7-26. Fees.
Before the burial permit shall be issued, the applicant therefore shall pay the following fees:

(a) If the person to be buried is under the age of six years, the fee shall be:

Weekday $200.00
Weekend $400.00
Holiday/Holiday Weekend $600.00
(b) If the person to be buried is of the age of six years and over, the fee shall be:

Weekday $500.00
Weekend $850.00
Holiday/Holiday Weekend $1200.00
(c) If the person to be buried has been cremated, the fee shall be:

Weekday $190.00
Weekend $380.00
Holiday/Holiday Weekend $570.00
(d) If the person to be buried is going to be placed in a crypt or mausoleum the fee shall be:

Weekday $190.00
Weekend $380.00
Holiday/Holiday Weekend $570.00
(e) This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after January 1, 2012. (Ord. 2234, §2; Ord. 2264, §1; Ord. 2777, §2; Ord. 3895, §2; Ord. 4025, §3)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 7-27. Waiver of fee.
Any person owning a lot or any part thereof in the cemetery of the city, who is financially unable to pay the fee required by Section 7-26 may be issued a burial permit by the city clerk without the payment of the fee, which permit shall authorize such person to open or dig the grave provided for by the permit; provided, however, that such grave shall be dug under the supervision of the parks and recreation department director or such person as he shall designate, and in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed to authorize any person to dig a grave under such permit for hire. (Ord. 923, §11; Ord. 2790, §8.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 7-28. Compliance.
No burial permit shall be issued for the burial of any deceased person in any cemetery or burial grounds within the city, unless the person owning such cemetery or burial grounds, or exercising or having charge and control of such cemetery or burial grounds, shall have complied with all the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 923, §13.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 7-29. Issuance.
Upon application and the payment of a fee required by Section 7-26 to the city clerk, for the use and benefit of the city, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to issue to the applicant a burial permit which shall be given a number, and which shall specify what cemetery or burial ground, the section, lot and grave number, the deceased person is to be buried in, giving the applicant one copy of such permit to be delivered to the director of the parks and recreation department and keeping one copy for the records of the city. After issuing such permit, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to place in the proper place, upon the plat in his office the number of the permit and the name of the deceased person. (Ord. 923, §8; Ord. 2790, §10.)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 7-30 to 7-34. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)

Chapter 8 - Courts, Fines and Imprisonment
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter


Chapter Contents:
Article I. Bail
§ 8-1. Generally.
§ 8-2. Amount.
§ 8-3. Payment; terms of bail.
§ 8-4. Receipt; issuance of summons.
§ 8-5. Custody of bail money pending hearing.
§ 8-6. Forfeiture of bail upon failure to appear; final disposition of bail.
§ 8-7 to 8-11. Reserved.

Article II. City Prisoners
§ 8-12. Place of imprisonment.
§ 8-13. Work on public streets, etc. - May be required.
§ 8-14. Same - Causing work to be done; designation of place and type of work.
§ 8-15. Imprisonment for failure to pay fine; working out fine.
§ 8-16. Escaping from jail, etc.; damage or destruction of property while in jail, etc.
§§ 8-17 to 8-21. Reserved.

Article III. Trials
§ 8-22. Conduct; keeping jury together.
§ 8-23. Interfering with witnesses, etc.
§ 8-24. Driver education course for persons convicted of motor vehicle violations.
§ 8-25. Authorizing the use of a driver license revocation form by the municipal court.
§§ 8-26 to 8-29. Reserved.


Article I - Bail
Sec. 8-1. Generally.
Any person charged with the violation of this Code or any city ordinance who may be under arrest and confined in the custody of the police force of the city, may be admitted to bail, conditioned for his appearance on a day and time certain before the police judge of the city, to answer such charges as may have been preferred against him. (Ord. 1038, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 8-2. Amount.
Any person charged with a violation of this Code and confined as mentioned in Section 8-1, may be recognized, in a sum to the satisfaction of the police judge, for such person's appearance before the police judge on a day and time certain and specified; provided, however, that no person shall be recognized in a sum less than, nor more than, the fine provided in any provision of this Code or other ordinance under which such person is charged. (Ord. 1038, §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 8-3. Payment; terms of bail.
Anytime the police judge may not be present in the courtroom of the police court, the police officer who is on duty and is in charge of the police officers then and there on active duty, may accept from such person, who is charged with a violation and is confined, as mentioned in Section 8-1, a cash bail bond in a sum not less than, nor more than, the fine provided in any section of this Code, or any other ordinances under which such person is charged; provided, that when such accused person is charged with any offense related to the operation of a motor vehicle, except the charge of driving a motor vehicle while intoxicated or under the influence of drugs, such police officer who is on duty and is in charge of the police officers then and there on active duty may accept from such accused person, in lieu of such cash bail bond, a current bail bond certificate for a sum not to exceed two hundred dollars; provided, that such certificate is guaranteed by a surety company qualified to engage in surety business in the state. Residents of Phelps County who are charged with a violation and are entitled to be admitted to bail may, in lieu of a cash bail bond, execute an appearance bond which may be secured by their personal check. (Ord. 2121, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 8-4. Receipt; issuance of summons.
The police officer accepting the cash bail bond, as mentioned in Section 8-3, shall give to the person being admitted to bail, a receipt for the sum of the cash bail bond and shall then and there give to such person a written summons stating the day and time when he shall appear before the police judge of the city to answer such charges as may have been preferred against him. (Ord. 1038, §4.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 8-5. Custody of bail money pending hearing.
The police officer accepting the cash bail bond, as mentioned in Section 8-3, shall within twenty-four hours after the receipt thereof, deposit such cash in the custody of the chief of police. The chief of police shall, thereafter, deposit such cash in the custody of the police judge at such time as the case is set for hearing before the police judge. (Ord. 1038, §5.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 8-6. Forfeiture of bail upon failure to appear; final disposition of bail and fine money.
In the event that a person admitted to bail, as provided in Section 8-1, shall fail to appear before the municipal court judge, at the time specified in the summons duly issued or by order of the court, to answer the charge against him, then, in that event, the municipal court judge may accept the cash bond money in lieu of the payment of a fine for the violation with which such person is charged. Such money as well as all money received by the court in payment of fines shall then be placed in the custody of the traffic violations clerk who shall deposit said monies in an account specially designated for such purpose. The traffic violations clerk shall once each month transfer all monies accumulated in said account to the city collector and obtain a receipt therefore and maintain accurate records of such receipts and transfers. (Ord. 2022, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 8-7 to 8-11. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article II - City Prisoners
Sec. 8-12. Place of Imprisonment.
Imprisonments, when made under this Code or any other ordinance of the city may be in the city prison or, at the option of the mayor or police judge, such imprisonments may be directed to be in the county jail. (Ord. 187, §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 8-13. Work on public streets, etc. - May be required.
Any person who has been convicted before the police judge and sentenced for violation of this Code or any other ordinance of the city, whether the punishment be by fine or imprisonment or by both may be put to work and required to perform labor on the public streets, highways and alleys, or other public works or buildings of the city. (Ord. 187, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 8-14. Same - Causing work to be done; designation of place and type of work.
The chief of police, street commissioner or other proper officers of the city shall have power and be authorized and required to have or cause all such prisoners to work out the full number of days for which they have been sentenced, at breaking rock, or at working upon public streets, highways and alleys or other public works or buildings of the city, as may be designated. (Ord. 187, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 8-15. Imprisonment for failure to pay fine; working out fine.
Any person who shall fail to pay the fine and costs assessed by the municipal court as punishment for violation of any of the provisions of this Code or other city ordinances shall be committed to jail. When any person is committed to jail for nonpayment of fines and costs, he shall receive five dollars ($5.00) per day credit against such fine and costs for each day he remains in jail, and in case the prisoner, whether he shall be committed to jail for a specified period of time as punishment for the violation of any ordinance of the city for which jail time is provided, or whether he shall be committed to jail for failure to pay fines and costs, shall perform work for the city while so committed, he shall be entitled to ten dollars ($10.00) per day credit against any fine or costs for each day he shall work, or one day additional credit against any specified jail term for each day he shall work. (Ord. 1990, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 8-16. Escaping from jail, etc.; damage or destruction of property while in jail, etc.
No person lawfully imprisoned in the city jail, or other place of imprisonment in the city, or in the custody of the police chief or other officer or guard, charged with the violation of this Code or any other ordinance, shall break from such jail or other place of imprisonment, or break custody and escape therefrom, or shall damage or destroy any property therein. (Ord. 55, §8.)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 8-17 to 8-21. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article III - Trials
Sec. 8-22. Conduct; keeping jury together.
After the jury is sworn to try the cause it shall sit together and hear the evidence; after hearing the same it shall be kept together under the charge of the police chief until the jury has agreed upon its verdict, or shall be discharged by the police chief. (Ord. 56, §7)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 8-23. Interfering with witness, etc.
No person shall entice or persuade, or by threats or any other means, directly or indirectly, induce or cause any person summoned as a witness in any case before the police judge to absent himself from the trial of such case, or shall induce or cause by persuasion, threats, or other means, any person to absent or secrete himself for the purpose of avoiding the services of process of any kind issued by the police judge. (Ord. 55, §7)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 8-24. Driver education course for persons convicted of motor vehicle violations.
Whenever any person shall have been found guilty in the police court of violating any ordinance involving the operation of a motor vehicle, the police judge may suspend sentencing pending the successful completion by the convicted person of a course of educational training designed to improve the safety habits of drivers, or may order the convicted person to attend such course in lieu of or in addition to the penalty otherwise provided for the offense. (Ord. 1942, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 8-25. Authorizing the use of a driver license revocation form by the municipal court.
That the municipal court of the City of Rolla, Missouri shall, when reporting municipal convictions that are pertinent to the "abuse and lose law", Sections 577.500 - 577.530 RSMo. use the form approved by the Supreme Court State Judicial Records Committee, a copy of which is attached hereto and marked Exhibit "A". (Ord. 2651, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 8-26 to 8-29. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)

Chapter 9 - Elections and Ward Boundaries
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter


Chapter Contents:
Article I - In General
9-1. Ward boundaries.
9-2. Councilmen residing in new ward permitted to serve out terms.
9-3. Qualifications of voters.
9-4. When general elections held.
9-5. Notice to be filed by candidates for city offices.
9-6 to 9-10. Reserved.


Sec. 9-1. Ward boundaries.
(a) The city is hereby divided into six wards, named and bounded as follows:

WARD NUMBER ONE: : Beginning at the centerline intersection of Missouri Highway 72 and Rolla Street; thence, North along the centerline of Rolla Street to the centerline of 12th Street; thence East along the centerline of 12th Street to the centerline of Pine Street; thence, North along the centerline of Pine Street to the centerline of Bishop Avenue; thence, Northeast along the centerline of Bishop Avenue to the centerline of Walnut Street; thence, South along the centerline of Walnut Street to the centerline of 18th Street; thence, East along the centerline of 18th Street to the centerline of Farrar Drive; thence, South along the centerline of Farrar Drive to the centerline of 14th Street; thence, West along the centerline of 14th Street to the centerline of Holloway Street, thence, south along the centerline of Holloway Street to the centerline of Salem Avenue; thence, Southeast along the centerline of Salem Avenue to the centerline of Summit Avenue; thence, South along the centerline of Summit Avenue to the centerline of Missouri Highway 72; thence, Northwest along the centerline of Missouri Highway 72 to the centerline of Rolla Street being the Point of Beginning.

WARD NUMBER TWO: Beginning at a point located on the Rolla City Limits and also being on the South Right-of-Way line of 10th Street and the East Right-of-Way line of Lovers Lane; thence, West along the South Right-of-Way line of 10th Street to the centerline of Greenbriar Drive; thence, South along the centerline of Greenbriar Drive to the centerline of Whitney Lane; thence, West along the centerline of Whitney Lane to the centerline of Greentree Road; thence, North along the centerline of Greentree Road to the centerline of Highland Drive; thence, West along the centerline of Highland Drive to a point being the extended Southeastern line of Murry Hill Third Subdivision, Lot 27; thence, North along said lot to the centerline intersection of 10th Street and McCutchen Drive; thence, West along the centerline of 10th Street to the centerline of Holloway Street; thence, North along the centerline of Holloway Street to the centerline of 14th Street; thence, East along the centerline of 14th Street to the centerline of Farrar Drive; thence, North along the centerline of Farrar Drive to the centerline of 18th Street; thence, West along the centerline of 18th Street to the centerline of Old St. James Road; thence, North along the centerline of Old St. James Road and extending to the South and West line of the extension of the Rolla City Limits; thence, East along the South line of the Rolla City Limits and following the North Right-of-Way line of Old St. James Road 1,310 feet, more or less; thence, North along the East line of the Rolla City Limits to a point being the extended Northwest line of Lot 1, Frontier Subdivision and continuing in a Northerly direction to the North Right-of-Way line of I-44, to encompass the South and West boundaries of Ward 2.

WARD NUMBER THREE: Beginning at the centerline intersection of Summit Avenue and Salem Avenue; thence, Northwest along the centerline of Salem Avenue to the centerline of Holloway Street; thence, North along the centerline of Holloway Street to the centerline of 10th Street; thence, East along the centerline of 10th Street to the centerline of McCutchen Drive; thence, South to the centerline of Highland Drive; thence, East along the centerline of Highland Drive to the centerline of Greentree Road; thence, South along the centerline of Greentree Road to the centerline of Whitney Lane, thence, East along the centerline of Whitney Lane to the centerline of Greenbriar Drive; thence, North along the centerline of Greenbriar Drive to the South Right-of-Way line of 10th Street; thence, East along the South Right-of-Way of 10th Street to the East Right-of-Way line of Lovers Lane, also being at a point on the East line of the Rolla City Limits; thence, South and following the meandering East line of the Rolla City Limits to a point on the North Right-of-Way line of Missouri Highway 72; thence, Northwest along the North Right-of-Way line of Missouri Highway 72 to the centerline of Salem Avenue; thence, Northwest along Salem Avenue to the centerline of Summit Avenue to the Point of Beginning.

WARD NUMBER FOUR: Beginning at the centerline intersection of Missouri Highway 72 and Rolla Street; thence, East along the centerline of Missouri Highway 72 to the centerline of Summit Avenue; thence, North along the centerline of Summit Avenue to the centerline of Salem Avenue; thence, Southeast along the centerline of Salem Avenue to the North Right-of-Way of Missouri Highway 72; thence, Southeast along the North Right-of-Way line of Missouri Highway 72 and meandering its way to a point being the Southeast corner of the Rolla City Limits, as established by Ordinance No. 3253 on July 6, 1998; thence, West to the centerline intersection of Little Oaks Road and Rolla Street; thence, North along the centerline of Rolla Street to the intersection of Missouri Highway 72 to the Point of Beginning.

WARD NUMBER FIVE: Beginning at the West Right-of-Way line of State Route E, being approximately 200 feet Southeast from the extended centerline of Towerview Court and also being on the Northeast point of the Rolla City Limits which was annexed by Ordinance 1051 on March 1, 1959; thence, East to the centerline of State Route E; thence, Southeast along the centerline of State Route E to the confluence of I-44; thence, in a southerly direction to the centerline of I-44 and continuing in a Southerly direction to the extended centerline of 10th Street; thence, East along the centerline of 10th Street to the centerline of Asher Street; thence, North along the centerline of Asher Street to the centerline of 11th Street; thence, East along the centerline of 11th Street to the centerline of Bishop Avenue; thence North along the centerline of Bishop Avenue to the centerline of Pine Street; thence, South along the centerline of Pine to the centerline of 12th Street; thence, West along the centerline of 12th Street to the centerline of Rolla Street; thence, South along the centerline of Rolla Street to the South side of Little Oaks Road, also being the Rolla city Limits, to encompass the Easterly and Northern boundary of Ward No. 5.

WARD NUMBER SIX: Beginning at the centerline of State Route E, being approximately 200 feet Southeast from the extended centerline of Towerview Court; thence, Southeast along the centerline of State Route E to the confluence of I-44; thence, in a southerly direction to the centerline of I-44 and continuing in a Southerly direction to the extended centerline of 10th Street; thence, East along the centerline of 10th Street to the centerline of Asher Street; thence, North along the centerline of Asher Street to the centerline of 11th Street; thence, East along the centerline of 11th Street to the centerline of Bishop Avenue; thence North along the centerline of Bishop Avenue to the centerline of Walnut Street; thence, South along the centerline of Walnut Street to the centerline of 18th Street; thence, East along the centerline of 18th Street to the centerline of Old St. James Road; thence, North along the centerline of Old St. James Road and extending to the South and West line of the Rolla City Limits; thence, North along the West line of the Rolla City Limits, also being the west line of the Railroad Right-of-Way to a point being the extended Northwest line of Lot 1, Frontier Subdivision, and continuing in a Northerly direction to the North Right-of-Way line of I-44, to encompass the Southern boundary of Ward 6. (Ord. 4022)

(b) This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. (Ord. 2295, §1; Ord. 2366, §1; Ord. 2829, §§1-2; Ord. 3256, §1; Ord. 3480, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 9-2. Councilmen residing in new ward permitted to serve out terms.
When any new ward shall be created or set off, and such new ward shall include the residence of any member of the city council, whose term of office shall not at the time of the formation of such new ward have expired, the office of such member shall not be considered vacant; but he shall be entitled to serve as councilman for the remainder of the term for which he was elected. (Ord. 534, 14.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 9-3. Qualifications of voters.
Any person registered as a qualified elector in the city shall be entitled to vote at all city elections. Each voter shall vote only in the ward in which he resides. No idiot, no insane person and no person while kept in any poorhouse at public expense or while confined in any public prison shall be entitled to vote at any election; nor shall any person convicted of a felony or of a misdemeanor connected with the exercise of the right of suffrage be permitted to vote at any city election unless he shall have been granted a full pardon, and after a second conviction of a felony or a misdemeanor connected with the exercise of the right of suffrage, he shall be forever excluded from voting. (Ord. 879, 1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 9-4. When general elections held.
There shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in April of each year a general election for the election of City Officers. (Ord. 534, 1; Ord. 3230, 2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 9-5. Notice to be filed by candidates for city offices.
Any person desiring to have his name printed upon any official ballot as a candidate for a city office at any election shall file his written declaration of candidacy with the city clerk or deputy city clerk no earlier than or later than the days established by state law as the filing period for such election. The filing deadline shall be at 5 p.m. on the last day allowed for filing. The city clerk shall publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten days prior to the filing period informing the public of the beginning and end of the filing period for each municipal election. (Ord. 839, 1; Ord. 1599, 1; Ord. 1791, 1; Ord. 1948, 2; Ord. 2487, 1; Ord. 2634, 2)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 9-6 to 9-10. Reserved.

Chapter 10 - Electricity
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter



Chapter Contents:
Article I - In General
§ 10-1. "Electrical inspector" - Defined.
§ 10-2. Same - Appointment and requirements.
§ 10-3. Same - Right of entry to inspect; authority to shut off current, etc.
§ 10-4. Same - Procedure for correcting defective installations.
§ 10-5. Compliance with Chapter prerequisite to electrical service.
§ 10-6. Permit - Required.
§ 10-7. Permit - Exceptions.
§ 10-8. Same - Application.
§ 10-9. Inspection fees.
§ 10-10. Certificate of inspection - Generally.
§ 10-11. Same - Compliance with Chapter and National Electrical Code.
§ 10-12. Records of permits and inspections to be kept.
§ 10-13. Liability for electrical installations.
§ 10-14. Enforcement of Chapter.
§§ 10-15 to 10-19. Reserved.


ARTICLE II. STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS
§ 10-20.ICC Electrical Code – Adopted.
§ 10-21. Conduits and wiring for bulk oil and service stations.
§ 10-22. Service connections.
§ 10-23. Ground wire required.
§§ 10-24 to 10-39. Reserved.


ARTICLE III. NATIONAL ELECTRIC SAFETY CODE
§ 10-40. National Electric Safety Code - Adopted.
§ 10-41. Purpose.
§ 10-42. Definitions.
§ 10-43. Prohibited acts.
§ 10-44. Exemptions.
§ 10-45. Severability of provisions.
§ 10-46. Effective date of this Ordinance.
§§ 10-47 to 10-49. Reserved.


ARTICLE IV
§ 10-50. Purpose.
§ 10-51. Definitions.
§ 10-52. Prohibited acts.
§ 10-53. Severability of provisions.
§§ 10-54 to 10-58. Reserved.


Article I - In General
Sec. 10-1. "Electrical inspector" - Defined.
Whenever the words "electrical inspector" are referred to in this Chapter or in the provisions of the National Electrical Code, they shall be construed to mean the building official or his duly appointed assistant. (Ord. 2368, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 10-2. Same - Appointment and requirements.
The city administrator shall appoint an electrical inspector. The electrical inspector or his appointed assistant may not be engaged in the business of installing electric wiring. (Ord. 2368, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 10-3. Same - Right of entry to inspect; authority to shut off current, etc.
The electrical inspector, or his duly appointed assistant, shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any building in the discharge of his official duties, or for the purpose of making any inspection or test or the installation of electrical wiring, electrical devices or electrical material, and shall have the authority to cause the turning off of all electrical current and cut or disconnect, in cases of emergency, any wires where such electrical current is dangerous to life or property or may interfere with work of the fire department. (Ord. 2368, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 10-4. Same - Procedure for correcting defective installations.
When the installation of any wiring, devices and materials is found, during an inspection to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition, the person using or operating the same shall be notified and shall make the necessary repairs or changes required to place such wiring, devices and materials in safe condition and have such work completed within fifteen days or any longer period specified by the inspector in the notice. The electrical inspector is hereby empowered to order the discontinue of electrical service to any building or site in which electrical wiring devices or material is found to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition by issuing a written order of disconnect to the utility company serving the building or site. Service may be restored after the electrical inspector issues a written permit to the utility company authorizing reconnection of the electric service. (Ord. 2368, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 10-5. Compliance with Chapter prerequisite to electrical service.
It shall be unlawful for any utility company to supply electric current or service to any installation or building without authorization of the electrical inspector. (Ord. 2368, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 10-6. Permit - Required.
An electrical permit shall be required for all new electrical services, and for alterations, additions or repair to existing electrical services, including the wiring of buildings for the placing of any electric lights, motors, heating devices or any apparatus requiring the use of an electrical current. (Ord. 2368, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 10-7. Permit - Exceptions.
No permit shall be required for minor repair work, such as repairing flush and snap switches, replacing fuses, changing lamp sockets and receptacles, and repairing drop cords. (Ord. 2368, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 10-8. Same - Application.
Applications for permits required by Section 10-6, describing work of the types enumerated by Section 10-6 shall be made by the person installing such work and the permit, when issued, will be issued to such applicant. (Ord. 2368, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 10-9. Inspection fees.
Refer to fee schedule provided in Section 108.7 of the International Building Code.

(Ord. 2368, §2; Ord. 2595, §2; Ord. 3283, §2; Ord. 3549, §2; Ord. 4454, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 10-10. Certificate of inspection - Generally.
Upon the completion of the installation of the wiring and electrical equipment for which a permit is required, it shall be the duty of the person installing the same to notify the electrical inspector who shall inspect the installation within forty-eight hours of the time such notice is given. If it is found to be fully in compliance with this Chapter and does not constitute a hazard to life and property, he shall issue a certificate of inspection and/or approval authorizing connection to the electrical service and turning on the current. All wires which are to be hidden from view shall be inspected before concealment and any person installing such wires shall notify the electrical inspector, giving him forty-eight hours in which to make the required inspection before such wires are concealed. (Ord. 2368, §2; Ord. 2595, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 10-11. Same - Compliance with Chapter and National Electrical Code.
No certificate of inspection and approval shall be issued unless the electrical light power or heating installation are in strict conformity with the provisions of this Chapter, and unless they are in conformity with the most approved methods of construction for safety to life and property and upon the payment of the proper fees as designated in Section 10-9. Compliance with the regulations as laid down in the National Electrical Code and supplements thereto as approved by the American Engineering Standards Committee shall be prima facie evidence of such most approved methods. (Ord. 2368, § 2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 10-12. Records of permits and inspections to be kept.
The electrical inspector shall keep complete records of all permits issued and inspections made and other official work performed under the provisions of this Chapter. He shall be provided with the necessary help to carry out the provisions of this Section. (Ord. 2368, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 10-13. Liability for electrical installations.
The provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling or installing any electric wiring, electric devices or electric material, for damage to person or property, caused by a defect in such electrical devices, nor shall the city be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspection authorized in this Chapter, or certificate of inspection issued as provided in this Chapter. (Ord. 2368, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 10-14. Enforcement of Chapter.
The electrical inspector is hereby appointed to enforce the provisions of this Chapter and such amendments as may hereafter be passed by the city council. (Ord. 2368, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 10-15 to 10-19. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)


Article II - Standards and Specifications
Sec. 10-20.  ICC Electrical Code - Adopted.

There is hereby adopted by the City, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations applicable to and governing all building and construction in the City, that certain code known as the ICC Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, of which code not less than two copies have been and now are filed in the office of the City Clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated in the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, as if set out at length herein.  (Ord. 4120 §1; Ord. 4454, §2)

Amendments

101.1 Title, is hereby amended by inserting the words "City of Rolla, Missouri".

403.2 Expiration. Every permit issued shall be valid for one year after issuance unless work authorized by the permit is not commenced within 180 days after it's issuance, or if the authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. At that time the permit would become void and re-application would need to be made. A one-time, one-year extension of a valid permit may be obtained at a cost of one half of the original permit fee.

404.1 Fee schedule. Refer to fee schedule provided in Section 108.7 of the International Building Code.

1003.1 Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a Misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.

1004.3 Unlawful Continuance. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe conditions, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $500.00.

This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after January 1, 2019.

(Ord. 2368, §2; Ord. 2595, §2 (11-20); Ord. 2926, §2; Ord. 3150, §2; Ord. 3549, §2; Ord. 4454, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 10-21. Conduits and wiring for bulk oil and service stations.
All bulk oil and service stations within the city shall be wired in rigid iron conduit and shall be wired in conformity with the requirements of the National Electrical Code for hazardous locations. (Ord. 2368, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 10-22. Service connections.
All exposed conduits to the Utility Company's supply side of the meter base shall be rigid heavy-wall steel. 

(Ord. 2368, §2; Ord. 3549, §2; Ord. 4454, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 10-23. Ground wire required.
All electrical systems in any structure within the city shall have an independent ground wire installed with such electrical system; and copper twelve (12) gauge shall be the minimum wire size for branch circuit receptacle outlets. Fourteen (14) gauge copper wire shall be allowed for residential fifteen amp lighting circuits.

(Ord. 2368, §2; Ord. 3549, §2; Ord. 4454, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 10-24 to 10-39. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article III - National Electric Safety Code
Sec. 10-40. National Electric Safety Code - Adopted.
There is hereby adopted by the city, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations applicable to and governing all electrical supply and distribution in the city, that certain code known as the "National Electric Safety Code", said code being the 1990 edition, published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, Inc., and all supplements thereto of code not less than three copies have been and now are filed in the office of the city clerk, and are obtained at the office of the city clerk during regular business hours, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated in the code of the city, as if set out at length herein. (Ord. 2757, §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 10-41. Purpose.
It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the City of Rolla, Missouri to maintain the financial integrity and continued viability of its board of public works, and to maintain reasonable prices for the customers of said board. To that end, and also to preserve the public safety and welfare of the City of Rolla, it is deemed necessary and appropriate to regulate and control the distribution and consumption of electrical power and energy within the corporate limits of the City of Rolla which may emanate from sources, or be under the control of persons or entities, other than the board of public works. (Ord. 2581, §1; Ord. 2757 §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 10-42. Definitions.
Board of public works - shall mean the board of public works of the City of Rolla, Missouri.

Electrical distribution system - shall mean real estate, fixtures, or personal property which is used or to be used for or in connection with or to facilitate the generation, transmission, distribution, sale or furnishing of electricity for light, heat, power or related uses, and any conduits, ducts, conductors, or other devices, materials, apparatus or property designed or used for containing, holding or carrying conductors used or designed to be used for the transmission or distribution of electricity for light, heat, power or related uses. The term shall not be construed to include electrical wiring designed to carry voltage of 220 volts or less and which is a fixture of any structure, nor shall it include portable generators of such voltage.

The municipal electrical distribution system - shall mean the electrical distribution system located within the corporate limits of the City of Rolla, Missouri, which is operated and maintained by the board of public works of the City of Rolla and is known as the Rolla Municipal Utilities.

Person - shall mean any natural person, corporation, company, firm, partnership, association, joint stock company or association, partnership or person, agency of state or local government, political subdivision, or trust, whether operated for profit or not, or their lessees, licensees, permittees, trustees, or receivers, which owns, operates, controls, or manages any "electrical distribution system", the whole or any part of which is located within the corporate limits of the City of Rolla. For purposes of this Ordinance, person shall not include the board of public works of the City of Rolla, Missouri.

Structure - shall mean an agricultural, residential, commercial, industrial, or other building or mechanical installation, machinery or apparatus. (Ord. 2581, §2; Ord. 2757 §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 10-43. Prohibited acts.
(a) No person shall, without a written permit previously obtained from the board of public works, or a franchise granted by ordinance of the city council:

own, erect, construct, operate, maintain, utilize, extend, or improve an electrical distribution system within the corporate limits of the City of Rolla, or
own, erect, construct, operate, maintain, utilize, extend or improve an electrical distribution system which is designed to, or does in fact, provide electrical service to itself or any other person, or
utilize, occupy, cross above or below, or in any way encroach upon any public street, alley, easement or right of way with any component or aspect of its electrical distribution system, or
own, utilize, operate or maintain an electrical distribution system which utilizes a source of electrical power and energy other than the municipal electrical distribution system.
(Ord. 2581, §3; Ord. 2757 §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 10-44. Exemptions.
(a) Section 10-31 of this Ordinance shall not be construed to apply to a rural electric cooperative in those specific instances where the rural electric cooperative was actually providing retail electrical service to a specific structure prior to the annexation into the City of Rolla of the real estate upon which that structure is located. In such instances, and to give effect to the provisions of Section 394.080(4) RSMo 1986, a rural electric cooperative shall be permitted to continue to provide the same type of electrical service to that same structure, and subsequent occupants thereof if the occupants desire, and also to continue to maintain any distribution facilities which the rural electrical cooperative had constructed within the City of Rolla prior to the effective date of the annexation in order to continue to provide service to that structure. However, this exemption from the provisions of Section 10-31 shall not be construed to allow any rural electrical cooperative to expand its operations to serve new customers, of whatever description, subsequent to annexation, and therefore no rural electric cooperative shall be permitted to connect its electrical distribution system with, or provide electrical service to:

structures within the corporate limits constructed subsequent to annexation of the real estate upon which they are situated,
structures constructed prior to such annexation but which were not provided electrical service by the rural electric cooperative prior to annexation,
structures within the corporate limits of the City of Rolla which have at any time been provided electrical service through the municipal electrical distribution system; and, further, that nothing herein contained shall prevent or prohibit the Rolla Municipal Utilities from lawfully purchasing properties belonging to such suppliers of electrical power as provided by state statutes, rules and regulations of the State of Missouri.
(b) This exemption is designed solely to allow a rural electric cooperative to continue to serve its customers, which may from time to time come within the corporate limits of Rolla by annexation, with the same type of electrical service that existed prior to annexation, and to provide electrical service to the subsequent occupants or owners of those same structures, if those occupants or owners desire to continue to receive service from that rural electric cooperative. (Ord. 2581, §4; Ord. 2757 §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 10-45. Severability of provisions.
The provisions of this Ordinance are declared to be severable. If any provision is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or unlawful, the remaining provisions of the ordinance are valid unless the court finds the valid provisions of the ordinance are so essentially and inseparably connected with, and so dependent upon, the void provision that it cannot be presumed the city council would have enacted the valid provisions without the void one; or unless the court finds that the valid provisions, standing alone, are incomplete and are incapable of being executed in accordance with the intent of the city council. (Ord. 2581, §5; Ord. 2757 §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 10-46. Effective date of this Ordinance.
This Ordinance shall become effective and be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. (Ord. 2581, §6; Ord. 2757 §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 10-47 to 10-49. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article IV - Natural Gas System
Sec. 10-50. Purpose.
It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the City of Rolla, Missouri to maintain the financial integrity and continued viability of its board of public works, and to maintain reasonable prices for the customers of said board. To that end, and also to preserve the public safety and welfare of the City of Rolla, it is deemed necessary and appropriate to regulate and control the distribution and consumption of natural gas and energy within the corporate limits of the City of Rolla which may emanate from sources, or be under the control of persons or entities, other than the board of public works. (Ord. 2870, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 10-51. Definitions.
Board of public works - shall mean the board of public works of the City of Rolla, Missouri.

Natural gas distribution system - shall mean real estate, fixtures, or personal property which is used or to be used for or in connection with or to facilitate the transmission, distribution, sale or furnishing of natural gas, heat, power or related uses, and any conduits, ducts or other devices, materials apparatus or property designed or used for containing, holding or carrying used or designed to be used for the transmission or distribution of natural gas, heat, power or related uses.

Person - shall mean any natural person, corporation, company, firm, partnership, association, joint stock company or association, partnership or person, agency of state or local government, political subdivision or trust, whether operated for profit or not, of their lessees, licensees, permittees, trustees, or receivers, which owns, operates, controls or manages any "natural gas distribution system", the whole or any part of which is located within the corporate limits of the City of Rolla. For purposes of this Ordinance, person shall not include the board of public works of the City of Rolla, Missouri.

Structure - shall mean an agricultural, residential, commercial, industrial, or other building or mechanical installation, machinery or apparatus. (Ord. 2870, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 10-52. Prohibited acts.
(a) No person shall without a written permit previously obtained from the board of public works, or a franchise granted by ordinance of the city council:

own, erect, construct, operate, maintain, utilize, extend, or improve a natural gas distribution system within the corporate limits of the City of Rolla, or
own, erect, construct, operate, maintain, utilize, extend, or improve a natural gas distribution system which is designed to, or does in fact, provide natural gas service to itself or any other person, or
utilize, occupy, cross above or below, or in any way encroach upon any public street, alley, easement or right of way with any component or aspect of its natural gas distribution system, or
own, utilize, operate or maintain a natural gas distribution system which utilizes a source of natural gas and energy other than the municipal natural gas distribution system. (Ord. 2870, §3)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 10-53. Severability of provisions.
The provisions of this Ordinance are declared to be severable. If any provision is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or unlawful, the remaining provisions of the ordinance are valid unless the court finds the valid provisions of the ordinance are so essentially and inseparably connected with, and so dependent upon, the void provisions that is cannot be presumed the city council would have enacted the valid provisions without the void one; or unless the court finds that the valid provisions, standing alone, are incomplete and are incapable of being executed in accordance with the intent of the city council. (Ord. 2870, §4)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 10-54 to 10-58. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)

Chapter 11 - Emergency Management
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter



Chapter Contents:
Article I - In General
§ 11-1. Rolla Emergency Management Agency - Establishment.
§ 11-2. Same - Composition.
§ 11-3. Same - Functions.
§ 11-4. Same - Director - Appointment; responsibilities of generally.
§ 11-5. Same - Same - Power to appoint additional personnel, etc.
§ 11-6. Same - Oath of office of members.
§ 11-7. Same - Office space.
§ 11-8. Mobile support units.
§ 11-9. Mutual aid - Authority of mayor.
§ 11-10. Same - Use of existing facilities, etc.
§ 11-11. Federal and state aid generally.
§ 11-12. Emergency procurement of services, supplies, etc.
§ 11-13. Waiver of formal requirements in case of enemy attack.
§§ 11-14 to 11-18. Reserved.


Sec. 11-1. Rolla Emergency Management Agency - Establishment.
There is hereby created within and for the territory of the City of Rolla, Missouri, an emergency management organization to be known as the Rolla Emergency Management Agency, which is responsible for the preparation and implementation of emergency functions required to prevent injury and minimize and repair damage due to disasters, to include emergency management of resources and administration of such economic controls as may be needed to provide for the welfare of the people, and emergency activities (excluding functions for which military forces are primarily responsible) in accordance with Chapter 44, Revised Statutes of Missouri, 1978, and supplements thereto, and the Missouri Emergency Operations Plan adopted thereunder. (Ord. 2378, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 11-2. Same - Composition.
The municipal civil defense organization shall consist of a director and other additional members to be selected by the director in order to conform to the state organization and procedures for the conduct of emergency operations as outlined in the state survival plan. (Ord. 1135, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 11-3. Same - Functions.
The organization shall perform emergency management functions within the territorial limits of City of Rolla, Missouri, and may conduct these functions outside the territorial limits as directed by the Governor during the time of emergency pursuant to the provisions of chapter 44, Revised Statutes of Missouri, 1978, and supplements thereto. (Ord. 2378, §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 11-4. Same - Director - Appointment; responsibilities of generally.
A director of the municipal civil defense organization, for the conduct of emergency operations, may be appointed by the mayor, and shall serve until removed by the same.

The director shall have such responsibilities for the organization, administration and operation of this organization as is delegated by the mayor subject to the direction and control of the mayor as provided by statute. (Ord. 1135, §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 11-5. Same - Same - Power to appoint additional personnel, etc.
The director of civil defense may appoint, without compensation, or remove any personnel needed by the civil defense organization for the proper function of its duties. (Ord. 1135, §4.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 11-6. Same - Oath of office of members.
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the municipal civil defense organization shall, before entering upon his duties, subscribe to the following oath, which shall be filed with the director:

"I,.....................................................,do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Missouri, and the territory, institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservations or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I, nor have I been, a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or this state by force or violence; and that during such time as I am affiliated with the municipal civil defense organization, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state by force or violence."

(Ord. 1135, §10.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 11-7. Same - Office space.
The mayor or city council may designate space in any city owned or leased building for the municipal civil defense organization as its office. (Ord. 1135, §11.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 11-8. Mobile support units.
The director of civil defense shall form mobile support units, as provided for in Section 44.010 et seq. of the Revised Statutes of Missouri and the state survival plan, and shall designate the leaders thereof.

Any member of a mobile support team who is a municipal employee or officer while serving on call to duty by the governor or the state director of civil defense shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and immunities incident to such employment or office. (Ord. 1135, §4.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 11-9. Mutual aid - Authority of mayor.
The mayor of the city, with the approval of the governor, may enter into mutual aid arrangements or agreements with other public and private agencies, within or without the state, for reciprocal civil defense aid. Such arrangements or agreements shall be consistent with the state survival plan, and in time of emergency it shall be the duty of the municipal civil defense organization to render assistance in accordance with the provisions of such mutual aid arrangements or agreements.

The director of the municipal civil defense organization may assist in negotiation or reciprocal mutual aid agreements between his organization and other public and private agencies and between the governor and the adjoining states or political subdivisions thereof and shall carry out arrangements or agreements relating to such organization. (Ord. 1135, §5.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 11-10. Same - Use of existing facilities, etc.
In carrying out the emergency powers under the provisions of this chapter, the mayor or the city council shall use the services, equipment, supplies and facilities of existing departments, offices and agencies of the state and of the political subdivisions, and the officers and personnel of all such departments, offices and agencies shall cooperate with and extend such services and facilities to the governor and the state civil defense agency upon request. (Ord. 1135, §6.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 11-11. Federal and state aid generally.
Whenever the federal government or state government or officer or agency thereof shall offer to the city services, equipment, supplies, material or funds by way of gift, grant or loan, for the purpose of civil defense, the city, acting with the consent of the governor and through the mayor, may accept such offer, and upon acceptance, the executive officer may authorize any officer of the city to receive such services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds on behalf of the city, subject to the terms of the offer. (Ord. 1135, §7.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 11-12. Emergency procurement of services, supplies, etc.
In the event of an emergency, as defined in Section 44.010(2) of the Revised Statutes of Missouri, the director of civil defense is authorized, on behalf of the city, to procure such services, supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view of the exigency, without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to municipal contracts or obligations, as authorized by Section 44.010 et seq. of the Revised Statutes of Missouri; provided, that if the city council meets at such time, he shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by that body. (Ord. 1135, §8.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 11-13. Waiver of formal requirements in case of enemy attack.
In the event of enemy attack, the mayor or city council may waive any time consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by statute pertaining to the advertisement for bids for the performance of public work or entering into contracts. (Ord. 1135, §9.)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 11-14 to 11-18. Reserved.

Chapter 12 - Energy
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter



Chapter Contents:
Article I - In General
§ 12-1. ICC International Energy Conservation Code - Adopted.
§ 12-2. Enforcement.
§ 12-3. Penalties.
§§ 12-4 to 12-8. Reserved.


Sec. 12-1. ICC International Energy Conservation Code - Adopted.
There is hereby adopted by the city, for the purpose of establishing minimum regulations governing the consumption of energy resources in buildings and structures; known as the ICC International Energy Conservation Code, 2000 Edition, published by Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., of which code not less than three copies have been and now are filed in the office of the city clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated in the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, as if set out at length herein.   (Ord. 2272, §1; Ord. 2596, §2; Ord. 2927, §2; Ord. 4120 §2)

This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after January 21, 2003.  (Ord. 2596, §3; Ord. 2927, §2; Ord. 4120 §2)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 12-2. Enforcement.
That the code adopted by the provisions of this Ordinance shall be enforced by the building official/code administrator. (Ord. 2201, §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 12-3. Penalties.
That any person who shall violate any provision of the code adopted by the provisions of this Ordinance shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding $100.00. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed as a separate offense. (Ord. 2201, §3.)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 12-4 to 12-8. Reserved.

Chapter 13 - Finance
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter



Chapter Contents:
Article I - In General
§ 13-1 Financial statement to be published semiannually.
§ 13-2 Depository for city funds - Designation.
§ 13-3 Same - Conditions relating to city funds on deposit.
§ 13-4 Purchasing manual.
§ 13-5 Audit Committee; selection of members, term of office.
§ 13-6 Duties generally.
§§ 13-7 to 13-8 Reserved.


Article II - City of Rolla Administrative Fund
§ 13-9 Created.
§ 13-10 Mayor to attend.
§ 13-11 Deposits to be made by treasurer.
§ 13-12 Use - Generally.
§ 13-13 Monthly financial reporting.
§ 13-14 Bond.
§§ 13-15 to 13-19 Reserved.


Article III - Budget
§ 13-20 Contents generally.
§ 13-21 Revenues and expenditures to balance/reserve requirement.
§ 13-22 Budget officer - Appointment.
§ 13-23 Same - Duties generally; preparations of budget.
§ 13-24 Submittal to city council; drafts of orders, motions, etc., to accompany same.
§ 13-25 Action by city council; limitations on same.
§ 13-26 Approval, etc., by city council; increase in expenditures after approval, etc.
§ 13-27 Transfer of unencumbered funds.
§ 13-28 Keeping records of orders, resolutions, etc., as to increase in budget.
§ 13-29 When budget for preceding year deemed in force.
§ 13-30 Budgetary authorization prerequisite to making expenditures.
§ 13-31 Park and Recreation Depreciation Reserve Account.
§ 13-32 Parkland Reserve Fund
§§ 13-33 to 13-35 Reserved.


Article IV - Wastewater System Revenue Bonds (State Revolving Fund Program) Series 1996
§ 13-36 Authorization of Bonds.
§ 13-37 to 13-40 Reserved.


Article V - General Obligation Recreation Center Bonds Series 1999
§ 13-41. Authorization of Bonds.
§§ 13-42 to 13-45 Reserved.


Article VI - Wastewater System Revenue Bonds (State Revolving Fund Program) Series 2000
§ 13-46 Authorization of Bonds.
§§ 13-47 to 13-51 Reserved.


Article VII - Taxable Industrial Development Revenue Bonds (Brewer Science, Inc. Project) Series 2002
§ 13-52 Authorization of Bonds.
§ 13-53 Authorization of documents.
§ 13-54 Approval of documents.
§ 13-55 Execution of documents.
§ 13-56 Further authority.
§§ 13-57 to 13-61 Reserved.


Article VIII* - General Obligation Recreation Center Refunding Bonds Series 2004
§ 13-62 Authorization of Bonds.
§§ 13-63 to 13-67 Reserved.


Article IX** - General Obligation Bonds Series 2004B
§ 13-68 Authorization of Bonds.
§§ 13-69 to 13-73 Reserved.


Article X*** - Sewerage System Revenue Bonds (State Revolving Fund Program) Series 2006
§ 13-74 Authorization of Bonds.
§§ 13-75 to 13-80 Reserved.


ARTICLE XI - General Obligation Recreation Center Refunding Bonds Series 2012
§ 13-81.  Authorization of Bonds.
§§13-82 to 13-87.  Reserved.


Article I - In General
Sec. 13-1. Financial statement to be published semiannually.
The city council shall, semiannually, in January and July of each year, publish a full and detailed statement of the receipts and expenditures and indebtedness of the city for the half year ending on December thirty-first and June thirtieth preceding the date of such report, which statement shall be published in some newspaper published in the city. (Ord. 1019, §9.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 13-2. Depository for city funds - Designation.
The treasurer of the city is authorized and directed to open accounts and deposit funds of the city in such depositories as may be designated by the city council. (Ord. 921, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 13-3. Same - Conditions relating to city funds on deposit.
City funds shall be deposited in designated depositories under such terms and conditions as may be specified by state law, this Code or other ordinance. (Ord. 921, §3.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 13-4. Purchasing manual.
That Section 13 of the Rolla City Code is hereby amended by including the "Purchasing Manual" of the City of Rolla, Missouri, originally adopted by Resolution No. 1170, dated February 4, 1991.

That the City of Rolla "Purchasing Manual" shall be adopted and amended to read as follows: "The City reserves the right to consider the distance of the bidding firm from the City of Rolla, the bidding firm's utilization of local resources or labor in fulfilling the bid and/or the City's past experience in receipt of services or material from the bidding firm in determining what constitutes the lowest and best bid." (Ord. 3198, §§ 1 & 2)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 13-5. Audit Committee; selection of members, term of office.
The Audit Committee is hereby established consisting of five members. The members of the committee shall include three members from the City Council, representing the widest range of the city possible, having been appointed by the Mayor subject to the consent and ratification of the City Council. The term shall be annual and members shall be eligible to succeed themselves. The City Administrator and Finance Director shall also be members of the committee. (Ord. 3625, §1; Ord. 3767, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 13-6. Duties generally.
There shall be an Audit Committee, which shall serve as an advisory committee to the Mayor and City Council. The committee may participate in the selection of the auditing firms, participate in the review of the City's investment program and make recommendations on major financial matters to the City Council as needed. The committee shall also participate in the pre-audit as well as the post-audit. The committee shall foster communication between auditors, staff, council members and the mayor to provide a better understanding of the city's financial affairs. (Ord. 3625, §1)

Secs. 13-7 to 13-8. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article II - City of Rolla Administrative Fund
Sec. 13-9. Created.
There is created a fund to be known as the "City of Rolla Administrative Fund." (Ord. 1171, §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 13-10. Mayor to control.
The money paid into the City of Rolla Administrative Fund shall be under the sole control and jurisdiction of the mayor. (Ord. 1171, §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 13-11. Deposits to be made by treasurer.
When authorized by the city council, and upon proper warrant, it shall be the duty of the city treasurer to withdraw from unbudgeted funds of the city such sum authorized, and deposit the same to the account of the "City of Rolla Administrative Fund" in such depository as the mayor may direct. (Ord. 1171, §3.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 13-12. Use - Generally.
It shall be the duty of the mayor to use the money in the City of Rolla Administrative Fund for such purpose as, in his discretion, will best serve the city and the inhabitants thereof in the performance of his administrative duties. The mayor is authorized to use such funds for the reimbursement of any out-of-pocket expense incurred by him or any other official or regular employee of the city in the performance of his duties, but neither the mayor nor any such other official or employees shall receive any pay for their services from this fund; however, the mayor may employ, at his discretion, other persons to perform services which he may deem necessary in the furtherance of any function of any municipal board or commission which will further the interest of the city. (Ord. 1171, §4.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 13-13. Monthly financial reporting.
The Director of Finance or his/her staff will prepare monthly financial reports detailing expenditures, revenues and bank balances which will be available within one month following the close of the fiscal month. These prepared statements will be available to the public, City Council and City Administration upon completion and request. A summary of revenues and expenditures will be presented at each City Council meeting. (Ord. 1171, §4; Ord. 3399, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 13-14. Bond.
The mayor shall provide a corporate fiduciary bond conditioned upon his faithful administration of the money paid into the City of Rolla Administrative Fund, which bond shall be in the sum of three thousand dollars. The premium for this bond shall be paid out of the administrative fund. (Ord. 1171, §5.)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 13-15 to 13-19. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article III - Budget
Sec. 13-20. Contents generally.
The city shall prepare an annual budget for each fiscal year. The annual budget shall present a complete financial plan for the ensuing budget year and shall include at least the following information:

A budget message describing the important features of the budget and major changes from the preceding year.

Estimated revenues to be received from all sources for the budget year, with a comparative statement of actual or estimated revenues for the two years next preceding, itemized by year, fund and source.

Proposed expenditures for each department, office and other classification for the budget year, together with a comparative statement of actual or estimated expenditures for the two years next preceding, itemized by year, fund, activity and object.

The amount required for the payment of interest, amortization and redemption charges on the debt of the city.

A general budget summary. (Ord. 1168, §1.)
(Return to Contents)


Sec. 13-21. Revenues and expenditures to balance/reserve requirement.
In no event shall the total proposed expenditures from any fund exceed the estimated revenues plus any unencumbered balance or less any deficit estimated for the beginning of the budget year.

In order to maintain an effective reserve balance for proper cash management procedures and adequate emergency reserves, it is the policy of the City Council to maintain a 25% General Fund reserve balance. The reserve shall be computed as 25% of the operating expenses (less grants, pass-through expenses, and debt service lease payments) of the General Fund. For emergency purposes, the City Council can reduce the reserve balance with a two-thirds vote of the City Council. (Ord. 1168, §1; Ord. 3923, §1)
(Return to Contents)


Sec. 13-22. Budget officer - Appointment.
The budget officer shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent and approval of a majority of the elected members of the city council. (Ord. 1168, §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 13-23. Same - Duties generally; preparation of budget.
The budget officer shall review all the expenditure requests and revenue estimates, after which he shall prepare the proposed budget as defined in this Article. All officers and employees of the city shall cooperate with and provide to the budget officer such information and such records as he shall require in developing the budget. (Ord. 1168, §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 13-24. Submittal to city council; drafts of orders, motions, etc., to accompany same.
After the budget officer has prepared the proposed budget, he shall submit it, along with such supporting schedules, exhibits and other explanatory material as may be necessary for the proper understanding of the financial needs and position of the city, to the city council. He shall submit at the same time complete drafts of such orders, motions, resolutions or ordinances as may be required to authorize the proposed expenditures and produce the revenues necessary to balance the proposed budget. (Ord. 1168, §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 13-25. Action by city council; limitations on same.
The city council may revise, alter, increase or decrease the items contained in the proposed budget, subject to such limitations as may be provided by law; provided, that in no event shall the total authorized expenditures from any fund exceed the estimated revenues to be received plus any unencumbered balance or less any deficit estimated for the beginning of the budget year. (Ord. 1168, §3.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 13-26. Approval, etc., by city council; increase in expenditures after approval, etc.
Except as otherwise provided by law, the city council shall, before the beginning of the fiscal year, approve the budget and approve or adopt such orders, motions, resolutions or ordinances as may be required to authorize the budgeted expenditures and produce the revenues estimated in the budget. Thereafter the city council shall not increase the total amount authorized for expenditure from any fund, unless city council adopts a resolution setting forth the facts and reasons making the increase necessary and approves or adopts an order, motion, resolution or ordinance to authorize the expenditures. (Ord. 1168, §4.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 13-27. Transfer of unencumbered funds.
During the budget year City Council may authorize the transfer of any unencumbered balance or portion thereof from the expenditure authorization of one department, office, classification or fund to another, subject to such limitations as may be provided by law.

The City Council shall prescribe annually, through the adoption of the budget, the inter-fund transfers needed to reflect the full cost of all operations. Overhead or indirect costs provided by general administration, finance, engineering and legal shall be assigned to the respective enterprise and governmental funds as prescribed by Council. Said costs will be assigned to all funds as a percent of total expenditures. A detailed explanation justifying the transfers shall be provided to City Council as requested. (Ord. 1168, §5; Ord. 3923, §2)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 13-28. Keeping records of orders, resolutions, etc., as to increases in budget.
The budget or the orders, motions, resolutions or ordinances as may be required to authorize the expenditures proposed in the budget as finally approved and any orders, motions, resolutions or ordinances to increase the total amount authorized for expenditures adopted shall remain on file with the city clerk for three years and shall be public records and open to inspection. To each copy so filed the budget officer shall attest to the fact that preparation and adoption procedures were conducted in the manner prescribed in this Article. (Ord. 1168, §6.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 13-29. When budget for preceding year deemed in force.
If, at the beginning of any fiscal year the city council has not approved or adopted and filed the budget and the expenditure orders, motions, resolutions or ordinances required by this Article for the current fiscal year and except as otherwise provided by law, the several amounts authorized in the expenditure orders, motions, resolutions or ordinances for the next preceding fiscal year for the objects and purposes specified in such expenditure orders, motions, resolutions or ordinances, so far as the amount shall relate to operation and maintenance expenses, shall be deemed to be reappropriated for the several objects and purposes specified in such expenditure orders, motions, resolutions or ordinances, until such time as the budget and the expenditure orders, motions, resolutions or ordinances for the current fiscal year are approved or adopted and filed as required in this Article. (Ord. 1168, §7.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 13-30. Budgetary authorization prerequisites to making expenditures.
The expenditure orders, motions, resolutions or ordinances approved or adopted and filed as provided in this Article, and the transfers made as provided in this Article, shall constitute the authorization for the expenditure of money for the budget year. No expenditure of public moneys shall be made unless it is authorized as provided in this Article. (Ord. 1168, §8.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 13-31. Park and Recreation Depreciation Reserve Account.
During the existence of the half-cent sales tax known as the City of Rolla Parks and Recreation Sales Tax, there shall be established a Depreciation Reserve and Equipment Replacement Account from the proceeds of City of Rolla Parks and Recreation Sales Tax as follows:

Annually, the City Council shall direct the Finance Director to deposit a minimum of Three Hundred Thousand Dollars ($300,000.00) in an interest-bearing account or note, for the purpose of maintaining a Health and Recreation Center and Outdoor Aquatic Facility Reserve Account, provided there are sufficient proceeds from the sales tax beyond the debt service schedule.

The principal and interest of this account shall not be drawn upon nor spent without City Council authorization as to the purpose and need of the expenditure. Such funds are intended to be used for the capital replacement of major fixtures, furniture and equipment, the upgrade or expansion of the facilities, and the repair of major building components (i.e.: roof, HVAC) to ensure the long term viability of the Health and Recreation Center as well as the Outdoor Aquatic Facility.

Deposits invested in this account shall only continue during the duration of the City of Rolla's half?cent Parks and Recreation sales tax; through December 31, 2013; however, the cumulative deposits will remain in the Reserve Account indefinitely (or until exhausted for the stated purpose).

Any remaining sales tax proceeds, beyond the prescribed debt service schedule and the depreciation reserve and equipment replacement account deposit prescribed herein, will remain in the recreation center and pool fund until released by formal Council action or a future vote of the citizens of Rolla. (Ord. 3365, §1)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 13-32. Parkland Reserve Fund.
All monies received from Fee-In-Lieu of Land Dedication (See Section 42-27 (6)) and the sale of any park property shall be deposited in a separate fund called the Park Land Reserve Fund. Other funds may be deposited into this account as deemed appropriate by the City Council.

The principal balance in this fund shall not be drawn upon or spent without a super majority vote (two-thirds) of the full Council. Such funds are intended to be used for the purchase of new parkland or park development.

The interest accrued in this fund shall be deposited in said fund. Accumulated interest can be used for a variety of park improvements subject to Council approval through the annual budget or subsequent Council action. (Ord. 3621, §1; Ord. 3655, §2; Ord. 3702, §2)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 13-33 to 13-35. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article IV - Wastewater System Revenue Bonds (State Revolving Fund Program) Series 1996
Sec. 13-36. Authorization of Bonds.
The Bonds are authorized and directed to be issued in the Original Principal Amount for the purposes in this Ordinance. (Ord. 3166, Art. II, §201)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 13-37 to 13-40. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article V - General Obligation Recreation Center Bonds Series 1999
Sec. 13-41. Authorization of Bonds.
There shall be issued and hereby are authorized and directed to be issued the General Obligation Recreation Center Bonds, Series 1999, of the City in the principal amount of $11,700,000 (the "Bonds"), for the purpose of constructing, furnishing and equipping a recreation and fitness center to include an indoor walking track, indoor swimming pool/aquatic center, outdoor aquatic facility and indoor recreation facilities. (Ord. 3327, Art. II, §201)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 13-42 to 13-45. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article VI - Wastewater System Revenue Bonds (State Revolving Fund Program) Series 2000
Sec. 13-46. Authorization of Bonds.
The Bonds are authorized and directed to be issued in the Original Principal Amount for the purposes of this Ordinance. (Ord. 3360, §201)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 13-47 to 13-51. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article VII - Taxable Industrial Development Revenue Bonds (Brewer Science, Inc. Project) Series 2002
Sec. 13-52. Authorization of Bonds.
The City is hereby authorized to issue and sell its Taxable Industrial Development Revenue Bonds (Brewer Science, Inc. Project), Series 2002, in the principal amount of $14,300,000, for the purpose of providing funds for the purposes described above. The Bonds shall be issued and secured pursuant to the herein authorized Indenture and shall bear such date, shall mature at such time, shall be in such denominations, shall bear interest at such rates, shall be in such form, shall be subject to redemption, shall have such other terms and provisions, shall be issued, executed and delivered in such manner and shall be subject to such provisions, covenants and agreements as are specified in the hereinafter referred to Indenture upon the execution thereof, and the signatures of the officers of the City executing such Indenture shall constitute conclusive evidence of their approval and the City's approval thereof. The Bonds and the interest thereon shall be limited obligations of the City payable solely out of the payments, revenues and receipts derived by the City from the Lease Agreement described below, and such payments, revenues and receipts shall be pledged and assigned to the Trustee as security for the payment of the Bonds as provided in the Indenture. (Ord. 3518, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 13-53. Authorization of documents.
The City is hereby authorized to enter into the following documents (the "City Documents"), in substantially the forms presented to the City Council of the City at this meeting (copies of which documents shall be filed in the official records of the City), with such changes therein as shall be approved by the officers of the City executing such documents, such officers' signatures thereon being conclusive evidence of their approval thereof.

Trust Indenture (the "Indenture") between the City and UMB Bank, n.a., as trustee (the "Trustee"), pursuant to which the Bonds shall be issued and the City shall pledge and assign the payments, revenues and receipts received pursuant to the Lease Agreement to the Trustee for the benefit and security of the owners of the Bonds upon the terms and conditions as set forth in said form of Indenture.

Lease Agreement (the "Lease Agreement) between the City and the Company, under which the City will provide for the acquisition, construction, improvement and equipping of the Project and lease the Project to the Company pursuant to the terms and conditions in said Lease Agreement, in consideration of rental payments by the Company which will be sufficient to pay the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on the Bonds.

Underwriting Agreement (the "Underwriting Agreement") among the City, the Company and Bank of America Securities LLC, as underwriter (the "Underwriter"), pursuant to which the Underwriter agrees to purchase the Bonds from the City upon certain conditions.

Performance Agreement (the "Performance Agreement") by and among the City, the Company and the Sublessee, pursuant to which the City has granted the Company and the Sublessee certain rights with respect to the abatement of ad valorem real estate and personal property taxes on the Project. (Ord. 3518, 2)
(Return to Contents)


Sec. 13-54. Approval of documents.
The City hereby approves the following documents, in substantially the forms presented to the City (copies of which documents shall be filed in the official records of the City) with such changes therein as shall be necessary to provide for the execution of such documents by the parties thereto:

Official Statement (the "Official Statement") in connection with the sale of the Bonds.

Form of the Letter of Credit (the "Letter of Credit") to be issued by Bank of America, N.A. (the "Bank") in favor of the Trustee.

Form of Remarketing Agreement (the "Remarketing Agreement") between the Company and the Underwriter, as remarketing agent (the "Remarketing Agent").
The Official Statement, in substantially the form submitted to the City with such changes and additions thereto as are necessary to conform to and describe the transaction and the distribution of the same by the Underwriter is hereby approved for use in connection with the Bonds. The City has not participated in the preparation of the Official Statement and has not verified the accuracy of the information therein, other than information respecting the City. Accordingly, such approval does not constitute approval by the City of such information or a representation by the City as to the completeness or accuracy of the information contained therein. For the purpose of enabling the Official Statement to comply with the requirements of Rule 15c2-12(b)(1) of the Securities and Exchange Commission, the City hereby deems the information regarding the City contained in the Official Statement to be "final" as of its date, except for the omission of such information as is permitted by Rule 15c2-12(b)(1), and the appropriate officials of the City are hereby authorized, if requested, to provide the Underwriter a letter or certification to such effect and to take such other actions or execute such other documents as such officials in their reasonable judgment deem necessary to enable the Underwriter to comply with the requirements of such Rule. (Ord. 3518, §3)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 13-55. Execution of documents.
The Mayor of the City is hereby authorized and directed to execute the Bonds and to deliver the Bonds to the Trustee for authentication for and on behalf of and as the act and deed of the City in the manner provided in the Indenture. The Mayor of the City is hereby authorized and directed to execute and deliver the City Documents for and on behalf of and as the act and deed of the City. The City Clerk of the City is hereby authorized and directed to attest to the Bonds and such City Documents and other documents, certificates and instruments as may be necessary or desirable to carry out and comply with the intent of this Ordinance. (Ord. 3518, §4)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 13-56. Further authority.
The City shall, and the officers, agents and employees of the City are hereby authorized and directed to take such further action, and execute such other documents, certificates and instruments as may be necessary or desirable to carry out and comply with the intent of this Ordinance and to carry our, comply with and perform the duties of the City with respect to the Bonds and the City Documents. (Ord. 3518, §5)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 13-57 to 13-61. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article VIII* - General Obligation Recreation Center Refunding Bonds Series 2004
Sec. 13-62. Authorization of Bonds.
There shall be issued and hereby are authorized and directed to be issued the General Obligation Recreation Center Refunding Bonds, Series 2004, of the City in the principal amount of $4,880,000 (the "Bonds").  (Ord. 3613, Art. II, §201)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 13-63 to 13-67. Reserved.
* For complete Ordinance, refer to Ord. No. 3613

(Return to Contents)



Article IX** - General Obligation Bonds Series 2004B
Sec. 13-68. Authorization of Bonds
There shall be issued and hereby are authorized and directed to be issued the General Obligation Bonds, Series 2004B, of the City in the principal amount of $7,000,000 (the "Bonds"), which are being issued for the purpose of paying (a) the costs of the Project and (b) the costs of issuance of the Bonds.  (Ord. 3624, §201)

Secs. 13-69 to 13-73. Reserved.
** For complete ordinance, refer to Ord. No. 3624

(Return to Contents)



Article X*** - Sewerage System Revenue Bonds (State Revolving Fund Program) Series 2006
Sec. 13-74. Authorization of Bonds
The Bonds are authorized and directed to be issued in the Original Principal Amount for the purposes of this Ordinance.  (Ord. 3769, §201)

Secs. 13-75 to 13-80. Reserved.
** For complete ordinance, refer to Ord. No. 3624

(Return to Contents)

ARTICLE XI* - GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS SERIES 2012

Sec. 13-81.  Authorization of Bonds.

There shall be issued and hereby are authorized and directed to be issued the City’s General Obligation Bonds, Series 2012, in the original principal amount of $3,445,000 (the "Bonds"), which are being issued for the purpose of providing finds to advance refund the Refunded Bonds and pay the costs of issuance of the Bonds. (Ord. 4048, §201)


Secs. 13-82 to 13-87.  Reserved.

NOTE:
*     For complete Ordinance, refer to Ord. No. 3613
**   For complete Ordinance, refer to Ord. No. 3624.
*** For complete Ordinance, refer to Ord. No. 3769.

Chapter 14 - Fire Protection
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter


Chapter Contents:
ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL
§ 14-1. International Fire Code - Adopted
§ 14-2. Same - Amendments.
§ 14-3. International Fire Code Adopted
§ 14-4. Burning trash, paper, wood, etc.  Prohibited during darkness. 
§ 14-5. Burning trash, paper, wood, etc. permitted during daylight under certain conditions
§ 14-6  Fire Pits.
§ 14-7. Fire Alarm Systems
14-7.010. Purpose
14-7.020. Registration of fire alarm system
14-7.030. System certification and key boxes
14-7.040. Inspection, testing and maintenance
14-7.050. Fire alarm activiation - response
14-7.060. Nuisance fire alarms
14-7.070. False fire alarm
14-7.080. Remedies and penalties
14-7.090. Government immunity
§ 14-8. Regulation of transport loads of gasoline, fuel oil, etc., to bulk plant storage tank, commercial garage, etc
§ 14-9.  Fire safety zones established; parking within such zone prohibited.
§§14-10 to 14-23.  Reserved.
ARTICLE II.  FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 14-24. Created.
§ 14-25. Composition.
§ 14-26. Fire Chief - Appointment; term of office; qualifications; removal; accountable to Mayor.
§ 14-27. Same - Powers and duties.
§ 14-28. Regulation of use, housing, etc., of equipment;
§ 14-29. Personnel - Division into two classes.
§ 14-30. Same - Responsible to Fire Chief; required compliance with all rules and regulations governing conduct, duties, etc., in department; issued badge or insignia.
§ 14-31. Enforcement of article.
§ 14-32. Penalty for violation of article.
§§ 14-33 to 14-37.  Reserved.
ARTICLE III.  FIREWORKS
§ 14-38. Sale of fireworks, etc., permitted on certain days.
§ 14-39. Wholesale sale of fireworks - Permitted.
§ 14-40. Permit - Required.
§ 14-41. Proof of wholesale sales - Required.
§ 14-42. Revocation of permits.
§ 14-43. Seizure of stock.
§ 14-44. Discharge of Fireworks
§ 14-45 to 14-50.  Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.  FIRE DETECTORS REQUIRED IN CERTAIN BUILDINGS AND DWELLINGS
§ 14-51. Installation of smoke detectors required.
§ 14-52. Type of detector.
§ 14-53. Enforcement and inspection.
§§ 14-54 to 14-60.  Reserved.
ARTICLE V.  FIRE CONTROL MEASURES AND REGULATIONS
§ 14-61. Adoption of fire control measures and regulations.
§ 14-62. Authority at fires and other emergencies.
§ 14-63. Interference with fire department operations.
§ 14-64. Vehicles crossing fire hose.
§ 14-65. Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles.
§ 14-66. Vehicles following fire apparatus.
§ 14-67. Unlawful boarding or tampering with emergency equipment.
§ 14-68. Damaging, injuring - Fire department equipment or personnel.
§ 14-69. Emergency vehicle operation.
§ 14-70. Blocking fire hydrants and fire department connections.
§ 14-71. Hydrant use approval.
§ 14-72. Fire Department Connection
§ 14-73. Key Box Where Required
§ 14-74. Key Box System Installed
§ 14-75. Key Box System Content Requirements
§ 14-76. Lock Sprinkler Cap System
§ 14-77. Reserved.

ARTICLE I - IN GENERAL
Sec. 14-1.  International Fire Code - Adopted
There is hereby adopted by the City for the purpose of establishing fire control measures and other rules and regulations controlling conditions which could impede or interfere with fire suppression forces, that certain code known as the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, of which code not less than two copies have been and now are filed in the office of the City Clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated in the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, as if set out at length herein.

This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after January 1, 2019. (Ord. 4454, §2)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-2.  Same - Amendments.
101.1 Title, is hereby amended by inserting the words “City of Rolla, Missouri”.

105.3.1 Expiration. Every permit issued shall be valid for one year after issuance unless work authorized by the permit is not commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced.  At that time the permit would become void and re-application would need to be made.  A one-time, on-year extension of a valid permit may be obtained at a cost of one half of the original permit fee.

106.4 Fee Schedule.  Refer to fee schedule provided in Section 108.7 of the International Building Code.

109.3 Violation Penalties.  Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a Misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days; or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.

903.2.8.1 Exceptions.

An automatic sprinkler system shall not be required in Group R as adopted by Missouri State Statute 67.281 "Any governing body of any political subdivision that adopts the 2009 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings or a subsequent edition of such code without mandated automatic fire sprinkler systems in Section R313 of such code shall retain the language in section R317 of the 2006 International Residential Code for two-family dwellings (R317.1) and townhouses (R317.2)."

An automatic sprinkler system shall not be required in Group R when the habitable space is less than 3,750 sq. ft. for a three unit multiple family home (Three-Plex), or less than 5,000 sq. ft. for a four unit multiple family home (Four-Plex), and no more than 1 story above grade.  Each individual apartment, must be constructed with a 1 hour fire separation separating individual units and all garage areas must be protected by a one hour fire separation

3301.1.3 Fireworks Add #5 to Exceptions:

            5.  

Any individual or organization may discharge fireworks as herein defined, without permit, on the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th and 5th days of July.

No fireworks shall be discharged within 50 feet of any stand, booth, or other location where fireworks are being sold.

Every person who shall sell fireworks in a accordance with this Chapter shall post notice at his place of sale warning that no fireworks shall be discharged within 50 feet of such place of sale as per city ordinance and shall post notice that fireworks may be discharged within the city limits on July 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th.

 

This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after January 1, 2019.

(Ord. 4104; Ord. 4454, §2)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-3.  International Fire Code - Adopted.
(a)   There is hereby adopted by the City of Rolla, MO for the purpose of establishing fire control measures and other rules and regulations controlling conditions which could impede or interfere with fire suppression forces, that certain code known as the International Fire Code, 2000 Edition, of which code not less than two copies have been and now are filed in the office of the City Clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated in the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, as if set out at length herein. 

That certain standard code known as the International Fire Code, 2000 edition, published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as the article setting forth the fire prevention standards for the city.  In addition to the inspection authority provided for in the said International Fire Code, the code official shall also have the following authority:

The Code Administrator shall have the right but not the responsibility to inspect all structures and premises, except single-family dwellings and dwelling units in two-family and multiple family dwellings category for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire, contribute to the spread of fire, interfere with firefighting operations, endanger life or any violations of the provisions or intent of this code or any other ordinance affecting fire safety. Whenever, in the enforcement of this code, another code or ordinance, it is determined that an inspection should be conducted and the responsibility of more than one code official of the jurisdiction is involved, it shall be the duty of the code officials involved to coordinate their inspections and administrative orders as fully as practicable so that the owners and/or occupants of the structure shall not be subjected to visits by numerous inspectors or multiple orders.  Whenever an inspector from any agency or department observes an apparent or actual violation of some provision of some law, ordinance, or code not within the inspector's authority to enforce, the inspector shall report the findings to the code official having jurisdiction.

Liability.  This article shall not be constructed to relieve from responsibility or to lessen responsibility of any person liable under the provisions of this article, nor shall the city be held as assuming any liability of any nature by reasons of the inspection authority hereby issued to the Building Inspector or Fire Chief for inspection for fire prevention.

Expiration.  Every permit issued shall be valid for one year after issuance unless work authorized by the permit is not commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced.  At that time, the permit would become void and re-application would need to be made.  A one-time, one-year extension of a valid permit may be obtained at a cost of one-half of the original permit fee.

Fee schedule.  Refer to fee schedule provided in Section 108.7 of the International Building Code.
(Ord. 4104)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-4.  Burning trash, paper, wood, etc. - Prohibited during darkness.
It is unlawful for any person to burn, set fire to or ignite any trash, paper, wood, grass, leaves, weeds, or any other debris or refuse within the city, during the hours of darkness, from sunset to sunrise, except as otherwise provided for permitted bonfires and fire pits. (Ord. 998 §1, replaced by Ord. 4104 §1

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-5.  Burning trash, paper, wood, etc. permitted during daylight under certain conditions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn, set fire to or ignite any solid waste, paper, wood, grass, leaves, weeds or any other debris or refuse.  Provided, that this section shall not apply to the burning of grass, leaves, weeds, or natural vegetation generated upon a landowners property by special permit.  (Ord. 2919, §1 replaced by Ord. 4104)

No burning shall be permitted on City right-of-way. 

Open burning of grass, leaves, weeds, or natural vegetation generated upon a landowner’s property shall be permitted year round, under the terms and conditions set forth in any written or verbal permit which may be issued by the fire chief or his/her designee.  Such written or verbal permit, issued by such fire chief or his/her designee, shall specify the time and place such burning shall be permitted.

Open burning shall be allowed after obtaining a permit or other proper authorization from the fire chief or his/her designee for recognized silvicultural or range or wildlife management practices, prevention or control of disease or pests, heating for warmth of outworkers, and a bonfire.

A bonfire shall be no more than 5 feet by 5 feet by 5 feet in dimension and shall burn not longer than 3 hours.  The size and duration of a bonfire shall only be increased by the Fire Chief or his/her designee when it is determined that fire safety requirements of the situation and the desirable duration of burn, warrant the increase.

Fuel for a bonfire shall consist only of seasoned dry firewood and be ignited with a small quantity of paper.  The fire shall not be used for waste disposal purposes with the intent to minimize the generation of air contaminants.

Applications for open burning bonfires shall be obtained at the City of Rolla Fire and Rescue Headquarters on or before the day of bon-fire and shall be in such form and contain such information as required by the Fire Chief or his/her designee.  Such applications shall contain, at a minimum, information regarding the purpose of the proposed burning, the nature and quantities of material to be burned, the date when such burning will take place, and the location of the burning site.

All permits shall be requested by and issued to the owner of the land upon which the bonfire is to be kindled.

The location for any open burning shall be not less than 50 feet from any structure and provisions shall be made to prevent the fire spreading to within 50 feet of any structure.  Fires in approved containers shall be permitted to be not less than 15 feet from any structure.  All burning shall take place on the owner’s property. 

Open burning shall not be used for waste disposal purposes, shall be of the minimum size of the intended purpose, and the fuel shall be chosen to minimize the generation and emission of air contaminants.

All open burning shall be constantly attended by a competent person until such open fire is extinguished.  This person shall have a garden hose connected to the water supply or other fire extinguishing equipment readily available for use.  Land clearing operations must obtain a permit from the Missouri Department of Natural Resources.

Commercial land clearing and or land clearing operations must be pre-approved by a vegetative or untreated wood permit obtained through the Missouri Department of Natural Resource, in conjunction with the City of Rolla Fire & Rescue.  

Open burning shall be allowed without prior notification to the Fire Chief or his/her designee for highway safety flares, railroad smudge pots and similar occupational needs.

The Fire Chief or his/her designee shall prohibit open burning which will be offensive or objectionable due to smoke or odor emissions when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous.  The Fire Chief or his/her designee shall order the extinguishment, by the permit holder or the fire department, for any open burning, which creates or adds to a hazardous or objectionable situation.

Open burning shall be allowed with prior notification to the Fire Chief or his/her designee and upon receipt of written permission from the jurisdictional EPA (Environmental Protection Agency) authority and/or Missouri Department of Natural Resources, provided that any conditions specified in the permission are followed, for:

disposal of hazardous or toxic material where the EPA determines that there is no practical alternative method of disposal,

instruction in methods of fire fighting or for research in control of fires, in emergency or other extraordinary circumstances research in control of fires,

in emergency or other extraordinary circumstances for any purpose determined to be necessary by the EPA, disposal of landscape waste other than residential

and agricultural waste, and recognized agricultural or horticultural management purposes to maintain or increase the quantity or quality of agricultural or horticultural production. 
(Ord. 998, §2; Ord. 1490, §1 and Ord. 2874 §2, replaced by Ord. 4104)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-6.  Fire Pits.
A "fire pit" includes below ground pits, freestanding fireplaces, and portable devices intended to contain and control outdoor fires.

All below ground fire pits shall be at least four inches in depth and shall be surrounded on the outside, above ground, by a non-combustible material such as steel, brick, or masonry.  The fire pit cannot exceed three feet in diameter, nor may the fire pile exceed two feet in height.

Fire pits shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications.

Only natural firewood, commercial logs, natural gas, and propane  may be burned.

Burning of lumber, pallets, scrap wood, tree trimmings, leaves, yard waste, paper, cardboard, garbage and similar items is not permitted.

All fire pits must be located away from any structure or combustible material

Below ground fire pits and freestanding fireplaces must be located a minimum of 25 feet away from any structure or combustible material

Portable fire pits must be located a minimum of 15 feet away from any structure or combustible material

The fire must be constantly attended and supervised until the fire has been completely extinguished

A portable fire extinguisher or other approved extinguishing equipment, such as a garden hose, must be readily available

The fire must be completely extinguished by 1 a.m.

Resident should remember common courtesy needs to be extended to neighbors with the consideration of weather, noise, and smoke.  The Fire Chief or his/her designee may have the fire extinguished at any time for appropriate reason. (Ord. 4104)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-7.  Fire Alarm Systems
No person shall maliciously turn in or cause to be turned in a false alarm of fire.  (Ord. 4104)

14.7.010.   Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to encourage owners and alarm businesses to properly install, use, and maintain the operational effectiveness of alarm systems in order to improve the reliability of alarm systems and reduce or eliminate false fire alarms and nuisance fire alarms.

This chapter governs fire alarm systems intended to summon fire department personnel, requires registration, assessment of fees for excessive false fire alarms and nuisance fire alarms, provides procedures for repeat offenders, and provides an effective date.
(Ord. 4104)

14.7.020.   Registration of fire alarm system.
A registration to the Codes Administrator shall be required for fire alarm systems whenever a record of completion is prepared, in accordance with adopted codes.  This will be conducted by submitting plans of the fire alarm system to the Codes Administrator. 

Registrations shall not be transferable from one premise to another or from one owner to another.

Every fire alarm company shall notify the AHJ of the existence of a fire alarm system prior to the fire alarm system being put into operation.  It shall be the responsibility of the installer to provide the owner with notice of the existence of this chapter, the approved plans, and a copy of the fire alarm system operation instructions in accordance with adopted codes, and the manufacturer’s instructions.

The approved plans shall include the following information:

The name(s), address of the premises, mailing address (if different from the address of the premises), business and home telephone number of the owner, lessee, operator, manager or person in possession of the premises wherein the fire alarm system is installed;

The name, address and telephone number of a minimum of two persons who can be notified by the AHJ, in the event of the activation of the fire alarm system, and who shall be capable of responding to the premises within one-half hour of notification, and who are authorized to enter the premises;

The name, address, and telephone number of the fire alarm company which has contracted to service the fire alarm system and proof of proper state licensing/registration with the City of Rolla

Fire and Rescue, if required.  Proof of proper state licensing may be a valid state licensing number;
The date fire alarm system is placed in operation;

Any other documentation relevant to the property or required by AHJ.

When any of the information required by subsection (E)(1), (E)(2), or (E)(3), herein, is changed or modified, it shall be reported to the AHJ by the owner within fifteen calendar days of change or modification.

The fire alarm installer shall complete and deliver the fire alarm system registration in the required format to the AHJ before the fire alarm system is activated or placed into service.
(Ord. 4104)

14.7.030.   System certification and key boxes.
Prior to installation or alteration of equipment or wiring of a fire alarm system, the owner or installer must submit complete plans and specifications for the proposed system to the city codes department for review.

All newly installed or re-certified commercial and residential (three or more living units) fire alarm systems shall be approved by the AHJ.  The certification shall indicate the fire alarm system is in compliance with adopted codes.  The certification shall be signed by a qualified fire alarm technician.

Approved key boxes shall be installed on all commercial and residential (three or more living units) buildings with a fire alarm system. 
(Ord. 4104)

14.7.040. Inspection, testing and maintenance.
The owner shall ensure all fire alarm systems are inspected and tested by a certified company at least once per year in accordance with adopted codes.

The owner shall ensure all fire alarm systems are maintained per manufacturer specifications and adopted codes.
(Ord. 4104)

14.7.050. Fire alarm activation – Response.
The owner shall be responsible for the activation of a fire alarm system.

A response to the activation of a fire alarm system shall occur from any officer or member of the fire department being dispatched to the premises where the fire alarm system has been activated.

At the time of response, Rolla Central Communications shall notify any person identified in the registration required pursuant to subsection 14.6.030(E) of the activation of the fire alarm system and, at that time, such person is required to respond to the premises.

In the event the fire alarm system is a monitored system, it is the responsibility of the company monitoring the fire alarm system to notify any person identified in the registration at the request of the AHJ.
(Ord. 4104)

14.7.060.   Nuisance fire alarms.
In the event the activation of a fire alarm system is deemed by the AHJ to be a nuisance fire alarm and the system requires repair, the owner will be provided a fire alarm activation report by an officer or member of the fire department, indicating that the activation was deemed to be the result of a nuisance fire alarm.  This report will be provided the third business day after the activation.

Upon receipt of a fire alarm activation report the owner shall return to the AHJ a completed report of service/repair within fifteen calendar days of receipt of the fire alarm activation report to verify, to the reasonable satisfaction of the AHJ, that:

The fire alarm system has been examined by a qualified fire alarm technician; and

A bona fide attempt has been made to identify and correct any defect of design, installation or operation of the fire alarm system which was identified as the cause of the nuisance fire alarm.

In the event the premises are equipped with a fire alarm system with over one hundred alarm initiating devices, the AHJ may waive one nuisance fire alarm per calendar year.

No violation shall be assessed for the first three nuisance fire alarms at the same premises responded to by the fire department during a running twelve-month period.  Thereafter, the owner shall be considered in violation of this article/ordinance.

In determining the number of nuisance fire alarms, multiple alarms occurring in any twenty-four hour period shall be counted as one nuisance fire alarm to allow the owner time to take corrective action.
(Ord. 4104)

14.7.070.   False Fire Alarm.
No violations shall be assessed for the first three false fire alarms at the same premises responded to by the fire department during a running three month period.  Thereafter, the owner shall be considered in violation of this article/ordinance. 

In determining the number of false fire alarms, multiple alarms occurring in any twenty-four hour period shall be counted as one false fire alarm to allow the owner time to take corrective action unless the false fire alarms are directly caused by the owner.

False fire alarms activated by any components connected to the fire alarm system shall be included in computing the total number of false fire alarms for purposes of this subsection.

The activation of a fire alarm system will not be considered a false fire alarm if the alarm is activated due to causes beyond the control of the owner.

In the event the premises are equipped with a fire alarm system with over one hundred alarm initiating devices, the AHJ may waive one false fire alarm per calendar year.
(Ord. 4104)

14.7.080.   Remedies and penalties.
The AHJ has the authority to revoke the occupancy certificate for the premises by written notice to the owner of the premises, and order a fire watch in accordance with adopted codes, due to repetitive nuisance fire alarms and/or false fire alarms, until the system is restored, and for any of the following reasons:
Failure to meet the requirements required by this chapter.  

Failure of the owner to provide a written report of service/repair required by this chapter;

A fourth false fire alarm or nuisance fire alarm at a premises for which a violation is assessed is charged pursuant to this chapter as a result of the failure of the owner to take corrective action to eliminate the cause of the false fire alarm or nuisance fire alarm; or

The failure of a person notified pursuant to subsection 14.7.060(B)(1) of this chapter to appear within one-half hour after being notified to respond, if such failure to respond occurs four or more times within a calendar year.
(Ord. 4104)

14.7.090.   Government immunity.
Neither registration of a fire alarm system nor the provisions of this chapter are intended to, nor will they, create a contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of response.  Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained.  When registering a fire alarm system, the owner acknowledges that fire department response may be based on factors such as availability of fire department units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, and staffing levels.  The city, its officers, employees, and agents shall not assume any duty or responsibility for the installation, maintenance, operation, repair or effectiveness of any privately owned fire alarm system, those duties or responsibilities being solely those of the owner of the premises. (Ord. 4104)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-8.  Regulation of transport loads of gasoline, fuel oil, etc., to bulk plant storage tank, commercial garage, etc.
It shall be unlawful to deliver transport loads of gasoline, fuel oil or diesel fuel to any bulk plant storage tank, or commercial garage or service station storage tank, except at such times as there shall be present at the site of the unloading of such transport a person of lawful age who shall personally witness and supervise the unloading of such transport truck and the filling of such storage tank.

It shall be unlawful to cause or permit gasoline, fuel oil or diesel fuel from any transport load to be discharged or poured upon the ground.

Should accidental discharge occur, contact 911 or Fire Department immediately.
(Ord. 1434, §§ 1,2; replaced by Ord. 4104)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-9.  Fire safety zones established; parking within such zones prohibited, exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle within the following described areas of the public streets, hereby designated as "fire safety zones," unless such vehicle is being then and there loaded with or unloaded of goods, wares, merchandise or other personal property, or is being loaded with passengers or is being used for the discharge of passengers therefrom:
(Ord. 4104)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-10 to 14-23.  Reserved.
(Return to Contents)

ARTICLE II - FIRE DEPARTMENT
Sec. 14-24.  Created.
A department to be hereafter known as the City of Rolla Fire & Rescue, the object of which shall be the prevention of fire and the protection of life and property within the limits of the city is hereby created. (Ord. 1211, §1 replaced by Ord. 4104)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-25.  Composition.
The department shall consist of a Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chief,  Firefighters, and other administrative personnel deemed necessary and prudent  as the council may from time to time determine. (Ord. 1211, §2 replaced by Ord. 4104)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-26.  Fire chief - Appointment; term of office; qualifications; removal;  accountable to Mayor.
The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the consent of the majority of the members of the city council for an indefinite period of time, and his/her tenure of office shall depend upon his/her good conduct and efficiency.  The chief shall be technically qualified by training and experience and shall have the ability to command firefighters and hold their respect and confidence.  He/she shall be removed only for just cause and after a hearing before the city council.  He/she shall be accountable to the City Administrator only and shall make written and verbal reports as may be required by the City Administrator or the City Council.  All other members of the fire department shall be accountable to the City Administrator and to the chief only.  (Ord. 1211, §3 replaced by Ord. 4104)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-27.  Same - Powers and duties.
The Fire Chief shall formulate, subject to the approval of the City Administrator, a set of rules and regulations to govern the department and shall be responsible for the personnel, morale and general efficiency of the department;  he/she shall determine the working schedule of all regular members of the fire department as well as all part-time members; he/she shall at least once a month conduct suitable drills or instruction in the operation and handling of equipment, first aid and rescue work, salvage, a study of buildings in the city, fire prevention, water supplies, and all other matters generally considered essential to good firemanship and safety of life and property from fire; he/she shall assist the proper authorities in suppressing the crime of arson by investigating or causing to be investigated the cause, origin and circumstances of all fires; he/she is hereby empowered, and it shall be his/her duty, to enter any and all buildings and premises used for commercial purposes including the housing of students and buildings for hotel and motel purposes at any reasonable hour for the purpose of making inspections and to serve written notice upon the owner or occupant to abate within a specific time, any and all fire hazards that may be found and any person so served with notice to abate any fire hazard or shall comply therewith and promptly notify the chief.  It shall also be the duty of the chief to see that complete records are kept of all fires, inspections, apparatus and minor equipment, personnel and other information about the work of the department and he/she shall report monthly to the city council for the condition of the apparatus and equipment, the number of fires during the month, the location and cause and date of same and loss occasioned thereby, the number and purpose of all other runs made and the number of members responding to each fire or other run and any changes in membership.  It shall be the duty of the chief to make a complete annual report to the city council within one month after the close of the fiscal year, such report to include the information specified herein together with comparative date for previous years and recommendations for improving the effectiveness of the department.  (Ord. 1211, §4 replaced by Ord. 4104)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-28.  Regulation of use, housing, etc., of equipment; mutual aid agreements.
The department shall be equipped with such apparatus and other equipment as may be required from time to time to maintain its efficiency and properly protect life and property from fire; all equipment of the department shall be safely and conveniently housed and no person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for any purely private purpose and while such equipment is in charge and control of a regular member of the department, and no person shall enter any place where fire apparatus is housed or handle any apparatus or equipment belonging to the department unless accompanied by or having the special permission of an officer or authorized member of the department.  No fire calls will be answered outside the corporate limits of the city; provided however, that call for assistance of mutual aid may be answered when the absence of such equipment from the city will not jeopardize protection of property within the corporate limits of the city.  (Ord. 2018, §1 replaced by Ord. 4104)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-29.  Personnel-Division into two classes.
The personnel of the City of Rolla Fire and Rescue shall be divided into two classes:  Regular firefighter; and Cadet firefighter.  A regular Firefighter is one who is employed at a regular salary on a full time basis certified as a Firefighter I and II; a Cadet Firefighter is one who is employed at a regular salary on a full time basis but does not have Firefighter I and II certification. (Ord. 1211, §6 replaced by Ord. 4104)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-30.  Same - Responsible to Fire Chief; required compliance with all rules and regulations governing conduct, duties, etc., in department; issued badge or insignia.
All members of the fire department shall be directly responsible to the Fire Chief and shall submit themselves to the orders and directions of the chief in all matters pertaining to the fire department and the carrying out of the functions of the department and shall comply with all rules and regulations promulgated by the chief governing their conduct, duties and activities in the fire department. (Ord. 2275, §2 replaced by Ord. 4104)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-31.  Enforcement of article.
All regularly appointed members of the department are hereby given the necessary special powers for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Article. (Ord. 1211, §§ 1, 2; replaced by Ord. 4104)

Secs. 14-32 to 14-37.  Reserved.

(Return to Contents)

ARTICLE III - FIREWORKS
Sec. 14-38.  Sale of fireworks, etc., permitted on certain days.
No person shall at any time sell, offer or expose for sale or give away any firecracker, potash or sulphur tablet or pellet, or any device for exploding any tablet or pellet, or any torpedo, aerial salute or aerial reporting shell, or any display bomb shell or any other article commonly known as fireworks within the corporate limits of the City of Rolla, MO, except on the thirtieth day of June and the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh days of July.  (Ord. 575, §1; Ord. 1620, §1; Ord. 2737, §1, replaced by Ord. 4104)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-39.  Wholesale sale of fireworks - Permitted.
Wholesale sale of fireworks is hereby permitted within the city limits of the City of Rolla, Missouri, herein.  All such wholesale sales shall comply with the conditions and requirements contained herein.  (Ord. 2311, §1, replaced by Ord. 4104)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-40.  Permit - Required.
No wholesale sale shall be made by any seller who does not have a valid permit.

A permit for the wholesale sale of fireworks shall be obtained from the City of Rolla Fire and Rescue.

No permit shall be issued except upon proof offered by the applicant of complete compliance of all provisions of state statutes and city ordinances relating to safety requirements for the sale of fireworks.

If, after inspection, the City of Rolla Fire and Rescue determines that the proposed conditions of sale constitute a fire hazard, no permit shall be issued. 
(Ord. 2311 §2 replaced by Ord. 4104)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-41.  Proof of wholesale sales - Required.
Any wholesale seller of fireworks making sales under this Ordinance must provide the City of Rolla Fire and Rescue with proof that all sales made are wholesale sales.  Such proof must be proffered on a monthly basis and noncompliance with this Section shall result in immediate revocation of permit to sell. (Ord. 2311, §3 replaced by Ord. 4104)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-42.  Revocation of permits.
Permits for the wholesale sale of fireworks provided for under this Ordinance may be revoked by the City of Rolla Fire and Rescue upon its determination, after inspection that unsafe conditions exist.  (Ord. 2311, §4 replaced by Ord. 4104)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-43.  Seizure of stock.
Upon a determination of unsafe conditions, or upon a violation of this Ordinance, the City of Rolla Fire and Rescue may seize, take, remove, or cause to be removed at the cost of the owner, all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for display or sale, stored or held in violation of this Ordinance. (Ord. 2311, §5 replaced by Ord. 4104)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-44.  Discharge of Fireworks.
Any individual or organization may discharge fireworks as herein defined, without permit, on the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 5th days of July. No fireworks may be discharged without the fire department’s special permit between the hours of 11 p.m. and 8 a.m.  Any individual or organization may discharge fireworks as herein defined, without permit, on the 4th day of July.  No fireworks may be discharged without the fire department’s special permit between the hours of midnight and 8 a.m.

No fireworks shall be discharged within 100 feet of any stand, booth, or other location where fireworks are being sold.

Every person who shall sell fireworks in accordance with this Chapter shall post notice at their place of sale warning that no fireworks shall be discharged within 100 feet of such place of sale as per city ordinance and shall post notice that fireworks may be discharged within the city limits on July 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th.

Indoor Pyrotechnics displays are prohibited in establishments, which are licensed to serve alcohol within the City of Rolla.  A special use permit would be required through the Missouri Division of Fire Safety and the City of Rolla Fire & Rescue for any other Pyrotechnic displays in the City Limits of Rolla

The uses of Sky Lanterns, also known as Kongming Lantern are prohibited in the City of Rolla.  They are constructed from oiled rice paper on a bamboo frame, and contain a small candle or fuel cell composed of a waxy flammable material.  When lit, the flame heats the air inside the lantern, causing the lantern to rise into the air.  The sky lantern is only airborne for as long as the flame stays alight, after which the lantern floats back to the ground.
(Ord. 4104, Ord. 4217, §1)

(Return to Contents)

Secs. 14-45 to 14-50.  Reserved.

 

ARTICLE IV - SMOKE DETECTORS REQUIRED IN CERTAIN BUILDINGS AND DWELLINGS
Sec. 14-51.  Installation of smoke detectors required.
The owner of each dwelling unit in the city, which is constructed or is renovated after the passage of this Article shall install smoke detectors prior to the occupancy of said newly constructed dwelling unit or prior to the completion of renovation to an existing dwelling unit.

The owner of any apartment building, dormitory, hotel or motel in the city in existence at the time of the passage of this Article or used as such or constructed after the time of the passage of this Article shall install smoke detectors in each apartment, dwelling, each dormitory room that has sleeping facilities or cooking facilities, and each motel or hotel room prior to allowing any person to rent, lease or occupy said apartment, dwelling, dormitory room, motel or hotel room, and in Ord 2592, §1.

Each apartment, dwelling, each dormitory room that has sleeping facilities or cooking facilities, and each motel or hotel room without a properly installed smoke detector shall be considered a separate violation under this ordinance.  (Ord. 2592, §1 replaced by Ord. 4104)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-52.  Type of detector.
Smoke detectors shall bear the label of a nationally recognized standards testing laboratory that indicates that the smoke detectors have been tested and listed under the requirement of United Laboratories, Inc. Standard UL217 2nd Edition or National Fire Protection Association Standards 72E and 74. (Ord. 2592, §1 replaced by Ord. 4104)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-53.  Enforcement and inspection.
(a)   The building code inspector or other city official charged with the issuance of construction or building permits for the buildings and structures to which this article applies shall require that all plans for new construction or renovation of existing structures to which this Article applies contain an indication that calls for the installation of smoke detectors as required by the provisions of this Article and shall not approve or issue such permit in the absence thereof. (Ord. 2592, §1 replaced by Ord. 4104)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-54 to 14-60.  Reserved.
(Return to Contents)

ARTICLE V - FIRE CONTROL MEASURES AND REGULATIONS
Sec. 14-61.  Adoption of fire control measures and regulations.
There is hereby adopted by the City of Rolla the fire control measures and regulations as herein set forth for the purposes of controlling conditions, which could impede or interfere with fire suppression forces.  (Ord. 2616, §1 replaced by Ord. 4104)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-62.  Authority at fires and other emergencies.
The fire official or duly authorized representatives, as may be in charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the protection of life and/or property, is empowered to direct such operations as may be necessary to extinguish or control any suspected or reported fires, gas leaks, or other hazardous conditions or situations or of taking any other action necessary in the reasonable performance of their duty.  The fire official may prohibit any person, vehicle or object from approaching the scene and may remove or cause to be removed from the scene any person, vehicle or object which may impede or interfere with the operations of the fire department.  The fire official may remove or cause to be removed any person, vehicle or object from hazardous areas.  All persons ordered to leave a hazardous area shall do so immediately and shall not re-enter the area until authorized to do so by the fire official. (Ord. 2616 § 2 replaced by Ord. 4104)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-63.  Interference with fire department operations.
It shall be unlawful to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or restrict the mobility of, or block the path of travel of any fire department emergency vehicle in any way, or to interfere with, attempt to interfere, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or hamper any fire department operation. (Ord. 2616 § 3 replaced by Ord. 4104)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-64.  Vehicles crossing fire hose.
A vehicle shall not be driven or propelled over any unprotected fire hose of the fire department when laid down on any street, alleyway, private drive or any other vehicular roadway without the consent of the fire official in command of said operation. (Ord. 2616 § 4 replaced by Ord. 4104)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-65.  Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles.
Upon the approach of any authorized emergency vehicle, giving audible and visual signal, the operator of every other vehicle shall immediately drive the same to a position as near as possible and parallel to the right-hand edge or curb of the street or roadway, clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle or vehicles shall have passed, unless otherwise directed by the fire official or a police officer.  (Ord. 2616, §6 replaced by Ord. 4104)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-66.  Vehicles following fire apparatus.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle, other than one on official business, to follow closer than 500 feet from any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm, or to drive any vehicle within the block or immediate area where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. (Ord. 2616 § 7 replaced by Ord. 4104)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-67.  Unlawful boarding or tampering with fire department emergency equipment.
A person shall not without proper authorization from the fire official in charge of said fire department emergency equipment, cling to, attach himself to, climb upon or into, board or swing upon any fire department emergency vehicle, whether the same is in motion or at rest, or sound the siren, horn, bell or other sound-producing device thereon, or to manipulate or tamper with, or attempt to manipulate or tamper with any levers, valves, switches, starting devices, brakes, pumps, or any equipment or protective clothing on, or a part of , any fire department emergency vehicle.  (Ord. 2616, §8 replaced by Ord. 4104)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-68.  Damage, injury - Fire department equipment or personnel.
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface, or attempt, or conspire to damage or deface any fire department emergency vehicle at any time, or to injure, or attempt to injure or conspire to injure fire department personnel while performing departmental duties.  (Ord. 2616, §9 replaced by Ord. 4104)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-69.  Emergency vehicle operation.
The driver of any emergency vehicle, as defined in Section 14-65 of this Ordinance, shall not sound the siren thereon or have the front red light on or disobey any existing traffic regulation, except when said vehicle is responding to an emergency call or when responding to, but not upon returning from a fire.

The driver of an emergency vehicle may:

Park or stand irrespective of the provision of existing traffic regulations;

Proceed past a red or stop signal or other sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operations;

Exceed the prima facie speed limit so long as the action does not endanger life or property;

Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions;

The exemptions herein granted to an emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any such vehicle while in motion sounds audible signal by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle. 
(Ord. 2616 § 10 replaced by Ord. 4104)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-70.  Blocking fire hydrants and fire department connections.
Pursuant to Missouri Revised Statutes and International Fire Code 2000, it shall be unlawful for posts, fences, vehicles, growth, trash, storage, and other material or objects to be placed or kept near fire hydrants, fire department inlet connections, or fire prevention system control valves in a manner that would prevent such equipment or fire hydrants from being immediately discernible.  In addition no person shall park within 15 feet of a fire hydrant per Missouri Revised Statutes 300.440.1 (Ord. 2616 § 11 replaced by Ord. 4104)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-71.  Hydrant use approval.
A person shall not use or operate any fire hydrant intended for use of the fire department for fire suppression purposes unless such person first secures a permit for such use from the fire official and the water company having jurisdiction.  This Section shall not apply to the use of such hydrants by a person employed by, and authorized to make such use by, the water company having jurisdiction.  (Ord. 2616 § 12 replaced by Ord. 4104)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-72.  Fire Department Connection - Fire Department Connection (FDC) Requirements
The City of Rolla requires the Fire Department Connection (FDC) to be a standalone connection.  The connection must follow all International Fire Code 2000 and NFPA requirements.  The FDC connection shall meet all test requirements.

The fire department connection FDC shall be a free standing and remote from the building at a distance from the building equal to half the height of the exterior wall.

The FDC shall be equipped with a 2-2½ inch National Standard Thread connection.  The FDC piping underground shall be equipped with a ball drip valve to ensure there is no standing water in the connection and that the piping does not freeze.

The FDC shall be arranged to face a paved roadway, sidewalk or other approved area and shall be installed so that it will not interfere with access to the building when hoses are laid from the closest public hydrant to the FDC.  The FDC shall be located on the same side of the lot/or building as the closet public fire hydrant or a maximum of one hundred (100) feet.

The FDC shall be arranged so that the connection is no more than (48) inches above the finished grade, sidewalk or location of the connection.

A Knox brand locking cap with a chain or cable shall be provided for the FDC.  A Knox application can be obtained at the City of Rolla Fire & Rescue.

Where the FDC is subject to vehicle damage, the connection shall be protected per the fire code.
(Ord. 4104)

rolla-fire-pipes.jpg

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-73.  Key Box
Where Required - The Knox Company is the only provider of Key Boxes used by the City of Rolla.

The owner and/or management agents of any new commercial construction shall install a key box, of a type and in a location approved by the Fire Chief or his/her designee.

Owners and operators of controlled vehicle parking areas which use mechanical parking gates to control motor vehicle ingress and egress shall install and maintain an emergency override control on each gate.  Said emergency override control devices shall contain a master key-operated type switch approved by the proper official of the local fire department.

For all buildings where installation is not required under the above listed provisions of such installation shall be permissible but not required.  If the owner or management agent of a property which is not required to install a key box elects to do so, said owner or management agent shall be obligated to meet all criteria specified for buildings where key box installation is required.
(Ord. 4104)  

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-74.  Key Box System Installation
The lock or key box to be installed in the structure shall meet the following specifications:

Key box shall be installed at the location as agreed upon by the owner of the property and the Fire Chief or his/her designee. 

UL 437--Standard for safety key lock;

UL 1610--Standard for central station alarm units for use with UL listed alarm systems;

UL 1037--Standard for anti-theft alarms and devices.

The fire department shall adopt procedures for protecting the integrity and security of the master keys system, which allow access to key boxes within the City of Rolla.  Procedures shall include, but not be limited to a definition of authorized uses and users of the system; specific means of access to the system; protection against unauthorized or uncontrolled use of master keys or master key systems; secure storage systems for master keys; a system for release and control of master keys from a central dispatch location; the recording of individuals having access to the master key, including date, time and location of access; and protections and safeguards against unauthorized duplication of master keys or access systems.
(Ord. 4104)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-75.  Key Box System Content Requirements
Key boxes shall include two separate sets of keys.  Each set shall contain the following individually labeled keys:

Keys to the locked point of egress whether on the interior or exterior of such buildings, mechanical rooms, electrical rooms, fire alarm panels, elevator controls, if elevators are present and equipped with a fire department bypass switch, keys to other areas in the building as directed by the proper official of the fire department.

In addition, the key box shall contain the following:

A current list of personnel and telephone numbers for call back purposes in the event of an emergency.

In the event that locks on the subject building are changed after the installation of the key box, the proper official of the local fire department shall be notified of such change in writing, and a key(s) to the new lock(s) shall be provided immediately.  
Enforcement of this section shall be performed by the authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 4104)

(Return to Contents)

Sec 14-76.  Lock Sprinkler Cap System.
The Knox Company is the only provider of locking sprinkler caps used by the City of Rolla.

Unless exempted by written order of the Chief of the City of Rolla Fire & Rescue and in order to eliminate the tampering with sprinkler connections and to provide an operational sprinkler system for fire suppression, the following structures shall be equipped with a lock sprinkler cap system at the required sprinkler connection:

All newly constructed commercial and industrial structures and places of assembly protected by an automatic fire alarm system or automatic suppression system;

All newly constructed multi-family residential structures required to have sprinkler system;

All newly constructed health care facilities; and

All existing structures undertaking additions, alterations or repairs which shall cause the same to conform with the then current provisions of any of the building or property maintenance codes adopted by the City.

All structures subject hereto shall be required to install a lock sprinkler cap system prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit which shall then be operational at all times thereafter.

The owner or operator of any structure subject hereto shall notify the Department of Fire/EMS of any damage or changes to the lock sprinkler cap system.

The Fire Chief shall be authorized to implement rules and regulations governing the use of any lock sprinkler cap system.

All existing buildings as described in first paragraph shall be required to comply with the installation of the key box system by December 31, 2014.

The City of Rolla Fire & Rescue shall be responsible for the enforcement hereof.

No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any structure subject hereto which is not properly equipped with the required lock sprinkler cap system.

Any such sprinkler cap system must be operational for the final inspection by the Codes Administrator and/or City of Rolla Fire & Rescue.
(Ord. 4104)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 14-77.  Reserved.

Chapter 15 - Stormwater and Flood Control
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter



Chapter Contents:
Article I - In General
§15-1. Statutory Authorization.
§15-2. Interpretation and Purpose.
§15-3. Definitions.
§15-4. Authority and Scope.
§ 15-5. Compatibility with Other Permit and Ordinance Requirements.
§ 15-6. Severability.
§ 15-7. Permit Procedures and Requirements.
§ 15-8. Review and Approval.
§ 15-9. Required Improvement and Security.
§ 15-10. Release or Reduction of Security.
§ 15-11. Inspection.
§ 15-12. Required Submittals and Review Procedure.
§ 15-13. Enforcement and Penalties.
§§ 15-14 to 15-19. Reserved.


Article II - Stormwater Conveyance and Detention
§ 15-20. Introduction.
§ 15-21. Purpose.
§ 15-22. Required Submittals.
§ 15-23. Design Requirements for Stormwater Improvements.
§ 15-24. Stormwater Design Standards.
§ 15-25. Waivers to Stormwater Improvement Requirements.
§ 15-26. Fee in Lieu of Stormwater Detention Facilities.
§§ 15-27 To 15-37. Reserved.


Article III - Erosion and Sediment Control
§ 15-38. Introduction.
§ 15-39. Purpose.
§ 15-40. General Performance Criteria for Erosion and Sediment Control.
§ 15-41. Design Requirements for Erosion and Sediment Control Plans.
§§ 15-42 to 15-52. Reserved.


Article IV - Illicit Storm Sewer Connections and Illegal Discharges
§ 15-53. Purpose.
§ 15-54. Ultimate Responsibility.
§ 15-55. Discharge Prohibitions.
§ 15-56. Industrial or Construction Activity Discharges.
§ 15-57. Access to Facilities for the Purpose of Monitoring Discharges.
§ 15-58. Requirement to Prevent Control, and Reduce Stormwater Pollutants by the Use of Best Management Practices.
§ 15-59. Watercourse Protection.
§ 15-60. Notification of Spills.
§ 15-61. Enforcement.
§§ 15-62 to 15-72. Reserved.


Article V - Stream Buffers
§ 15-73. Introduction.
§ 15-74. Purpose.
§ 15-75. Authority and Scope.
§ 15-76. General Plan Requirements for Stream Buffers.
§ 15-77. Design Standards for Stream Buffers.
§ 15-78. Buffer Management and Maintenance.
§ 15-79. Enforcement and Penalties.
§ 15-80. Waivers and Variances for Article V.
§§ 15-81 to 15-91. Reserved.


Article VI - Flood Control
§ 15-92. Introduction.
§ 15-93. Purpose.
§ 15-94. Scope.
§ 15-95. Basis for Establishing Areas of Special Flood Hazard.
§ 15-96. Interpretation.
§ 15-97. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability.
§ 15-98. Floodplain Development Permit.
§ 15-99. Designation of the Local Administrator.
§ 15-100. Duties and Responsibilities of the Public Works Director.
§ 15-101. Variance Procedures for Article VI.
§ 15-102. General Design Standards.
§ 15-103. Standards for Proposed Development.
§ 15-104. Standards for Structures.
§ 15-105. Floodways.
§ 15-106. Recreational Vehicles.
§ 15-107. Penalties.
§ 15-108. Amendments.
§§ 15-109 to 15-119. Reserved.


Article I - General
Sec. 15-1. Statutory Authorization.
The Legislature of the State of Missouri has in Chapter 89 delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, does ordain the following Ordinance. (Ord. 2517; Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-2. Interpretation and Purpose.
It is hereby determined that land development projects and associated increases in impervious cover alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition.

The purpose of this Chapter is to establish minimum stormwater improvement requirements and controls to safeguard persons, protect property, and prevent damage to the environment in watersheds within the City of Rolla. This Chapter seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives:

(a) By requiring the implementation of both an on-site stormwater conveyance system and stormwater detention;

(b) Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from any development in order to reduce flooding, siltation and stream bank erosion and maintain the integrity of stream channels;

(c) Minimize the total annual volume of surface water runoff which flows from any specific site during and following development to not exceed the pre-development hydrologic regime to the maximum extent practicable;

(d) Prohibit illicit connections and illegal discharges to the municipal storm sewer system;

(e) Provide for the protection of stream systems through the establishment of stream buffers;

(f) Minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas. (Ord. 2517; Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives shall have the meaning herein given. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.

(1) Accelerated Erosion: Erosion caused by development activities that exceeds the natural processes by which the surface of the land is worn away by the action of water, wind, or chemical action.

(2) Active Stream Channel: The area of the stream channel that is subject to frequent flows (at least the peak flow from a 2-year design storm) and that includes the portion of the channel below the floodplain.

(3) Actual Start of Construction: Different from “start of construction”; the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

(4) Actuarial or Risk Premium Rates: Those rates established by the Public Works Director pursuant to individual City studies and investigations which are undertaken to provide flood insurance in accordance with Section 1307 of the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 and the accepted actuarial principles. “Risk premium rates” include provisions for operating costs and allowances.

(5) Administrator means the Federal Insurance Administrator.

(6) Agency means the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).

(7) Appeal: A request for a review of the Public Works Director's interpretation of any provision of this Chapter or a request for a variance.

(8) Appurtenant Structure or Accessory Structure: A structure that is on the same parcel of property as the principle structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.

(9) Area of Special Flood Hazard or Special Flood Hazard Area: The land in the flood plain within the City of Rolla subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.

(10) Authorized Enforcement Agency: Employees or designees of the City of Rolla Public Works Department.

(11) Base Flood or 100-year Flood: The flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.

(12) Basement: Any area of the structure having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.

(13) Best Management Practices (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good house keeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.

(14) Buffer: A vegetated area, including trees, shrubs, and herbaceous vegetation, that exists or is established to protect a stream system, lake, or reservoir. Alteration of this natural area is strictly limited.

(15) Building: Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and occupying more than one hundred (100) square feet of area.

(16) Chief Executive Officer or Chief Elected Official means the official of the community who is charged with the authority to implement and administer laws, ordinances, and regulations for that community.

(17) Community means any State or area or political subdivision thereof, which has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for the areas within its jurisdiction.

(18) Channel: A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.

(19) City of Rolla: The incorporated municipality given the name of “Rolla” located in the State of Missouri in Phelps County and the governing body within the said district boundaries. Also referred to as “City”.

(20) Clean Water Act: The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.

(21) Clearing: Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.

(22) Construction Activity: Activities subject to NPDES Construction Permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one (1) acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.

(23) Dedication: The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for general public use.

(24) Design Storm: The duration and return frequency of the storm event used to determine the design capacity, or analyze the existing capacity, of a storm sewer system and/or detention facility. A design storm shall be approximately the same in duration as the time of concentration, but shall not be less than fifteen (15) minutes or greater than twenty four (24) hours.

(25) Detention Facility: A detention basin or alternative structure designed for the purpose of temporary storage of stream flow or surface runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates.

(26) Detention: The temporary storage of storm runoff in a stormwater facility with the goals of controlling peak discharge rates and providing gravity settling of pollutants.

(27) Developer: A person who undertakes land disturbance activities.

(28) Development: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials

(a) The improvement of property for any purpose involving building;
(b) Subdivision or the division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more parcels;
(c) The combination of any two or more lots, tracts, or parcels of property for any purpose;
(d) The preparation of land for any of the above purposes.
(29) Drainage Easement: A legal right granted by a landowner to a grantee allowing the use of private land for stormwater conveyance and/or detention systems.

(30) Drainage Way: Any channel that conveys surface runoff throughout the site.

(31) Elevated Building means for insurance purposes, a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundations, walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.

(32) Eligible Community or Participating Community means a community for which the Administrator has authorized the sale of flood insurance under the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).

(33) Erosion and Sediment Control Plan: A set of plans prepared by or under the direction of a registered professional engineer to be used to control sediment and indicating the specific measures and sequencing for erosion control on a development site during and after construction.

(34) Erosion Control: A measure that prevents erosion.

(35) Existing Construction: For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. “Existing construction” may be referred to as “existing structures.”

(36) Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the City of Rolla.

(37) Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).

(38) Fee in Lieu: A payment of money in place of meeting all or part of the stormwater performance standards required by this Chapter.

(39) Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM): An official map of the City on which the Public Works Director has delineated both special flood hazard areas and the designated regulatory floodway.

(40) Flood Elevation Determination: A determination by the Public Works Director of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the flood level that has a one (1) percent or greater chance of occurrence in any given year.

(41) Flood Elevation Study: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards.

(42) Flood Fringe: The area outside the floodway encroachment lines, but still subject to inundation by the regulatory flood.

(43) Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM): An official map of the City, issued by the Public Works Director, where the boundaries of the flood areas having special flood hazards have been designated as (unnumbered or numbered) A zones.

(44) Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): An official map of the City, on which the Public Works Director has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the City of Rolla.

(45) Flood Insurance Study (FIS): An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.

(46) Flood or Flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:

(1) The overflow of inland waters and/or
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
(47) Floodplain Management Regulations: Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain and grading ordinances) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof that provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.

(48) Floodplain Management: The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management regulations.

(49) Floodplain or Flood-prone Area: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see “flood”).

(50) Flood proofing: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, or structures and their contents.

(51) Floodway Encroachment Lines: The lines marking the limits of floodways on Federal, State and local floodplain maps.

(52) Floodway Fringe: That area of the flood plain, outside of the floodway that on the average is likely to be flooded once every one hundred (100) years (i.e., that has a one percent chance of flood occurrence in any one year).

(53) Floodway or Regulatory Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot.

(54) Freeboard: A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. “Freeboard” tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as bridge openings and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.

(55) Functionally Dependent Use: A use that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. This term includes only docking facilities and facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

(56) Grading: Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof.

(57) Hazardous Materials: Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.

(58) Highest Adjacent Grade: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

(59) Historic Structure: Any structure that is (a) listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b) certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (c) individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either (1) by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (2) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

(60) Hydrologic Soil Group (HSG): A Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from A soils, with high permeability and little runoff production, to D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff.

(61) Illegal Discharge: Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the storm drain system.

(62) Illicit Connections: An illicit connection is defined as either of the following:

(a) Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the City of Rolla;
(b) Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the City of Rolla.
(63) Impervious Cover: Those surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall (e.g., building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc).

(64) Industrial Activity: Activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b) (14).

(65) Industrial Stormwater Permit: A National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit issued to a commercial industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies.

(66) Infiltration: The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.

(67) Land Development Permit: A permit issued by the City of Rolla for the construction or alteration of ground improvements and structures for the control of erosion, runoff and grading.

(68) Land Disturbance Activity: Any activity which changes the volume or peak flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land surface. This may include the grading, digging, culling, scraping, or excavating of soil, placement of fill materials, paving, construction, substantial removal of vegetation, or any activity which bares soil or rock or involves the diversion or piping of any natural or man-made watercourse.

(69) Landowner: The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding proprietary rights in the land.

(70) Lowest Floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable flood proofing design requirements of this Chapter.

(71) Manufactured Home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”

(72) Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

(73) Map means the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for a community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).

(74) Market Value or Fair Market Value means an estimate of what is fair, economic, just and equitable value under normal local market conditions.

(75) Mean Sea Level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are referenced.

(76) NFIP: The National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).

(77) National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit: A permit issued by EPA (or by a State under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.

(78) New Construction: For the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, “new construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the City and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

(79) New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the City.

(80) Nonpoint Source Pollution: Pollution from any source other than from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include, but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.

(81) Non-Stormwater Discharge: Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.

(82) Off-Site Facility: A stormwater improvement facility located outside the subject property boundary described in the land development permit application.

(83) One Hundred Year Floodplain: The area of land adjacent to a stream that is subject to inundation during a storm event that has a recurrence interval of 100 years.

(84) On-Site Facility: A stormwater improvement facility located within the subject property boundary described in the land development permit application.

(85) Perimeter Control: A barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a site by filtering sediment-laden runoff or diverting it to a sediment trap or basin.

(86) Permanent Construction: Does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.

(87) Person: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent.

(88) Phasing: Clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the stabilization of each phase completed before the clearing of the next.

(89) Pollutant: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordnance, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatable's; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.

(90) Pollution: Any contamination or alteration of the physical, chemical, or biological properties of any waters that will render the waters harmful or detrimental to:

(a) Public health, safety, or welfare;
(b) Domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses;
(c) Livestock, wild animals, or birds;
(d) Fish or other aquatic life.
(91) Premises: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.

(92) Principally Above Ground: At least fifty-one (51) percent of the actual cash value of the structure, less land value, is above ground.

(93) Recreational Vehicle: A vehicle which is (a) built on a single chassis; (b) four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and (d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

(94) Redevelopment: Any construction, alteration or improvement exceeding one (1) acre in areas where existing land use is high density commercial, industrial, institutional or multifamily residential.

(95) Remedy A Violation means to bring a structure or other development into compliance with Federal, State, or local floodplain management regulations; or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance.

(96) Risk Premium Rates means those rates established by the Administrator pursuant to individual community studies and investigations which are undertaken to provide flood insurance in accordance with Section 1307 of the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 and the accepted actuarial principles. Risk premium rates include provisions for operating costs and allowances.

(97) Sediment Control: Measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving the site.

(98) Site: A parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is performed as a single unified operation.

(99) Special Hazard Area: An area having special flood hazards and shown on an FHBM, FIRM or FBFM as zones (unnumbered or numbered) A and AE.

(100) Stabilization: The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding.

(101) Start of Construction: The first land-disturbing activity associated with a development, including land preparation such as clearing, grading, and filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for basements, footings, piers, or foundations; erection of temporary forms and installation of accessory buildings such as garages. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the land development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date.

(102) State Coordinating Agency: That agency of the state government, or other office designated by the governor of the state or by state statute at the request of the Public Works Director to assist in the implementation of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) in that state.

(103) Stop Work Order: An order issued which requires that all construction activity on a site be stopped.

(104) Storm Drainage System: Publicly-owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.

(105) Stormwater Improvements: The use of structural or non-structural practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and/or peak flow discharge rates.

(106) Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan: A document which describes the Best Management Practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to Stormwater, Stormwater Conveyance Systems, and/or Receiving Waters to the Maximum Extent Practicable.

(107) Stormwater Retrofit: A stormwater improvement system designed for an existing development site that previously had either no stormwater improvement system in place or a system inadequate to meet the requirements of the site.

(108) Stormwater Runoff: Flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from precipitation.

(109) Stormwater Treatment Practices (STPs): Measures, either structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical means of preventing or reducing point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and water bodies.

(110) Stormwater: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.

(111) Stream Channel: Perennial and intermittent watercourses identified through site inspection and U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) maps. Perennial streams are those which are depicted on a USGS map with a solid blue line. Intermittent streams are those which are depicted on a USGS map with a dotted blue line.

(112) Stream System: A stream channel together with the 100-year floodplain.

(113) Structure or Building: For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. “Structure” for insurance purposes, means a walled and roofed building, other than a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground and affixed to a permanent site, as well as a manufactured home on a permanent foundation. For the latter purpose, the term includes a building while in the course of construction, alteration or repair, but does not include building materials or supplies intended for use in such construction, alteration or repair, unless such materials or supplies are within an enclosed building on the premises.

(114) Substantial Damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

(115) Substantial Improvement: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

(a) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(b) Any alteration of a “historic structure”, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a “historic structure”.
(116) Time of Concentration: The time it takes for water to travel from the hydraulically most distant point in the contributing drainage area to the point of interest.

(117) Variance: A grant of relief by the City from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. Flood insurance requirements remain in place for any varied use or structure and cannot be varied by the City.

(118) Violation: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the City’s floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this Chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

(119) Wastewater: Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility.

(120) Water Pollution Hazard: A land use or activity that causes a relatively high risk of potential water pollution.

(121) Water Surface Elevation: Means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplain.

(122) Watercourse: A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water; including, but not limited to lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, and bodies of water delineated by the City of Rolla.

(123) Waterway: A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to the public storm drain.

(124) Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.

(Ord. 2517; Ord. 2820; Ord. 3500, §2; Ord. 3846 §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-4. Authority and Scope.
Therefore, the City of Rolla establishes this set of stormwater quality and quantity policies which are:

(a) Applicable to all surface waters to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation;

(b) Applicable to any person, firm, corporation, business or unit of government proposing to develop land or disturb the ground through construction activities within the City of Rolla.

This Chapter shall be applicable to:

(a) All subdivision or site plan applications submitted after the date of passage of this Chapter by the City of Rolla;

(b) All water entering the storm sewer system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency.

In addition, all plans must be reviewed by the Public Works Director to ensure that post construction runoff levels are consistent with any local and regional watershed plans. (Ord. 2517; Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-5. Compatibility with Other Permit and Ordinance Requirements.
This Chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, stature, or other provision of law. Nor is this Chapter intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. The requirements of this Chapter should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this Chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. (Ord. 2517; Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-6. Severability.
If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this Chapter shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this Chapter. (Ord. 2517; Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-7. Permit Procedures and Requirements.
No land owner or land operator shall receive any of the building or land development permits required for land disturbance activities without first meeting the requirements of this Chapter prior to commencing the proposed activity. Application for a land development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Public Works Director. No person, firm, corporation, business or unit of government shall initiate any development or substantial improvement or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a separate permit for each development as defined in this Chapter.

A land development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard as established in Article VI, Section 15-95. Unless otherwise excepted by this Chapter, a permit application must be accompanied by the following in order that the permit application be considered:

(a) A stormwater improvement plan prepared to meet the requirements of Article II, Article IV, and Article V of this Chapter;

(b) An erosion and sediment control plan for any land disturbing activity that would require the uncovering of one (1) or more acres and is prepared to meet the requirements of Article III of this Chapter;

(c) Documents prepared to meet the requirements of Article VI of this Chapter showing provisions for flood hazard reduction;

(d) A non-refundable permit review fee shall be made payable to the City of Rolla according to the following fee schedule:

Zoning classification Permit fee

R-R $200 plus $20 per acre

R-1, R-2 $200 plus $50 per acre

R-3, C-0, C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1, M2 $600 plus $150 per acre

(e) The permit review fee schedule outlined in Section 15-7(d) is based on a customary review process between the consultants employed by the developer/owner and the City. The City may impose additional charges for the review of excessive submittals due to inadequate project design.

No permit is required for the following activities:

(a) Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property, or natural resources;

(b) Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a permitted main or accessory use. (Ord. 2517; Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-8. Review and Approval.
(a) Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the City of Rolla during regular business hours. Permit applications shall include the following: two copies of the stormwater improvement plan, two copies of the erosion and sediment control plan, two copies of the flood hazard reduction documents and the required review fee as established in Section 15-7.

(b) Within thirty (30) business days of the receipt of a completed permit application, including all documents as required by this Chapter, the City of Rolla shall, in writing, approve or disapprove the application and accompanying construction plans.

(c) If the permit application, stormwater improvement plan, or erosion and sediment control plan are disapproved, the developer may revise the plans or agreement. If additional information is submitted, the City of Rolla shall have thirty (30) business days from the date the additional information is received to inform the developer that the plan is either approved or disapproved.

(d) If the permit application and the final stormwater improvement plan and erosion and sediment control plan are approved by the City of Rolla, all appropriate City of Rolla land development permits shall be issued. (Ord. 2517; Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-9. Required Improvement and Security.
(a) Prior to the approval of the final stormwater improvement plan and erosion and sediment control plan, the owner shall have installed or shall have furnished adequate performance security for the ultimate construction and installation of said improvement plans and shall have executed such an agreement contract to the City of Rolla for satisfactory completion of such improvements.

(b) In lieu of immediate construction improvements, the developer may file a surety or cash bond with the Public Works Director on a form approved by the Public Works Director and with a surety company having a rating of A + 4A or higher. On a development of substantial size, the Public Works Director may accept a bond for less than the entire development if the owner provides written assurances that all building construction will be confined to lots for which all adjacent improvements are covered in the performance bond. (Ord. 2517; Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-10. Release or Reduction of Security.
(a) The release or reduction of required surety bonds, escrow agreement or other security agreement shall be in accordance with the following:

(b) The Public Works Director may release or reduce said bond or agreements when he has determined that all or a portion of the required improvements have been satisfactorily completed and are free of any liens or other encumbrances. (Ord. 2517; Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-11. Inspection.
(a) Regular inspections of the stormwater improvement system construction and the erosion and sediment control measures shall be conducted by the staff of the City of Rolla Public Works Department.

(b) If any violations are found, the property owner shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions necessary. No work shall proceed until all violations are corrected and all work previously completed has received approval by the City of Rolla.

(c) A final field inspection by the City of Rolla Public Works Department is required upon completion of the stormwater improvement system and erosion and sediment control plan, before the release of any performance securities can occur. The final field inspection shall be performed in the presence of the owner. The owner shall be notified in writing of any deficiencies discovered during the final inspection and shall be given a reasonable period of time to correct deficiencies. Upon correction of the noted deficiencies, the owner shall notify the City of Rolla and schedule a follow-up inspection. (Ord. 2517; Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-12. Required Submittals and Review Procedure.
(a) Required Submittals: To facilitate the review of plans before approval for construction, a registered professional engineer shall submit with the plans all the necessary data, maps, computations, and check lists set forth in this Chapter in support of the designs and plans. All stormwater improvement plans and erosion and sediment control plans shall be in accordance with the Stormwater Design Standards set forth by the City of Rolla.

(b) Review Procedure: On completion of the review, one set of plans or a letter with comments with requested revisions and notations will be returned to the registered professional engineer for revision of the original drawings. Additional sets of plans for further review or final approval will then be requested. (Ord. 2517; Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-13. Enforcement and Penalties.
(a) Violations: Any activity that is commenced or is conducted contrary to this Chapter, may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law.

(b) Notice of Violation: When the City of Rolla determines that an activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner of the property.

(c) Stop Work Orders: Persons receiving a notice of violation will be required to halt all construction activities. This “stop work order” will be in effect until the City of Rolla confirms that the development activity is in compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a notice of violation in a timely manner can result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this Chapter.

(d) Restoration of Lands: Any violator may be required to restore land to its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the City of Rolla may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the property until paid. (Ord. 2517; Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 15-14 to 15-19. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article II - Stormwater Conveyance and Detention
Sec. 15-20. Introduction.
Stormwater runoff and soil erosion can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff from development sites. Proper management of stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property, reduce the effects of development on land, control stream channel erosion, reduce local flooding, and maintain after development, as nearly as possible, the pre-development runoff characteristics. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-21. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to establish general requirements and principles for the design and construction of stormwater conveyance systems and detention facilities within the City of Rolla. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-22. Required Submittals.
The Stormwater Improvement plan shall include the following information:

(a) A schedule estimating the dates of completion of construction for all storm drainage facilities shown on the plan;

(b) All necessary construction specifications;

(c) Basic design criteria including the rainfall intensity, percentage of imperviousness, runoff coefficients for each tributary basin area in the drainage area, time of concentration, peak flow rates, and any other pertinent design criteria;

(d) A vicinity map;

(e) Key map of the entire project to scale, showing easements, sewer lines and facilities, both existing and to be constructed;

(f) A drainage area map showing the ridge line of the area tributary to each inlet, sewer, and channel section in the system. The map shall be labeled with or accompanied by a table summarizing the basic design criteria. The established elevations, gradients and contours of the finished graded surfaces and streets shall be shown in support of the inlet drainage area lines and indicated directions of flow;

(g) A subdivision plat, dimensioned and substantially complete and ready for filing;

(h) Recorder of Deeds book and page from Phelps County Recorder of Deeds for existing recorded easements when not part of a recorded subdivision plat;

(i) All existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way;

(j) Plans and profiles of each storm drain, showing location, size, design flow, flow line elevations, gradients and materials; boring information and rock elevations along the proposed storm drain anywhere applicable; location, depths and sizes of adjacent or crossing sewer lines and utilities; and special construction requirements such as concrete cradle or encasement, backfill, size and class of pipe. Typical cross sections of swales, ditches or open channels;

(k) Summary design information for each component of the stormwater conveyance system;

(l) All elevations shall be based upon U.S.G.S. datum with location of the benchmark indicated on the plans. Acceptable benchmarks include those established by the City of Rolla, Missouri Department of Transportation and the United States Geological Survey;

(m) Details of special structures, channel improvements, culverts, transitions, headwalls, aprons and junction chambers, all adequately detailed and dimensioned, including placement of steel in reinforced concrete structures;

(n) The location of all utilities anticipated to be encountered during construction shall be shown. Plans must be submitted to all utility companies for verification of conflicts. Storm and sanitary sewers shall be located to comply with State laws and regulations governing such placement;

(o) Location of all existing and proposed building facilities with minimum floor elevations where buildings could be impacted by flood waters and location of all existing and proposed utilities on the site;

(p) For design of detention facilities, calculations of peak runoff flows shall be provided for all areas which are tributary to the location of the proposed detention facility for both existing conditions and conditions after the planned development of the site. The information shall include the acreage of all areas contributing flow to the site and the present land use by acreage of those areas. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-23. Design Requirements for Stormwater Improvements.
(a) The improvements shall be in accordance with the City of Rolla Stormwater Design Standards and must be prepared by a registered professional engineer.

(b) These stormwater improvements should seek to utilize pervious areas for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate stormwater runoff from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas to the maximum extent practicable.

(c) These stormwater improvements shall maintain the peak rate of surface water runoff which flows from any specific site during and following development so that the peak rate of runoff will not exceed the pre-project conditions to the maximum extent practicable. The effects of the proposed development on stormwater discharge to downstream locations shall be determined and:

(1) Sufficient information showing locations of downstream watercourses, channels, sewers, culverts, structures and adjoining land shall be provided;

(2) The need for special storm drainage easement requirements to locations downstream of the proposed development and/or downstream drainage modifications or protection shall be evaluated.

(d) The design capacity for all stormwater conveyance systems and detention facilities shall meet the following specifications:

(1) All stormwater conveyance systems shall be designed to accommodate peak flows from a 10-year design storm;

(2) All detention facilities shall be designed to detain the runoff from design storms up to and including a 25-year design storm. Such facilities shall be designed to release the retained surface water runoff such that the peak rate of runoff from the tract after development shall not exceed the peak rate of runoff from the tract prior to development for the 2, 10 and 25-year design storms.

(3) Detention facilities should be designed to accommodate peak retention with at least one foot of freeboard.

(e) Stormwater improvements shall be designed and implemented such that all buildings and other structures shall be protected from the flood waters of a 100-year design storm. The stormwater improvement system shall also pass the flood waters of a 100-year design storm without damage to either the conveyance system or the detention facilities.

(f) Open channels shall be located in drainage easements sufficiently wide to accommodate a 100-year design storm and shall be designed and constructed in such a manner as to provide easy maintenance of the channel and side slopes and to prevent erosion from the design flows. If the channel extends between buildings, consideration must be given to adequate protective measures, such as paving the channel invert and side slopes, bank protection or fencing. Open channels in residential areas shall generally be located along the rear or side lot lines.

(g) Where storm drainage along the side lot lines of residential property is to be in conduit, the conduit shall extend to a point at least forty (40) feet to the rear of the front building line or ten (10) feet beyond the rear line of the structure, whichever is greater. A surface swale shall be provided over this area to contain at least a 100-year storm. At the point of intersection with the open channel, some type of facility shall be provided to disperse flow and minimize erosion.

(h) Where culverts are placed under roadways, they shall extend to at least the limits of the right-of-way or the toe of the roadway embankment, whichever is greater, and proper measures shall be taken to prevent erosion. Embankments shall be protected to prevent erosion against a 100-year storm.

(i) Curb inlets shall be installed at or near intersections where they are deemed necessary for the safety of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. No curb inlet shall be located within a crosswalk.

(j) All detention facilities shall include an emergency or overflow spillway which will pass excess flows greater than those of the 25-year design storm. The emergency spillway shall be designed to safely pass the flow resulting from the 100-year design storm without damage to the basin.

Modifications to the stormwater improvement plan shall be processed and approved or disapproved in the same manner as Section 15-8 of this Chapter. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-24. Stormwater Design Standards.
All storm water conveyance, detention and erosion control design shall meet the provisions of this Chapter and shall comply with the latest revision of The Stormwater Design Standards for the City of Rolla filed in the office of the Director of Public Works. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-25. Waivers to Stormwater Improvement Requirements.
(a) Waivers for Providing Stormwater Conveyance Systems: Every developer shall provide for an on-site stormwater conveyance system. No waivers shall be approved.

(b) Substitutions for Providing Stormwater Detention: Every developer shall provide for stormwater detention unless the City determines that detention may not be appropriate for the development. In cases where the City determines that detention is not appropriate, the developer shall be required to substitute cash payments in lieu of stormwater detention requirements. The minimum requirements for stormwater detention may be waived in whole upon request of the developer, provided that all of the following conditions apply:

(1) It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely to impair attainment of the objectives of this Chapter.

(2) The proposed development is equal to or less than twenty (20) acres for residential development and/or 1 acre for commercial or industrial development; OR the proposed development is projected to have an increase in peak stormwater runoff for a 10-year design storm of no more than five (5) cfs; OR if the City of Rolla determines that an off-site regional detention facility would be favorable to the proposed on-site detention facility. At the request of the City, submittal of hydraulic analyses comparing on-site and off-site options for detention may be required.

(3) Provisions are made to manage stormwater detention by an existing or future proposed off-site regional facility. The off-site regional facility is required to be adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site local detention and has a legally obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the detention facility. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-26. Fee in Lieu of Stormwater Detention Facilities.
(a) Where the City of Rolla determines not to require stormwater detention, the developer shall be required to pay a fee in lieu of on-site stormwater detention. This fee shall be based on an increase in the peak stormwater flow from the development in question.

(b) For subdivisions zoned R-R, R-1 and R-2, this fee shall be in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500) for each acre of property in the development, with a minimum payment of five hundred dollars ($500). For subdivisions zoned R-3, C-0, C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1 and M-2, this fee shall be in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1500) for each acre of property in the development, with a minimum payment of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1500).

(c) All of the monetary contributions shall be credited to the City of Rolla’s Stormwater Improvement Fund, and shall be made by the developer prior to the issuance of any land development permit for the development. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 15-27 to 15-37. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article III - Erosion and Sediment Control
Sec. 15-38. Introduction.
During the construction process, soil is highly vulnerable to erosion by wind and water. Eroded soil endangers water resources by reducing water quality and causing the siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and other desirable species. Eroded soil also necessitates repair of sewers and ditches and the dredging of lakes. In addition, clearing and grading during construction cause the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and aquatic habitat. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-39. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to establish general requirements and principles for the design and construction of erosion and sediment control measures within the City of Rolla. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-40. General Performance Criteria for Erosion and Sediment Control.
The Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall include the following:

(a) A natural resources map identifying soils, forest cover, and resources protected under other chapters of this Code. This map should be at a scale no smaller than 1"=100'.

(b) A sequence of construction of the development site, including stripping and clearing; rough grading; construction of utilities, infrastructure, and buildings; and final grading and landscaping. Sequencing shall identify the expected date on which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, areas of clearing, installation of temporary erosion and sediment control measures, and establishment of permanent vegetation.

(c) All erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet the objectives of this Chapter throughout all phases of construction and after completion of development of the site. Depending upon the complexity of the project, the drafting of intermediate plans may be required at the close of each season.

(d) Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer application, and kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent vegetative control measures.

(e) During construction, provisions shall be made for the storage of all construction-site waste material so that contaminants from such waste material will not be leached into the storm drainage system. All construction-site waste shall be properly disposed of within fifteen (15) days after the close of construction.

(f) Provisions for maintenance of control facilities, including easements.

Modifications to the erosion and sediment control plan shall be processed and approved or disapproved in the same manner as Section 15-8 of this Chapter. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-41. Design Requirements for Erosion and Sediment Control Plans.
(a) Grading, erosion control practices, sediment control practices and waterway crossings shall meet the design criteria set forth in the most recent version of “Protecting Water Quality”‡ and shall be adequate to prevent transportation of sediment from the site to the satisfaction of the City. Cut and fill slopes shall be no greater than 3:1, except as approved by the City to meet other community or environmental objectives.

(b) Clearing and grading of natural resources shall not be permitted, except when in compliance with all other chapters of this Code and current requirements of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Clearing techniques that retain natural vegetation and drainage patterns, as described in “Protecting Water Quality” shall be used until all sediment control devices have been installed and have been stabilized.

(1) Phasing shall be recommended on all sites disturbing greater than thirty (30) acres, with the size of each phase to be established at plan review and as approved by the City of Rolla.

(2) Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment control devices, shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been installed and have been established.

(c) Erosion control requirements shall include the following:

(1) Soil stabilization shall be completed within thirty (30) days of clearing or inactivity in construction;

(2) If seeding or another vegetative erosion control method is used, it shall become established within thirty days or the City of Rolla may require the site to be reseeded or a non vegetative option employed;

(3) Special techniques that meet the design criteria outlined in “Protecting Water Quality” on steep slopes or in drainage ways shall be used to ensure stabilization;

(4) Soil stockpiles must be stabilized or covered at the end of each workday to prevent erosion;

(5) The entire site must be stabilized, using a heavy mulch layer or another method that does not require germination to control erosion, at the close of the construction season;

(6) Techniques shall be employed to prevent the blowing of dust or sediment from the site;

(7) Techniques that divert upland runoff past disturbed slopes shall be employed.

(d) Sediment control suggestions shall include:

(1) Settling basins, sediment traps, and perimeter controls;

(2) Settling basins that are designed in a manner that allows adaptation to provide long-term stormwater management;

(3) Protection for adjacent properties by the use of a vegetated buffer strip in combination with perimeter controls.

(e) Waterway and watercourse protection requirements shall include:

(1) A temporary stream crossing installed and approved by the City of Rolla if a wet watercourse will be crossed regularly during construction;

(2) Stabilization of the watercourse channel before, during, and after any in-channel work;

(3) All on-site stormwater conveyance channels designed according to the criteria outlined in the City of Rolla Stormwater Design Standards;

(4) Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion located at the outlets of all pipes and paved channels.

(f) Construction site access requirements shall include:

(1) Temporary access road provided at all sites;

(2) Other measures required by the City of Rolla in order to ensure that construction vehicles do not track sediment onto public streets or be washed into storm drains. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 15-42 to 15-52. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article IV - Illicit Storm Sewer Connections and Illegal Discharges
Sec. 15-53. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to establish general requirements and principles for the maintenance and control of illicit storm sewer connections and illegal discharges into the municipal storm sewer system within the City of Rolla. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-54. Ultimate Responsibility.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this Chapter are minimum standards; therefore this Chapter does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-55. Discharge Prohibitions.
(a) Prohibition of Illegal Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater.

The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows:

(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this Chapter: water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wet-land flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less than one PPM chlorine), fire fighting activities, and any other water source not containing Pollutants.
(2) Discharges specified in writing by the City of Rolla as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
(3) Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a written notification to the City of Rolla prior to the time of the test.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.
(b) Prohibition of Illicit Connections

(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this Chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the municipal storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. (Ord. 3500, §2)
(c) Roof Drain Connections

(1) For all new construction, roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers, or roadside ditches. Roof drains shall discharge to infiltration areas or vegetative Best Management Practices (BMP's) where practicable.
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-56. Industrial or Construction Activity Discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the City of Rolla prior to allowing of discharges to the municipal storm sewer system. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-57. Access to Facilities for the Purpose of Monitoring Discharges.
This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity.

(a) The City of Rolla shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this Chapter as often as necessary to determine compliance with this Chapter.

(b) The City of Rolla shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge.

(c) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the City of Rolla and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.

(d) Unreasonable delays in allowing the City of Rolla access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this Chapter. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the City of Rolla reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this Chapter.

(e) If the City of Rolla has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this Chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this Chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the City of Rolla may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-58. Requirement to Prevent, Control, and Reduce Stormwater Pollutants by the Use of Best Management Practices.
The City of Rolla Public Works Department has adopted requirements identifying Best Management Practices for any activity, operation, or facility that may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S. (See Section 15-40 and Section 15-41 of this Chapter on Erosion and Sediment Control requirements). The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illegal discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliant with the provisions of this Section. These BMPs shall be part of a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit for a regulated industry. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-59. Watercourse Protection.
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person’s lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, yard waste, excessive vegetation and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse, as specified in Article V. Stream Buffers. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-60. Notification of Spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or water of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify the City of Rolla Police Department of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the City of Rolla in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the City of Rolla within three (3) business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-61. Enforcement.
Whenever the City of Rolla finds that a person, firm, corporation or business has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this Chapter, the City of Rolla may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice shall require without limitation:

(a) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;

(b) The elimination of illicit connections or illegal discharges;

(c) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;

(d) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;

(e) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and

(f) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.

If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. If the person notified as provided in this Section shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the same within the time specified in such notice, the designated officer shall report the same to the council of the city. Thereupon the council shall call and have a full and adequate hearing upon the matter, giving the affected parties at least fourteen days written notice of the hearing. At such hearing any party may be represented by counsel, and all parties shall have an opportunity to be heard.

After the hearing, if the evidence supports a finding based upon competent and substantial evidence that a violation exists, that the person having an interest was notified, and that the person failed to remediate or restore, the city council shall issue an order based upon its findings of fact to its designated officer to proceed to remediate or restore by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof and fine shall be charged to the violator. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 15-62 to 15-72. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article V - Stream Buffers
Sec. 15-73. Introduction.
Buffers adjacent to stream systems provide numerous environmental protection and resource management benefits that can include the following:

(a) Restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the water resources by removing pollutants delivered from urban stormwater, reducing erosion and sediment entering the stream, and stabilizing stream banks;

(b) Providing infiltration of stormwater runoff;

(c) Maintaining base flow of streams;

(d) Contributing the organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem;

(e) Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic organisms;

(f) Providing riparian wildlife habitat;

(g) Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity.

It is the desire of the City of Rolla to protect and maintain the native vegetation in riparian and wetland areas by implementing specifications for the establishment, protection, and maintenance of vegetation along all stream systems within our jurisdictional authority. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-74. Purpose.
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish minimal acceptable requirements for the design and maintenance of buffers to protect streams and floodplains within the City of Rolla; to protect the water quality of watercourses, reservoirs, lakes, and other significant water resources within the City of Rolla; to protect riparian and aquatic ecosystems within the City of Rolla; and to provide for the environmentally sound use of land resources within the City of Rolla. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-75. Authority and Scope.
(a) This Chapter shall apply to all proposed development except for that development which meets waiver or variance criteria as outlined in Section 15-80 of this Chapter.

(b) This Chapter shall apply to all timber harvesting activities, except those timber harvesting operations which are implementing a forest management plan that has been deemed to be in compliance with the regulations of the buffer Ordinance and has received approval from the Missouri Department of Conservation.

(c) This Chapter shall apply to surface mining operations except that the design standards shall not apply to active surface mining operations that are operating in compliance with an approved state or federal surface mining permit issued by the appropriate governing agency.

(d) Article V of this Chapter shall not apply to agricultural operations that are covered by an approved Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) conservation plan that includes the application of BMPs.

(e) Article V of this Chapter may not apply to areas that are zoned R-R in accordance with the City of Rolla Zoning Ordinance.

(f) Article V of this Chapter shall not apply to streams with a tributary drainage area of less than one hundred (100) acres.

(g) This Chapter shall apply to all parcels of land, structures, and activities that are causing or contributing to:

(1) Pollution, including nonpoint source pollution, of the waters within the City of Rolla;

(2) Erosion or sedimentation of stream channels;

(3) Degradation of aquatic or riparian habitat. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-76. General Plan Requirements for Stream Buffers.
(a) In accordance with Section 15-77 of this Chapter, a stream buffer plan approved by the City of Rolla is required for all development, forest harvesting operations, surface mining operations, and agricultural operations.

(b) The stream buffer plan shall set forth an informative, conceptual, and schematic representation of the proposed activity by means of maps, graphs, charts, or other written or drawn documents so as to enable the City an opportunity to make a reasonably informed decision regarding the proposed activity.

(c) The stream buffer plan shall contain the following information:

(1) A location or vicinity map;

(2) Maps which include at a scale no smaller than 1” = 100’:

(A) Field-delineated and surveyed streams, springs, seeps, bodies of water, and wetlands (include a minimum of 200 feet into adjacent properties);

(B) Field delineated stream buffers;

(C) Limits of the 100-year flood inundation area;

(3) Hydric soils mapped in accordance with the NRCS soil survey of the site area. Steep slopes greater than fifteen (15) percent for areas adjacent to and within two hundred (200) feet of streams or other water bodies;

(4) A description of existing vegetation within the stream buffer.

(d) The stream buffer plan shall be submitted in conjunction with the required stormwater improvement plan and erosion and sediment control plan for any development, and the stream buffer should be clearly delineated on the final grading plan. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-77. Design Standards for Stream Buffers.
(a) A stream buffer for a stream system shall consist of a vegetated strip of land extending along both sides of a stream and its adjacent wetlands, floodplains, or slopes. The buffer width shall be adjusted to include contiguous sensitive areas, such as steep slopes or erodible soils, where development or disturbance may adversely affect water quality, streams, wetlands, or other water bodies.

(b) The stream buffer shall begin at the edge of the stream bank of the active channel.

(c) The required width for all stream buffers (i.e., the base width) shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet, centered on the centerline of the channel (See Figure 15-1), with the requirement to expand the buffer depending on:

(1) Percent Slope: The stream buffer width shall be modified if steep slopes are within close proximity to the stream and drain into the stream system. In those cases, the stream buffer width may be adjusted;

Percent Slope Width of Buffer

15% - 17% add 10 feet

18% - 20% add 20 feet

21% - 23% add 30 feet

24% - 25% add 40 feet

(2) 100-year Floodplain: Stream buffers shall be extended to encompass the entire 100-year floodplain and a zone with a minimum width of ten (10) feet beyond each edge of the floodplain;

(3) Wetlands or Critical Areas: When wetland or critical areas extend beyond the edge of the required buffer width, the buffer shall be adjusted so that the buffer consists of the extent of the wetland plus a twenty (20) foot zone extending beyond the wetland edge.

Figure 15 - 1. Stream Buffer Schematic. Minimum buffer measured from centerline of stream.

(d) The following land uses and/or activities are designated as potential water pollution hazards and must be set back from any active stream channel or water body by at least the distance indicated below:

Storage of hazardous substances 100 feet

Aboveground or underground petroleum storage facilities 100 feet

Drainfields from onsite sewage disposal and treatment systems (i.e., septic systems) 50 feet

Raised septic systems 100 feet

Solid waste landfills 300 feet

Junkyards 100 feet

Confined animal feedlot operations 250 feet

Subsurface discharges from a wastewater treatment plant 100 feet

Land application of biosolids 100 feet

(Ord. 3500, §2)

15-78. Buffer Management and Maintenance.

(a) Management of Resources: The stream buffer, including wetlands and floodplains, shall be managed to enhance and maximize the unique value of these resources. Management includes specific limitations on alteration of the natural conditions of these resources. The following practices and activities are restricted within the active channel and buffer area, except with approval by the City of Rolla.

(1) Clearing of existing vegetation;

(2) Soil disturbance by grading, stripping, or other practices;

(3) Filling or dumping of any material including, but not limited to yard waste and demolition debris;

(4) Drainage by ditching, underdrains, or other systems;

(5) Use, storage, or application of pesticides;

(6) Storage or operation of motorized vehicles, except for maintenance and emergency use approved by the City of Rolla.

(b) Permitted Structures, Practices and Activities: The following structures, practices, and activities are permitted in the stream buffer, with specific design or maintenance features, subject to the review of the City of Rolla.

(1) Roads, bridges, paths, and utilities:

(A) An analysis needs to be conducted to ensure that no economically feasible alternative is available;

(B) The right-of-way should be the minimum width needed to allow for maintenance access and installation;

(C) The angle of the crossing shall be perpendicular to the stream or buffer to minimize clearing requirements;

(D) The minimum number of road crossings should be used within each subdivision, and no more than one fairway crossing is allowed for every three hundred (300) feet of buffer.

(2) Stormwater improvements:

(A) An analysis needs to be conducted to ensure that no economically feasible alternative is available and that the project either is necessary for flood control or significantly improves the water quality or habitat in the stream;

(B) When constructing stormwater improvement facilities, the area cleared will be limited to the area required for construction and adequate maintenance access;

(C) Material dredged or otherwise removed from a stream buffer during necessary construction shall be stored outside the buffer.

(3) Stream restoration projects, facilities, and activities approved by the City of Rolla are permitted within the stream buffer;

(4) Water quality monitoring and stream gauging are permitted within the stream buffer, as approved by the City of Rolla;

(5) Individual trees within the stream buffer that are in danger of falling, causing damage to dwellings or other structures, or causing blockage of the stream may be removed;

(6) Other timber cutting techniques approved by the City of Rolla may be undertaken within the stream buffer under the advice and guidance of the City if necessary to preserve the forest from extensive pest infestation, disease infestation, or threat from fire.

(c) Plan Preparation: All plans prepared for recording and all right-of-way plans shall clearly:

(1) Show the extent of any stream buffer on the subject property;

(2) Label the stream buffer;

(3) Provide a note to reference any stream buffer stating: “There shall be no clearing, grading, construction or disturbance of vegetation except as permitted by the City.”

(d) Ownership: All stream buffer areas shall be dedicated to the City of Rolla. The City shall be responsible to reimburse the owner/developer of the property for the value of the undeveloped land that is dedicated to the City.

(e) Maintenance: All stream buffer areas shall be maintained by the City of Rolla. The City of Rolla shall inspect the buffer as required and immediately following severe storms for evidence of sediment deposition, erosion, or concentrated flow in channels and corrective actions taken to ensure the integrity and functions of the stream buffer.

Stream buffer areas may be allowed to grow into their vegetative target state naturally, but methods to enhance the successional process such as active reforestation may be used when deemed necessary by the City of Rolla to ensure the preservation and propagation of the buffer area. Stream buffer areas may also be enhanced through reforestation or other growth techniques as a form of mitigation for achieving buffer preservation requirements.

(f) Dedication of Lands: An offer of dedication of a stream buffer area to the City of Rolla shall not be interpreted to mean that this automatically conveys to the general public the right of access to this area. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-79. Enforcement and Penalties.
The City of Rolla is authorized and empowered to enforce the requirements of this Chapter in accordance with the procedures of this Section and the procedures set for in Article I, Section 15-13.

(a) Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter may be liable for any cost or expenses incurred as a result thereof by the City of Rolla.

(b) Penalties that may be assessed for those deemed to be in violation may include the following:

(1) A civil penalty in the form of a fine not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. Every day that such violation(s) continue will be considered a separate offense.

(2) A criminal penalty in the form of a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation, imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or both. Every day that such violation(s) continue will be considered a separate offense.

(3) Anyone who knowingly makes any false statements in any application, record, or plan required by this Chapter shall upon conviction be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation, imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days, or both.

(c) In addition to any other sanctions listed in this Chapter, a person who fails to comply with the provisions of Article V of this Chapter shall be liable to the City in a civil action for damages in an amount equal to the cost of restoring the buffer. Damages that are recovered in accordance with this action shall be used for the restoration of the damaged buffer system. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-80. Waivers and Variances for Article V.
(a) This Chapter shall apply to all proposed development except for activities that were completed prior to the effective date of this Chapter and had received the following:

(1) A valid, unexpired permit in accordance with development regulations;

(2) A current, executed public works agreement;

(3) A valid, unexpired land development permit;

(4) A waiver in accordance with current development regulations.

(b) The City of Rolla may grant a variance for the following:

(1) Those projects or activities for which it can be demonstrated that strict compliance with this Chapter would result in a practical difficulty or extreme financial hardship;

(2) Those projects or activities serving a public need where no feasible alternative is available;

(3) The repair and maintenance of public improvements where avoidance and minimization of adverse impacts to wetlands and associated aquatic ecosystems have been addressed.

(c) A waiver for development may also be granted, if deemed appropriate by the City. The buffer width may be reduced at some points as long as the average width of the buffer meets the minimum requirement. This averaging of the buffer may be used to allow for the presence of an existing structure or to recover a lost lot, as long as the active stream channel is not disturbed by the reduction and no new structures are built within the 100-year floodplain.

(d) The developer shall submit a written request for a variance to the City. The application shall include specific reasons justifying the variance and any other information necessary to evaluate the proposed variance request. The City may require an alternative analysis that clearly demonstrates that no other feasible alternatives exist and that minimal impact will occur as a result of the project or development.

(e) In granting a request for a variance, the City may require site design, landscape planting, fencing, signs, and water quality best management practices to reduce adverse impacts on water quality, streams, wetlands, and floodplains. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 15-81 to 15-91. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article VI - Flood Control
Sec. 15-92. Introduction.
The flood hazard areas of the City of Rolla are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.

These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in flood plains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazards to other lands which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages.

The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) that is the basis of this Chapter uses a standard engineering method of analyzing flood hazards which consist of a series of interrelated steps.

Selection of a base flood that is based upon engineering calculations which permit a consideration of such flood factors as its expected frequency of occurrence, the area inundated, and the depth of inundation.  The base flood selected for this Chapter is representative of large floods which are characteristic of what can be expected to occur on the particular streams subject to this Chapter.  It is in the general order of a flood which could be expected to have a one percent chance of occurrence in any one year as delineated on the FIS, and illustrative materials for Phelps County, Missouri, dated February 20, 2008 as amended, and any future revisions thereto.

Calculation of water surface profiles are based on a standard hydraulic engineering analysis of the capacity of the stream channel and overbank areas to convey the regulatory flood.

Computation of a floodway required to convey this flood without increasing flood heights more than one (1) foot at any point. (Ord. 3500, §2; Ord. 3846, §1; Ord. 4093 §1)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-93. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this Chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize those losses described in Section 15-92 to establish or maintain the City’s eligibility for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) as defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 59.22(a)(3); and to meet the requirements of 44 CFR 60.3(d) by applying the provisions of this Chapter to:

(a) To protect human life and health;

(b) To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

(c) To minimize the need for rescue efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

(d) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, or property in times of flooding or cause undue increases in flood heights or velocities;

(e) Require uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities that serve such uses, be provided with flood protection at the time of initial construction; and

(f) Protect individuals from buying lands that are unsuited for the intended development purposes due to the flood hazard.

(g) To minimize prolonged business interruptions;

(h) To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in flood plains;

(i) To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas;

(j) To insure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-94. Scope.
This Chapter shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Rolla, identified as numbered and unnumbered A zones and AE zones, on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) Phelps County FIRM Panels:

20161C0233D; February 20, 2008 part Little Beaver Creek and Little Beaver Creek Tributary
20161C0232D; December 16, 2009 part Burgher Branch
20161C0232D; February 2, 2011 part Spring Creek Tributary
20161C0233D; February 2, 2011 part Spring Creek Tributary
20161C0234D; December 16, 2009 Burgher Branch Tributary and part Burgher Branch
20161C0234D; February 2, 2011 part Spring Creek Tributary
20161C0234D; April 19, 2011 part Dutro Carter Creek
20161C0242D; February 20, 2009 part Deible Branch
20161C0242D; April 19, 2011 part Dutro Carter Creek
20161C0253D; December 16, 2009 East Fork Burgher Branch and part Burgher Branch
29161C0261D; February 20, 2008 part Dutro Carter Creek and part Little Dry Fork
29161C0261D; March 10, 2008 part Love Branch
29161C0261D; December 16, 2009 part Burgher Branch
29161C0261D; February 20, 2009 part Deible Branch
29161C0261D; April 19, 2011 part Dutro Carter Creek, part Deible Branch and part Love Branch
29161C0275D; February 20, 2008 part Bourbeuse River
29161C0252D; February 20, 2008 part Bourbeuse River Tributary
as amended, and any future revisions thereto.  In all areas covered by this Chapter, no development shall be permitted except through the issuance of a floodplain development permit, granted by the City of Rolla under such safeguards and restrictions as the City of Rolla may reasonably impose for the promotion and maintenance of the general welfare, health of the inhabitants of the community, and as specifically noted in Section 15-102 through Section 15-106. (Ord. 3500, §2; Ord. 3846, §1, Ord. 4093 §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-95. Basis for Establishing Areas of Special Flood Hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by FEMA through a scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study for the City of Rolla, Missouri, Phelps County”, dated February 20, 2008 with accompanying FIRMs (and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps) with any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Chapter. (Ord. 3500, §2; Ord. 3846, §1, Ord. 4093 §3)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-96. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this Chapter, all provisions shall be:

(a) Considered as minimum requirements;

(b) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

(c) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-97. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this Chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This Chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Rolla or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made there under. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-98. Floodplain Development Permit.
To obtain a floodplain development permit, the developer shall first file with the City an application in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every floodplain development permit application shall:

(a) Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot, block and tract, house and street address, or similar description that will readily identify and specifically locate the proposed structure or work;

(b) Identify and describe the work to be covered by the floodplain development permit;

(c) Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended;

(d) Indicate the assessed value of the structure and the fair market value of the improvement;

(e) Specify whether development is located in designated flood fringe or floodway;

(f) Identify the existing base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed development;

(g) Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the Public Works Director;

(h) Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed construction; and

(i) Be signed by the permittee or his authorized agent who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-99. Designation of the Local Administrator.
The Public Works Director is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this Chapter, by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-100. Duties and Responsibilities of the Public Works Director.
Duties of the Public Works Director shall include, but not be limited to:

(a) Review of all applications for floodplain development permits to assure that sites are reasonably safe from flooding and that the floodplain development permit requirements of this Chapter have been satisfied;

(b) Review of all floodplain development permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal, State, or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required by Federal, State or local law;

(c) Review all subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding;

(d) Issue floodplain development permits for all approved applications;

(e) Verify and maintain a record and maintain record of the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor, including basement of all new or substantially improved structures;

(f) Verify and maintain a record, and maintain record of the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved non-residential structures have been flood proofed;

(g) When flood proofing techniques are utilized for a particular non-residential structure the Public Works Director shall require certification from a registered professional engineer or architect;

(h) property owners/developers to notify the Missouri State Emergency Management Agency (MoSEMA) prior to any alteration or relocation of a floodway, and require the property owner/developer to furnish evidence of such notification to FEMA;

(i) Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished; (Ord. 3500, §2; Ord. 3846, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-101. Variance Procedures for Article VI.
(a) The board of adjustment as established by the City of Rolla shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this Chapter.

(b) Where an application for a floodplain development permit or request for a variance from the floodplain management regulations is denied by the floodplain administrator, the developer may apply for such floodplain development permit or variance directly to the Appeal Board, as defined in Section 15-101.

(c) The board of adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this Chapter.

(d) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of adjustment or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the Circuit Court as provided in the Missouri statutes.

(e) In passing upon such applications, the board of adjustment shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this Chapter, and the following criteria:

(1) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

(2) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;

(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the City;

(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

(6) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;

(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and flood plain management program for that area;

(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

(10) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters, if applicable, expected at the site; and,

(11) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, streets and bridges.

(f) Conditions for Approving Floodplain Management Variances:

(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot on one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items (b - f) below, have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

(2) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places, the State Inventory of Historic Places or the local inventory of historic places upon determination provided the proposed activity will not preclude the structure’s continued historic designation.

(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.

(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:

(A) A showing of good and sufficient cause;

(B) A determination that failure to grant the variance could result in exceptional hardship to the developer; and

(C) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

(6) The City shall notify the developer in writing, over the signature of the Public Works Director, that:

(A) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage; and

(B) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance actions as required by this Chapter.

(g) Conditions of Approving Variances for Accessory Structures: Any variance granted for an accessory structure shall be decided individually based on a case by case analysis of the building's­ding's unique circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions as well as those criteria and conditions set forth in Section 15-102 (e) and (f) of this Chapter.

In order to minimize flood damages during the 100-year flood and the threat to public health and safety, the following conditions shall be included for any variance issued for accessory structures that are constructed at-grade and wet-floodproofed:

(1) Use of the accessory structures must be solely for parking and limited storage purposes in zone A only as identified on the City's FIRM.

(2) For any new or substantially damaged accessory structures, the exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e., foundation, wall framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring, etc.) below the base flood elevation, must be built with flood-resistant materials in accordance with Section 15-102 (d) (2) of this Chapter.

(3) The accessory structures must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure in accordance with Section 15-102(d1) of this Chapter. All of the building's structural components must be capable of resisting specific flood-related forces including hydrostatic, buoyancy, and hydrodynamic and debris impact forces.

(4) Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be located above the base flood elevation or flood proofed so that they are contained within a watertight, flood proofed enclosure that is capable of resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance with Section 15-102 (d) (4) of this Chapter.

(5) The accessory structures must meet all NFIP opening requirements. The NFIP requires that enclosure or foundation walls, subject to the 100-year flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters in accordance with Section 15-104 (c) (2) of this Chapter.

(6) The accessory structures must comply with the floodplain management floodway encroachment provisions of Section 15-105 (b) of this Chapter. No variances may be issued for accessory structures within any designated floodway, if any increase in flood levels would result during the 100-year flood.

(7) Equipment, machinery, or other contents must be protected from any flood damage.

(8) No disaster relief assistance under any program administered by any Federal agency shall be paid for any repair or restoration costs of the accessory structures.

(9) The City of Rolla shall notify the developer in writing over the signature of the Public Works Director that:

(A) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage; and

(B) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance actions as required by this Chapter.

(10) Wet-flood proofing construction techniques must be reviewed and approved by the City and registered professional engineer or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain development permit for construction. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-102. General Design Standards.
(a) No permit for floodplain development shall be granted for new construction, substantial-improvements, and other improvements, including the placement of manufactured homes, within any numbered or unnumbered A zones and AE zones, unless the conditions of this section are satisfied.

(b) All areas identified as unnumbered A zones on the FIRM are subject to inundation of the 100-year flood; however, the base flood elevation is not provided. Development within unnumbered A zones is subject to all provisions of this Chapter. If FIS data is not available, the City shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation or floodway data currently available from Federal, State, or other sources.

(c) Until a floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development, including fill, shall be permitted within any numbered A zone or AE zone on the FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the City.

(d) All new construction, subdivision proposals, substantial-improvements, prefabricated structures, placement of manufactured homes, and other developments shall require:

(1) Design or adequate anchorage to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;

(2) Construction with materials resistant to flood damage;

(3) Utilization of methods and practices that minimize flood damages;

(4) All electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning equipment, and other service facilities be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding;

(5) New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters, and on-site waste disposal systems be located so as to avoid impairment or contamination; and

(6) Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, located within special flood hazard areas are required to assure that:

(A) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;

(B) All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;

(C) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and

(D) All proposals for development, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, of five (5) acres or fifty (50) lots, whichever is lesser, include within such proposals base flood elevation data.

(e) Storage, material, and equipment:

(1) The storage or processing of materials within the special flood hazard area that are in time of flooding buoyant, flammable, explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited.

(2) Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to major damage by floods, if firmly anchored to prevent flotation, or if readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning.

(f) Accessory structures, used solely for parking and limited storage purposes, not attached to any other structure on the site, of limited investment value, and not larger than four hundred (400) square feet, may be constructed at-grade and wet-floodproofed provided there is no human habitation or occupancy of the structure; the structure is of single-wall design; a variance has been granted from the standard floodplain management requirements of this Chapter; and a floodplain development permit has been issued. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-103. Standards for Proposed Development.
All proposals for residential subdivision development (including manufactured home parks) and other proposed new developments (including nonresidential) shall:

(a) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;

(b) Have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;

(c) Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards;

(d) Provide base flood elevation data for the proposed developments which are greater than either fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-104. Standards for Structures.
In all areas identified as numbered and unnumbered A zones and AE zones, where base flood elevation data have been provided, as set forth in Section 15-102 (b), the following provisions are required:

(a) Residential Construction: New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structures, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one (1) foot above base flood elevation.

(b) New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other non-residential structures, including manufactured homes shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be flood proofed so that below such a level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Public Works Director, as set forth in Section 15-100 (g).

(c) New Construction and Substantial Improvements: That fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

(1) A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided; and
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(d) Manufactured Homes:

(1) All manufactured homes to be placed within all unnumbered and numbered A zones and AE zones, on the City’s FIRM shall be required to be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.

(2) Require manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within unnumbered or numbered A zones and AE zones, on the City’s FIRM on sites:

(A) Outside of manufactured home park or subdivision;
(B) In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
(C) In an expansion to and existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or
(D) In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood,
Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation and be securely attached to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.

(3) Require that manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within all unnumbered and numbered A zones and AE zones, on the City’s FIRM, that are not subject to the provisions of Section 15-104 (d) of this Chapter, be elevated so that either:

(A) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at one (1) foot above the base flood level; or
(B) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be securely attached to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. (Ord. 3500, §2; Ord. 3846, §1)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-105. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 15-94 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provision shall apply:

(a) The City shall select and adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle that the area chosen for the regulatory floodway must be designed to carry the waters of the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one (1) foot at any point.

(b) The City shall prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the City during occurrence of the base flood discharge.

(c) If Section 15-105 (b) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this Article.

(d) In unnumbered A zones, the City shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base elevation or flood data currently available through Federal, State or other sources or Section 15-102 (b) of this Chapter in meeting the standards of this Section. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-106. Recreational Vehicles.
Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within all unnumbered and numbered A zones and AE zones on the City’s FIRM either:

(a) Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, or

(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use‡; or

(c) Meet the permitting, elevation, and the anchoring requirements for manufactured homes of this Chapter. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-107. Penalties.
(a) No development located within the special flood hazard areas of this City shall be extended, converted, or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this Chapter and other applicable regulations.

(b) Violation of the provisions of this Chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with granting of variances) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this Chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.

(c) Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Rolla or other appropriate authority from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy such violation. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 15-108. Amendments.
(a) The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this Chapter may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed or appealed to reflect any and all changes in the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973, provided, however, that no such action may be taken until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Rolla.

(b) At least fifteen (15) days shall elapse between the date of this publication and the public hearing. A copy of such amendments will be provided to the Region VII office of FEMA. The regulations of this Chapter are in compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations. (Ord. 3500, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 15-109 to 15-119. Reserved.
REFERENCES

Caraco, D. 1997. Delaware Program Improves Construction Site Inspection. Watershed Protection Techniques, 2(3): 440-442.

Claytor, R. 1997. Practical Tips for Construction Site Phasing. Watershed Protection Techniques 2(3): 413-417.

Green County Resource Management Department Planning and Zoning Section. 1999. Green County Stormwater Design Standards. Springfield, Missouri.

Heraty, M. 1993. Riparian buffer programs: a guide to developing and implementing a riparian buffer program as an urban best management practice. Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments, USEPA Office of Wetlands, Oceans and Watersheds. Washington, DC.

Maryland Department of the Environment, Water Management Administration. July 2000. Maryland Model Stormwater Management Ordinance. http://www.mde.state.md.us Baltimore, Maryland.

Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District, The. 1997. Rules and Regulations and Engineering Design Requirements for Sanitary Sewage and Stormwater Drainage Facilities. St. Louis, Missouri.

Model Ordinances to Protect Local Resources. 1999. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Water. http://www.epa.gov/owow/nps/ordinance.

Center for Watershed Protection, Inc. The Stormwater Manager’s Resource Center Website. 2000. http://www.stormwatercenter.net/Manual_Builder/stormwater_ordinance.htm. Ellicott City, Maryland.

Protecting Water Quality: A field guide to erosion, sediment and stormwater best management practices for development sites in Missouri and Kansas. Missouri Department of Natural Resources, Division of Geology and Land Survey, Dam and Reservoir Safety Program; St. Charles County Soil and Water Conservation District. Subgrant G94-NPS-03, USEPA.

Public Works Department Columbia, Missouri. 1991. Storm Drainage Design Manual. Columbia, Missouri.

Schueler, T. 1995. Site planning for urban stream protection. Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments, USEPA Office of Wetlands, Oceans and Watersheds. Washington, DC.

Welsch, D. 1991. Riparian forest buffers. FS Pub. No. NA-PR-07-91. US Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. Forest Resources Management, Radnor, PA.

Chapter 16 - Franchises
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter


Chapter Contents:
Article I - In General
§§ 16-1 to 16-10. Reserved.


Article II - Cable Television Service
Division 1 - Cable Television
§ 16-11. Intent.
§ 16-12. Short title.
§ 16-13. Definitions.
§ 16-14. Grant of franchise.
§ 16-15. Regulation of franchise.
§ 16-16. General financial and insurance provisions.
§ 16-17. Design and construction provisions.
§ 16-18. Service provisions.
§ 16-19. Operation and maintenance.
§ 16-20. Rights reserved to grantee.
§ 16-21. Miscellaneous provisions.
§ 16-22. Acceptance.
§ 16-23. Severability.
§ 16-24. Effective date.
§§ 16-25 to 16-30. Reserved.


Division 2 - Cable Television Contract: February 18, 2007
§§ 16-31 to 16-32. Reserved.
§ 16-33. Definitions.
§ 16-34. Granting of Authority; Limits and Reservations.
§ 16-35. Regulation and Oversight.
§ 16-36. Provision of Cable Service.
§ 16-37. System Facilities, Equipment and Services.
§ 16-38. Channels and Facilities for Public, Educational and Governmental Use.
§ 16-39. Franchise Fee.
§ 16-40. Franchise Violations.
§ 16-41. Insurance, Indemnification.
§ 16-42. Miscellaneous Provisions.
§§ 16-43 to 16-45. Reserved.


Division 3 - Cable Television Contract: April 7, 2003
§ 16-46. Intent.
§ 16-47. Short title.
§ 16-48. Definitions.
§ 16-49. Granting of Franchise.
§ 16-50. Improvements requirements.
§ 16-51. System design and performance standards.
§ 16-52. Service and programming requirements.
§ 16-53. Miscellaneous provisions.
§ 16-54. Severability.
§ 16-55. Forfeiture, revocation or abridgement.
§ 16-56. Effective date.
§§ 16-57 to 16-72. Reserved.


Article III - United Telephone Service Agreement
§ 16-73. Granting a franchise to the United Telephone Company.
§ 16-74. Term of license.
§ 16-75. Service to subscribers.
§ 16-76. Construction and use of facilities.
§ 16-77. Poles or underground conduits of the Grantee shall not interfere with other franchise businesses.
§ 16-78. Location of poles and underground conduit to be approved by City Administration.
§ 16-79. General financial and insurance provisions.
§ 16-80. Movement of large structures or equipment under wires or cables.
§ 16-81. Cutting and trimming trees and shrubs.
§ 16-82. Joint use agreements of poles.
§ 16-83. Audit of Grantee required annually.
§ 16-84. License payments.
§ 16-85. City to review and establish license payments.
§ 16-86. Acceptance of license to be filed with city clerk.
§ 16-87. Forfeiture of franchise.
§ 16-88. Terms may apply to succeeding Grantees.
§ 16-89. Severability.
§ 16-90. Effective date.
§§ 16-91 to 16-95. Reserved.


Article IV - Natural Gas Service Franchise
§ 16-96. Grant.
§ 16-97. Construction, construction schedule.
§ 16-98. PSC rates and regulations.
§ 16-99. Gas supply.
§ 16-100. Extensions of system.
§ 16-101. Mortgage of assets allowed.
§ 16-102. Indemnity.
§ 16-103. Franchise fee.
§ 16-104. Revocation.
§ 16-105. Insurance.
§ 16-106. Right-of-way usage.
§ 16-107. Maintenance and complaints.
§ 16-108. Captions.
§ 16-109. Non enforcement by City.
§ 16-110. Theft of service and tampering.
§ 16-111. Severability.
§ 16-112. Election and acceptance required.
§ 16-113. Disclaimers.
§ 16-114. Repeal by reference.
§ 16-115. City permits required.
§ 16-116. PSC rules, regulations, and tariffs.
§ 16-117. Sale of facilities to City.
§§ 16-118 to 16-122. Reserved.


Article V - Fidelity Communications Franchise
§ 16-123. Granting a Franchise to Fidelity Communications Services I, Inc.
§ 16-124. Term of license.
§ 16-125. General terms and conditions.
§ 16-126. License fee payments.
§ 16-127. Indemnity.
§ 16-128. Service agreement to form an Educational and Governmental Cable Channel.
§§ 16-129 to 16-132. Reserved.


Article I - In General
(Article I - Reserved)
Secs. 16-1 to 16-10. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article II - Cable Television Service
Division 1 - Cable Television
Sec. 16-11. Intent.
The City of Rolla finds that the development of cable television and communications systems has the potential of having great benefit and impact upon its citizens. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the City further finds that the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the City or such persons as the City shall designate. (Ord. 2831, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-12. Short title.
This ordinance shall be known and be cited as "Rolla CATV Ordinance". (Ord. 2831, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-13. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.

"Basic Cable Service" means the total of all the following:
The retransmission to all Subscribers of all broadcast television channel signals authorized by the FCC and provided for herein;
The cablecasting to all subscribers of the Local Origination Channel, and the Public, Educational and Government Access signals;
Basic Cable Service may be offered to Subscribers in one or more levels or combinations of programs. However, for purposes of rate regulation, if a more specific definition of a basic level to which rate regulation shall be applicable is defined in a franchise award ordinance, the definition in the franchise award ordinance shall apply.
"Broadcast Signal" means a television or radio signal that is transmitted over the air to a wide geographic audience and is received by a Cable Communications System off-the-air or by microwave link.
"Cable Communications System" or "System", also referred to as "Cable Television System", "CATV System", or "Broadband Communications Network", means a system of antennas, cables, amplifiers, towers, microwave links, cablecasting studios, and any other conductors, converters, equipment or facilities, designed and constructed for the primary purpose of distributing signals to and from subscribers, and the secondary purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying, storing, processing, or distributing audio, video digital, or other forms of signals.
"Cablecast signal" means a non broadcast signal that originates within the facilities of the Cable Communication System.
"Cable-mile" means a linear mile of cable as measured on the street or easement from pole to pole or pedestal to pedestal.
"City" means the City of Rolla, Missouri, as presently constituted and any area subsequently annexed, and shall have the same meaning as "Grantor" defined herein.
"Commencement of Construction (or reference thereto)" means that time and date when construction of the Cable Communications System is considered to have commenced, which shall be when the preliminary engineering (strand mapping) or network design is initiated, and after all necessary permits and authorizations have been obtained.
"Commencement of Operation (or reference thereto)" means that time and date when operation of the Cable Communications System is considered to have commenced, which shall be when sufficient distribution facilities have been installed so as to permit the offering of full service to at least twenty percent (20%) of the dwelling units located within the service area.
"Converter" means any device which converts signal carriers from one form to another.
"Council" means the City Council of the City of Rolla.
"Educational Channel", or "Educational Access Channel" means any channel where educational institutions are the primary designated programmers.
"FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed or elected successor.
"Franchise" means the nonexclusive rights granted pursuant to this ordinance to construct and operate a Cable Communications System along the public ways within all of the City. Any such authorizations, in whatever form granted, shall not mean or include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the City as required by other ordinances and laws of this City.
"Franchise Agreement" means a franchise award ordinance, accepted on the part of the Grantee, containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted, including referenced specifications, franchise applications, and other related material. The franchise agreement may modify terms of this ordinance by appropriate ordinance amendment.
"Franchise Payment" means all charges imposed for a franchise.
"Grantee" means any "person" receiving a franchise pursuant to this ordinance and under the granting franchise award ordinance, and its lawful successor, trustee, receiver, transferee or assignee.
"Grantor" means the City of Rolla, Missouri, as represented by its governing body acting within the scope of its jurisdiction.
"Gross Annual Revenues" means the annual gross revenues received by the Grantee from all sources of subscription services of the Cable Communications System, except that any sales, excise or other taxes collected for direct pass-through to local, state or federal government shall not be included. If a more specific definition is set out in a franchise award ordinance, that definition shall prevail.
"Initial Service Area" means the area of the City which will receive service initially, as set forth in the franchise award ordinance.
"Installation" means the connection of the System from feeder cable to Subscribers' terminals.
"Monitoring" means observing a communication signal, or the absence of a signal, where the observer is neither the subscriber nor the programmer, whether the signal is observed by visual or other means, for any purpose whatsoever. (Provided that Monitoring shall not include sweeps of the System, or any part thereof, for the purpose of verifying System integrity, controlling return path transmissions or billing for any services.)
"Non-Broadcast Signal" means a signal that is transmitted by a Cable Communications System and that is not involved in an over-the-air broadcast transmission path.
"Obscenity/Pornography" means that which, when considered as a whole, by the average adult persons, applying contemporary community standards:
predominantly appeals to the prurient interest in sex; and
depicts, describes or portrays in a patently offensive manner human sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, masturbation, urinary and excretory functions, sadism, masochism, sadomasochistic abuse, lewd exhibition of the genitals or any touching of the genitals, public areas or buttocks of the human male or female, or the breasts of the females, whether alone or between members of the same or opposite sex, or between humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual simulation or gratification; and
when taken as a whole lacks serious social, literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
"Ordinance". Any lawfully enacted order of a political subdivision of the State of Missouri.
"Pay-Cable" or "Pay Television" means the delivery to subscribers over the Cable Communications System of television signals for a fee or charge over and above the charge for Basic Cable Service, on a per program, per channel or other subscription basis.
"Penetration" means the result expressed in percentage obtained by dividing the total number of potential subscribers in the franchise area into the number of subscribers receiving service from Grantee.
"Person" means an individual, partnership, association, organization, corporation, other entity or any lawful successor, transferee or assignee thereof.
"Pornography". See (23) "Obscenity/Pornography".
"Programmer" means any person or entity who or which produces or otherwise provides program material or information from transmission by video, audio, digital, or other signals, either live or from recorded tapes or other stored media, to Subscribers, by means of the Cable Communications System.
"Reasonable Notice" shall be a written notice addressed to the Grantee at its principal office or such other office as the Grantee has designated to the City as the address to which notice should be transmitted, which notice shall be either sent by certified mail (or its equivalent) and postmarked not less than four (4) days prior to that day, or delivered personally by Grantor by and through its representative. In computing said four (4) days, Saturday, Sundays and holidays recognized by the City shall be excluded. Actual notice shall be an absolute defense by the Grantor in any future action of any kind by Grantee where proper notice shall be an issue.
"Reasonable Order" shall be a written order not excessive or extreme as to costs or time to comply.
"Resident" means any person residing in the City or as otherwise defined by applicable law.
"Sale" shall include any sale, exchange, or offer for sale.
"School" means any primary and secondary school.
"Section" means any section, subsection, or provision of this ordinance.
"Service Area" means the entire geographic area within the franchise territory.
"State" means the State of Missouri.
"Street" shall include each of the following which have been dedicated to the public or hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by others and located within the City limits: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way and similar public ways and extensions and additions thereto, together with such other public property and areas that the City shall permit to be included within the definition of street from time to time.
"Subscriber" means any person, firm, corporation, or other entity who or which elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, service provided by Grantee by means of or in connection with the Cable Communications System.
"Substantially Completed" means that sufficient distribution facilities have been installed by the Grantee so as to permit the offering of full network service to at least ninety percent (90%) of the potential Subscribers in the service area.
"Year" means the remaining portion of 1992. Thereafter, "year" means a full calendar year. (Ord. 2831, §3)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 16-14. Grant of franchise.
Grant. In the event that Grantor shall grant to a Grantee a nonexclusive, revocable franchise to construct, operate, maintain and reconstruct a Cable Communications System within the City, said franchise shall constitute a right to provide the services of a Cable Communications System as described by the provisions of this Ordinance and by the franchise award ordinance. The franchise award Ordinance shall include all provisions of a Grantee's proposal as finally negotiated and accepted by the Grantor and Grantee.

Said franchise award ordinance shall be granted under the terms and conditions herein, consistent with applicable Missouri Statutes and FCC rules and regulations which are incorporated by this reference as if fully set forth herein. In the event of a conflict between the terms and conditions of said franchise and the terms and conditions on which the Grantor can grant a franchise, Missouri Statutes or FCC rules and regulations, whichever takes precedence, shall, without exception, control.

Nothing in any franchise award ordinance shall be deemed to waive the requirements of the various codes and ordinances of the City regarding permits and fees to be paid or manner of construction.
Franchise Territory. If the Grantor shall issue a franchise award ordinance, it shall be for a Service Area which includes the entire City.

Use of Public Streets and Ways. For the purpose of operating and maintaining a Cable Communications System in the City, the Grantee may erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across, and along the public streets, and ways within the City such wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, pedestals, attachments, and other property and equipment as are necessary and appurtenant to the operation of the Cable Communications System. Prior to construction or alteration, however, the Grantee shall file plans with the appropriate City agencies, officers or departments as designated by the City, and utility companies, and receive written approval before proceeding. Such approval shall be given or denied by the appropriate City Agency or office within 30 days of submission of such request. If such permission is not denied 30 days, Grantee may proceed as proposed.

Duration. The term of said franchise and all rights, privileges, obligations and restrictions pertaining thereto shall be fifteen (15) years from the effective date of the franchise unless abridged or terminated as hereinafter provided. The effective date of the franchise award ordinance shall be upon final passage by the Council unless a Grantee fails to file within twenty (20) days after the date of notification of final passage in the appropriate office of the City a written acceptance of the franchise, in which event it shall be null and void.

Franchise Nonexclusive. Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The Grantor specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a Cable Communications System as it deems appropriate. However, the terms of any franchise award ordinance or license granted to any other grantee shall not be more favorable than any other franchise award ordinance. The effect of this provision is to require nondiscrimination by the City in relation to multiple grantees.

Transfer of Ownership or Control.

Transfer of Franchise. Any franchise cannot in any event be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or otherwise disposed of in any manner, including but not limited to, forced or voluntary sales, merger, consolidation, receivership, or other means, without the prior written consent of the City. Such consent as required by the City shall, however, not be unreasonably withheld.

The successor Grantee, upon any transfer as heretofore described, shall within sixty (60) days thereafter file with the City an instrument duly executed and certified reciting the fact of such sale assignment or lease, accepting the terms of this franchise ordinance and the franchise award ordinance subject to the terms of the transaction and agreeing to perform all the terms thereof.

Every such transfer as heretofore described, whether voluntary or involuntary, shall be deemed void and of no effect unless Grantee shall within sixty (60) days after the same shall have been made, file such certified copy as is required.

Ownership or Control. The Grantee shall promptly notify the City of any actual transfer of, or acquisition by any other party of control of Grantee. A rebuttable presumption that a change, transfer or acquisition of control has occurred shall arise upon the acquisition or accumulation by a person or group of persons of twenty-five percent (25%) or more of the voting shares of Grantee.

For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer, or acquisition of control, the City may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective controlling party, and Grantee shall assist the City in any such inquiry.

Mortgage of Assets, When Allowed. Grantee shall not make, execute, or enter into any deed, deed of trust, mortgage, conditional sales contract, or any loan, lease, pledge, sale, gift or similar agreement concerning any of the facilities and property, real or personal, involved in the operation of the Cable System under a franchise award ordinance granted by the City except:

disposition or replacement of worn out or obsolete equipment, property or facilities in the normal course of operating a Cable System, including the renewal or extension of equipment or property leases and contracts; or

acquisition, transfer, sale or other disposition of leases, licenses, easements, and other interests in real property in the normal course of operating a Cable System and not involving the relinquishment of any right or power affecting Grantee's ability to provide services in whole or in part; or

with prior approval of the City based on a finding that the proposed transaction will not affect Grantee's ability and responsibility to provide services in accordance with its franchise award ordinance and will not interfere with the City's interest. Such approval by the City shall not unreasonably be withheld; or

Grantee may pledge or mortgage its assets to a financial institution in return for sums necessary to construct, buy, or operate the Cable System, provided that such pledge or mortgage and related agreements that are public records are filed with the City and limit such financial institution as follows: any foreclosure or exercise of lien over the franchise or facilities may only be by assumption of control over the entire system or a self-sufficient, separately operable head-end and its dependent distribution system in a multiple head-end system. However, if the financial institution providing financing shall notify the Grantor of its intent not to operate the System, then the City shall have the option to operate said System. Prior to assumption of control, the financial institution shall notify the City that it or a designee acceptable to the City will take control of and operate the System, and shall submit a plan for such operation insuring continued service and compliance with this Ordinance and all franchise award ordinance obligations during the term the financial institution exercises such control. The institution shall not exercise control for longer than one (1) year unless extended by the City for cause and shall be entitled to petition the City for transfer of the remaining term of the franchise award ordinance or award of a new franchise to another Grantee. The City shall approve such transfer upon finding that the legal, financial, character, technical and other qualities of the proposed Grantee are satisfactory and that the transfer will promote the public interest. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. Before the City shall operate the System, it shall likewise provide a written plan of operation to the financial institution. Upon provision of a written plan, the City shall have the authority to take possession of said System and operate said System. The City shall, in the course of its operations, collect all billings and pay all appropriate bills and expenses, and deduct and place the rest of said funds from operating revenues of the System in an escrow account in said financial institution. The escrow funds shall be released when the City is relieved of the responsibility of operating the System.

Consent Not Waiver. The consent or approval of the City to any transfer by Grantee shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the City in and to the streets, and any transfer shall, by its terms, be expressly subordinate to the terms and conditions of said franchise award ordinance.

Nonapproval of Transfer, When. In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the City will not approve any transfer or assignment of the franchise prior to substantial completion of construction of any proposed system.

Franchise Renewal. This franchise may be renewed upon application of Grantee pursuant to the following procedures and/or in accordance with the then applicable law.

Renewal Notice. At least twenty-four (24) months prior to the expiration of the franchise award ordinance, Grantee shall inform the City in writing of its intent to seek renewal of the franchise award ordinance, or as shall be required by Federal or State law, if said laws existing at that time pre-empt, as a matter of law, this Ordinance.

Satisfactory Performance Required. After giving public notice, the City shall proceed to determine whether Grantee has satisfactorily performed its obligations under the franchise award ordinance. To determine satisfactory performance, the City shall consider technical developments and performance of the System requirements set in the franchise award ordinance, as well as other standards established in applicable law - Federal or State. Programming, or other services offered, and costs of services offered shall also be considered if then allowed by applicable law. Also, the City shall consider Grantee's annual reports made to the City and the FCC; industry performance on a national basis shall also be considered. Provision shall be made for public comment.

Time Frame. A one (1) year period shall be provided to determine the Grantee's eligibility for renewal.

Renewal Periods. If the City finds Grantee's performance satisfactory, a new franchise award ordinance shall be granted pursuant to this Ordinance, as amended, for an additional period of five (5) years. Subsequent renewals for five (5) year periods may be applied for by Grantee in accordance with the procedure outlined in this Section. At the discretion of the City, longer periods of renewal may be granted.

Police Powers. In accepting this franchise, Grantee acknowledges that its rights hereunder are subject to the police power of the City to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public; and it agrees to comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the City pursuant to such power.

Any conflict between the provisions of this Ordinance and any other present or future lawful exercise of the City's police powers shall be resolved in favor of the latter, except that any such exercise that is not of general application in the jurisdiction or applies exclusively to Grantee or Cable Communications Systems which contains provisions inconsistent with this Ordinance shall prevail only if the City finds an emergency exists constituting a danger to health, safety, property or general welfare or such exercise is mandated by law.

Franchise Fee.

Annual Franchise Payment. A grantee of a franchise award ordinance hereunder shall pay to the City a fee in an amount equal to five percent (5%) of gross receipts for all subscription services if allowed by law.

Such payment shall be in addition to any other fee or tax and commence as of the effective date of the operation of the System by Grantee. In the event of a dispute as to the amount due the City, if the City so requests, Grantee shall furnish a statement of said payment certified by the financial officer of Grantee, which statement shall include total amounts of annual gross subscription service revenues and the above charges, deductions and computations for the period covered by the payment. If Grantee fails to produce a certified statement acceptable to the City, then, the City shall choose a CPA of at least regional reputation for honesty and competency. All reasonable charges for the said CPA services shall be borne by Grantee if the annual Gross Revenues reported to Grantor are, in the aggregate, 2% or less than reported.
Acceptance by City. No acceptance of any payment by the City shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the City may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this Ordinance or for the performance of any other obligation of Grantee.

Failure to Make Required Payment. In the event that any franchise payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the dates specified herein, Grantee shall pay as additional compensation:

an interest charge, computed from such due date on such amount due, at the annual rate equal to the commercial prime interest rate in effect from time to time at Boatmen's National Bank, Rolla, Missouri during such period until such amounts are fully paid, and

a sum of money equal to expenses, costs, and attorneys' fees, if any, incurred by the City by reason of delinquent payment.

Conflict of Laws. Should it be adjudged or determined by a Court of competent jurisdiction that the amount of said franchise fee as set out herein is in conflict with State or Federal law or FCC Rules and Regulations, then the amount set by this Ordinance shall be the maximum allowable under controlling law.

Forfeiture, Revocation or Abridgement.

Grounds for Revocation or Abridgment. The City reserves the right to revoke any franchise award ordinance granted hereunder and rescind all rights and privileges associated with the franchise award ordinance in the following circumstances, each of which shall represent a default and breach under this Ordinance and the franchise award ordinance grant:

If Grantee should default in the performance of any of its material obligations under this Ordinance or under such documents, contracts and other terms and provisions entered into by and between the City and Grantee.

If Grantee should fail to provide or maintain in full force and effect, the liability insurance coverage as required herein.

If any court of competent jurisdiction, the FCC or any state regulatory body by rules, decisions or other action determines that any material provision of the franchise documents, including this ordinance, is invalid.

If Grantee should frequently violate any orders or rulings of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over Grantee relative to this franchise unless such orders or rulings are being contested by Grantee in a court of competent jurisdiction.

If Grantee ceases to provide services for any reason within the control of Grantee over the Cable Communications System. Grantee shall not be declared at fault or be subject to any sanction under any provision of this ordinance in any case in which performance of any such provision is prevented for reasons beyond Grantee's control. A fault shall not be deemed to be beyond Grantee's control if committed by a corporation or other business entity in which Grantee holds a controlling interest or which holds, alone or with others a controlling interest in Grantee, whether held directly or indirectly.

If Grantee evades or attempts to evade any of the provisions of this Ordinance or the franchise award ordinance or practices any fraud or deceit upon the City.

If Grantee's construction schedule is delayed for more than six (6) months later than the schedule contained in the franchise award ordinance.

If Grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged a bankrupt.

Procedure prior to Revocation. Revocation procedures shall be executed as required by the then applicable laws. If neither Federal nor State law preempts, the following shall apply:

The City may make written demand that Grantee comply with any such requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule or regulation or correct any action deemed cause for revocation. If the failure, refusal or neglect of Grantee continues for a period of thirty (30) days following such written demand, the City may place its request for termination of the franchise award ordinance upon a regular Council meeting agenda. The City shall cause to be served upon such Grantee, at least ten (10) business days prior to the date of such Council meeting, a written notice of this intent to request such termination, and the time and place of the meeting, notice of which shall be published by the City Clerk at least once ten (10) business days before such meeting in a newspaper of general circulation within the City.

The Council shall hear any persons interested therein, and shall determine, in its discretion, whether or not any alleged failure, refusal or neglect by Grantee was with just cause.

If such failure, refusal or neglect by Grantee was with just cause, the Council shall direct Grantee to comply within such time and manner and upon such terms and conditions as are reasonable.

If the Council shall determine such failure, refusal or neglect by Grantee was without just cause, then the Council may, by resolution, declare that the franchise award ordinance of such Grantee shall be terminated unless there be compliance by Grantee within such period as the Council may fix.

Abridgement of Franchise Term. After following the procedure set out herein prior to revocation, and the Council finding a violation of this franchise or the franchise award ordinance, but not of sufficient gravity to require revocation of this franchise or the franchise award ordinance, or if the Council determines that revocation would not serve the public health, safety and welfare, the Council may abridge the term of the franchise award ordinance. For each offense or violation the Council may abridge the term of the franchise award ordinance for a period of time not more than 60 days. Each day's violation of this section may be considered a separate offense. Such abridgments of the franchise award ordinance term shall not in any event accumulate in the aggregate more than four (4) years total.

Disposition of Facilities. In the event a franchise award ordinance expires, is revoked or otherwise terminated, the City may order the removal of the system facilities from the City within a reasonable period of time as determined by the City.

Restoration of Property. In removing its plant, structures and equipment, Grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways and places in as good condition as prevailed prior to Grantee's removal of its equipment and appliances without affecting the electrical or telephone system cable, wires or attachments. The City shall inspect and approve the condition of the public ways and public places; and cables, wires, attachments and poles after removal. The liability insurance as provided herein shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by Grantee with the terms and conditions of this paragraph and this ordinance.

Restoration by City, Reimbursements of Costs. In the event of a failure by Grantee to complete any work required by subsection (d) above and/or subsection (e) above, or any other work required by City law or ordinance within the time as may be established and to the satisfaction of the City, the City may cause such work to be done and Grantee shall reimburse the City the cost thereof within thirty (30) days after receipt of an itemized list of such costs or the City may recover such costs.

City's Right Not Affected. The termination and forfeiture of any franchise award ordinance shall in no way affect any of the rights of the City under the franchise award ordinance or any provision of law.

Receivership and Foreclosure.

Termination Upon Bankruptcy. Any franchise award ordinance granted shall at the option of the City Council, cease and terminate one hundred eighty (180) days after the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of Grantee whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said one hundred eighty (180) days, or unless:

Such receiver or trustee shall have, within one hundred eighty (180) days after their election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and provisions of this ordinance and the franchise award ordinance granted pursuant hereto, and the receiver or trustee within said one hundred eighty (180) days shall have remedied all defaults under the franchise award ordinance; and

Such receiver or trustee shall, within said one hundred eighty (180) days execute an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises, whereby such receiver or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of said franchise award ordinance.

Termination Upon Foreclosure. Except for the existing lien holders, in the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the plant, property and equipment of Grantee, or any part thereof, including or excluding this franchise, the Council may serve notice of termination upon Grantee and the successful bidder at such sale, in which event said franchise award ordinance and all rights and privileges of Grantee thereunder shall cease and terminate thirty (30) days after service of such notice, unless:

The Council shall have approved the transfer of said franchise, as and in the manner in this ordinance provided, and

Such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with the City to assume and be bound by all the terms and conditions of said franchise award ordinance.

Franchise Required. No Cable Communications System shall be allowed to occupy or use the streets of the City or be allowed to operate without a franchise award ordinance in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. Any Grantee providing any service under the terms of a valid franchise award ordinance shall have standing to enforce this provision. (Ord. 2831, §4)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 16-15. Regulation of Franchise.
Regulatory Authority. The Grantor shall exercise appropriate regulatory authority under the provisions of this Ordinance and applicable law. Grantor may, at its sole option, participate with other governmental entities in a joint regulatory agency, with delegated responsibility in the area of cable and related communications.

Regulatory Responsibility. The Grantor, if acting jointly with other Grantors, may delegate the following regulatory responsibility:

Administration and Enforcement. Administration and enforcement of the provisions of the Cable Communications System franchise award ordinance(s).

Coordination. Coordination of the operation of public, governmental and/or educational channels, if any.

Support to Public Agency Users. Provision of technical, programming and operational support to public agency users, such as City departments, schools and health care institutions.

Procedures and Standards for Institutional Operations. Establishment of procedures and standards for institutional operations and services, use of dedicated channels, and sharing of public facilities.

Planning. Planning of expansion and growth of services, including inter-connection of various CATV Systems.

Interconnection. Analysis of the possibility of integrating Cable Communication Systems with other City, County, State or regional telecommunications networks.

Policy. Formulation and recommendation of long range telecommunications policy for the City.

Community Channels. Selection and implementation of all things necessary to establish an entity that would ensure access to community channels that serve the public interest.

Rate Regulation.

Initial Rates. The City reserves the right, power and authority to regulate rates, having found that effective competition, as defined in Section 623 of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 and applicable regulations, does not exist. The level(s) regulated shall be set out in the franchise award ordinance.

Rate Regulation. If the City shall assume the authority to regulate rates, it shall do so as follows:

The City shall have the power to approve or disapprove any and all regular subscription rates, installation charges and other charges proposed by Grantee for and in connection with television and radio signals distributed hereunder. Such rates and charges shall be fair and reasonable and no higher than necessary to meet all costs of service with efficient and economical management, including a fair return on the original cost, less depreciation, of the properties devoted to such service, without regard to any subsequent sale or transfer price or cost of such properties.

The City shall have the power, authority and right to cause Grantee's rates and charges to conform to the provisions of subsection (1) above hereof, and for this purpose the City may deny increases or order reductions in such rates and charges when it determines that in the absence of such action on its part, Grantee's rates and charges or proposed increased rates and charges will not conform to the said subsection (1) above.

Procedure. Upon the filing of a petition by Grantee for a rate change, the City shall have one hundred eighty (180) days to do all things necessary to render a written decision on Grantee's petition, either accepting, rejecting, or modifying the same and reciting the basis of its decision. The City shall consider, inter alia, the following factors in approving or disapproving the petition:

The ability of Grantee to render System services and to derive a reasonable profit therefrom under the existing rate schedule and under the proposed rate schedule;

The revenues and profits derived from System services;

The quality of the service offered by Grantee;

The original construction cost of the System plus improvements less depreciation;

A fair rate of return with respect to Grantee's investment;

The extent to which Grantee has adhered to the terms of this franchise;

The City shall not consider any valuation based upon any franchise award ordinance or Grantee's goodwill, and these items of value shall neither be amortized as an expense nor shall a return be paid on them for this purpose.

Rates Effective Upon Failure of Written Decision To Be Rendered. If the City fails to render a written decision either accepting, rejecting or modifying Grantee's petition within one hundred eighty (180) days of Grantee's petition pursuant to subsection (b) above, Grantee shall thereafter be entitled to put its proposed new rates into effect.

Financial Reports Required. Grantee's petition for a rate increase shall include, but not be limited to, the following financial reports, which shall reflect the operations of the system.

Balance Sheet for two (2) years preceding request.

Income Statement for two (2) years preceding request.

Statement of Sources and Applications of Funds for two (2) years preceding request.

Detailed Supporting Schedules of Expenses, Income, Assets and other items as may be reasonably required.

Statement of Current and Projected Subscribers and Penetration.

Schedule of Rates. Each Grantee shall maintain and file with the City a complete schedule of subscriber rates including all fees and charges, if any, for services not subject to approval by the City.

Costs of Rate Regulation to Grantee. All costs to the City arising out of a petition for rate change shall be borne by Grantee in accordance with FCC rules and regulations.

City Instituted Rate Change. In clarification of the above, if the City shall institute rate modification proceedings, the deadlines set out herein shall only begin to run from the date the required information is supplied to the City. Grantee shall have sixty (60) days to provide information, as required, to the City after Grantee shall receive written notice from the City. (Ord. 2831, §5)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-16. General Financial and Insurance Provisions.
Indemnification.

Extent. Grantee shall upon acceptance of the franchise award ordinance granted indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, employees and from any and all claims, suits, judgments or damages in any way arising out of or through or alleged to arise out of or through the act of the City in granting a franchise award ordinance and the acts or omissions of Grantee, its servants, employees, or agents. Both such indemnifications shall cover such claims arising in tort, contracts, violations of U.S. or State Constitutions, statutes, ordinances, regulations, or from any source or on the basis of any theory whatsoever, but shall specifically exclude any litigation now existing or in the future between the City and Rolla Cable Systems, Inc., its successors and assigns.

Tender of Defense. In the event any such claims shall arise, the City shall tender the defense thereof to Grantee; provided, however, that the City, in its sold discretion, may participate in the defense of such claims at the expense of Grantor.

Insurances.

Kinds, Amounts. Grantee shall maintain through the term of the franchise award ordinance insurance in amounts at least as follows:

Workmen's Compensation Insurance: Such coverage as may be required by the workmen's compensation insurance and safety laws of the State of Missouri and amendments thereto.

Grantee's Liability: Combined single limit of $1,000,000.

Comprehensive General Liability: Bodily injury each person $1,000,000, each occurrence $1,000,000; and property damage each occurrence $1,000,000.

Comprehensive Automobile Liability: Including nonownership and hired car coverage as well as owned vehicles with minimum limits as follows: bodily injury for each person $1,000,000, and each occurrence $1,000,000; property damage for each occurrence $1,000,000.

Copies Furnished. Grantee shall furnish the City with copies of such insurance policies or certificates of insurance.

Endorsement. Such insurance policies provided for herein shall name the City, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees as additional insureds and shall contain the following endorsement:

"It is hereby understood and agreed that this insurance policy may not be cancelled by the surety or the intention not to renew be stated by the surety until thirty (30) days after receipt by the City by registered mail of written notice of such intention to cancel or not renew."

No Limitation of Liability. The minimum amounts set forth herein for such insurance shall not be construed to limit the liability of Grantee to the City under the franchise award ordinance issued hereunder to the amounts of such insurance.

Franchise Processing Costs. Costs incurred by the City in any franchising process shall include but not be limited to, all costs of publication of notices, publication of the franchise award ordinance, consultant's and attorneys' fees, and all incidental costs, and shall be paid by Grantee as a precondition to the award of a franchise. Reimbursement shall specifically include any litigation expense, including attorney's fees, arising out of the Cable Act.

Adjustment of Established Amounts. The City shall have the power from time to time to review the adequacy of the insurance coverage amounts. If because of changed circumstances, such as, but not limited, to, inflation, costs of materials, and/or the record of performance of Grantee, the City determines that the amounts set are inadequate, the City shall notify Grantee by sending Grantee a document detailing the proposed changes which shall be in accordance with general practices in the CATV industry for similar operations. Grantee shall have thirty (30) days to reply. After consideration of Grantee's reply, if any, the City may reduce, leave the same, or increase the amounts set as it deems reasonable to protect the public welfare and provide for the common good. (Ord. 2831, §6)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-17. Design and Construction Provisions.
System Design. The Cable Communications System shall be constructed, reconstructed, or improved in accordance with the design requirements contained in the franchise award ordinance agreement.

Geographical Coverage. Grantee shall design, construct, or reconstruct the system in such manner as to have the eventual capability to pass by every single-family dwelling unit, multiple-family dwelling unit, agency, and business establishment within the area of the franchise. Service shall be provided to Subscribers in accordance with the schedules and line extension policies specified in the franchise award ordinance.

Early Extension. In areas not meeting the requirement for mandatory extension of service, Grantee shall provide, upon the request of a potential Subscriber desiring service, an estimate of the costs required to extend service to said Subscriber. Upon said Subscriber agreeing in writing to such costs, Grantee shall then extend service to said potential Subscriber. Grantee may require advance payment or assurance of payment satisfactory to Grantee. The amount paid by Subscribers for early extension shall be non refundable, even if the area subsequently reaches the density required for mandatory extension.

System Construction Schedule.

Requirements. Grantee shall comply with the requirements of the system construction schedule contained in the franchise award ordinance agreement.

Service Not Provided, Where. Service need not be provided where power and telephone utilities are not available.

Revocation. Failure to begin construction within six (6) months after award of the franchise award ordinance will be grounds for franchise award ordinance revocation, at the option of the Grantor.

Penalties for Delay in Construction. The Grantor may at its sole option, apply any of the following in connection with delays in system construction:

Reduction of Franchise Period. Reduction in the duration of the franchise award ordinance on a month-to-month basis for each month of delay.

Termination. Termination of the franchise award ordinance for delays exceeding six (6) months.

Provision of Service. After service has been established by activating co-axial cables for any area, neighborhood or group of homes meeting the criteria of the initial service area and the line extension policy thereof, Grantee shall provide service to any requesting Subscriber or resident thereof within ninety (90) days from the date of request.

Underground Cable. Underground cabling is encouraged. In any event, cables shall be installed underground at Grantee's cost where existing utilities are already underground. Previously installed aerial cable shall be put underground in concert with other utilities, when such other utilities may convert from aerial to underground construction.

New Developments Underground. In cases of new construction or property development where utilities are to be placed underground, the developer or property owner shall give Grantee reasonable notice of such construction or development, and of the particular date on which open trenching will be available for Grantee's installation of cable conduit, pedestals and/or vaults, and laterals, all of which are to be provided at Grantee's expense. Grantee shall also provide specifications as needed for trenching.

Costs of trenching and easements required to bring service to the development shall be borne by the developer or property owner; except that if Grantee fails to install its conduit, pedestals and/or vaults, and laterals within fifteen (15) working days of the date the trenches are available, as designated in the notice given by the developer or property owner, then should the trenches be closed after the fifteen (15) day period, the cost of new trenching is to be borne by Grantee. Notice provided to Grantee by City of a preliminary plat request shall satisfy the requirement of reasonable notice if sent to the local general manager of system engineer of Grantee prior to approval of the preliminary plat request.

Street Occupancy.

Utilization of Existing Poles. Grantee shall utilize existing poles, conduits and other facilities whenever possible, and shall not construct or install any new, different, or additional poles, conduits, or other facilities whether on public property or on privately-owned property until the written approval of the City is obtained, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. However, no location of any pole or wire holding structure of Grantee shall be a vested interest and such poles or structures shall be removed or modified by Grantee at its own expense whenever the City determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. Grantee shall negotiate the lease of pole space and facilities from the existing pole owners.

Notification of Construction. Grantee shall notify the City at least ten (10) business days prior to the intention of Grantee to commence any construction in any streets. The City shall cooperate with Grantee in expeditiously granting any permits required, providing such grant and subsequent construction by Grantee shall not unduly interfere with the use of such streets, and the proposed construction shall be done in accordance with the pertinent provisions of the ordinances of the City.

Minimum Interference. All transmission lines, equipment and structures shall be so installed and located as to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners and at all times shall be kept and maintained in a safe condition and in good order and repair. Grantee shall, at all times, employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public. Suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares or other devices shall be used at such times and places as are reasonably required for the safety of all members of the public. Any poles or other fixtures placed in any public way by Grantee shall be placed in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on such public way.

Restoration of Streets. Whenever a Grantee shall disturb the surface of any street, alley, public highway, or ground for any purpose mentioned herein, it shall restore the same to the condition in which it was prior to the opening thereof, and when any opening is made by a Grantee in any hard surface pavement in any street, alley or public highway a Grantee shall promptly refill the opening and restore the pavement. The Grantor may refill and/or repave in case of neglect of a Grantee. The cost thereof, including the cost of inspection and supervision, shall be paid by the Grantee in question. All excavations made by a Grantee in the streets, alleys and public highways shall be properly safeguarded for the prevention of accidents. The work hereby required shall be done in strict compliance with the rules, regulations and ordinances of the Grantor as now or hereafter provided.

Removal of Facilities. Whenever, in case of fire or other disaster, it becomes necessary in the judgment of the Chief of the Police Department to remove any of Grantee's facilities, no charge shall be made by Grantee against the City for restoration and repair, unless such acts amount to gross negligence by the City.

Tree Trimming. Grantee shall have the authority to trim trees on public property at its own expense as may be necessary to protect its wire and facilities, subject to the supervision and direction of the City.

Improvements by City. Grantee at its expense shall protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove any property of Grantee when, in the opinion of the City, the same is required by reason of traffic conditions; public safety; street vacation; freeway or street construction; change or establishment of street grade; installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power line, signal line, transportation facilities, tracks or any other types of structures; improvements by governmental agencies, whether acting in a governmental or proprietary capacity or any other structure or public improvement, including but not limited to movement of buildings, urban renewal and redevelopment, and any general program under which the City shall undertake to cause all such properties to be located beneath the surface of the ground. Grantee shall in all cases have the privilege, subject to the corresponding obligations, to abandon any property of Grantee in place. Nothing hereunder shall be deemed a taking of the property of Grantee and Grantee shall be entitled to a surcharge by reason of anything hereunder.

Payment Upon Grantee's Failure. Upon failure of Grantee to commence, pursue or complete any work required by law or by the provisions of this Ordinance to be done in any street, within the time prescribed and to the satisfaction of the City, the City may after 30 days written notice to Grantee, at its option, cause such work to be done and Grantee shall pay to the City the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the City to Grantee within thirty (30) days after receipt of such itemized report.

Paving Cuts. Grantee shall make no paving cuts or curb cuts unless absolutely necessary, and only after written permission has been given by the City.

Installation In Conduit. Grantee shall install in conduit all cables passing under any public roadway.

Reservations of Street Rights. Nothing in the franchise shall be construed to prevent the Grantor from constructing sewers, grading, paving, repairing and/or altering any street, alley or public highway, or laying down, repairing or removing water main or constructing or establishing any other public work. All such work shall be done, insofar as practicable, in such manner as not to obstruct, injure or prevent the free use and operation of the poles, wires, conduits, conductors, pipes or appurtenances of Grantee. If any such property of Grantee herein shall interfere with the construction or repair of any street or public improvement, whether it be construction, repair or removal of a sewer or water main, the improvement of a street or any other public improvement, all such poles, wires, conduits or other appliances and facilities shall be removed or replaced in such manner as shall be directed by the Grantor so that the same shall not interfere with the said public work of the Grantor, and such removal or replacement shall be at the expense of Grantee.

Street Vacation or Abandonment. In the event any street, alley, public highway or portion thereof used by Grantee shall be vacated by the Grantor, or the use thereof discontinued by Grantee, during the term of the franchise award ordinance, Grantee shall forthwith remove facilities therefrom unless specifically permitted to continue or abandon the same, and on the removal thereof restore, repair or reconstruct the street area where such removal has occurred in such condition as may be required by the Grantor. In the event of failure, neglect or refusal of Grantee, after thirty (30) days' notice by the Grantor to repair, improve or maintain such street portion, the Grantor may do so such work or cause it to be done, and the cost thereof as found and declared by the Grantor shall be paid by Grantee and collection may be made by court action or otherwise.

Movement of Facilities. In the event it is necessary temporarily to move or remove any of Grantee's wires, cables, poles, or other facilities placed pursuant to the franchise award ordinance, in order to lawfully move a large object, vehicle, building or other structure over the streets, alleys or highways of the Grantor, Grantee upon reasonable notice shall move, at the expense of the person requesting the temporary removal, which payment shall be in advance of the work, such facilities as may be required to facilitate such movements.

Construction and Technical Standards:

Construction Standards.

Compliance with Safety Codes. All installation of equipment with the exception of temporary repairs to the System shall be of a permanent nature, durable and installed in accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical Code as amended, or other applicable City codes.

Construction Standards and Requirements. All of Grantee's plant and equipment, including but not limited to the antenna site, head-end and distribution system, towers, house connections, structures, poles, wire, cable, coaxial cable, fixtures and appurtenances shall be installed, located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired, maintained and operated in accordance with good engineering practices, performed by experienced maintenance and construction personnel so as not to endanger or interfere with improvements the municipality may deem proper to make, or to interfere in any manner with the rights of any property owner, or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic on municipal properties.

Test and Compliance Procedure. If the FCC shall prescribe testing requirements for cable systems, those provisions shall preempt. However, if the FCC requires no performance testing then the following shall apply: Grantee shall submit, within sixty (60) days after the effective date of the franchise award ordinance, a detailed test plan describing the methods and schedules for testing the Cable Communications System on an ongoing basis to determine compliance with the provisions of the franchise award ordinance. The tests for Basic Cable Services shall be performed periodically, at intervals no greater than every six (6) months. Locations shall be at the far ends of the distribution trunk cables. If more than ten percent (10%) of the locations tested fail to meet the performance standards, Grantee shall be required to repair the system. (Ord. 2831, §7)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-18. Service Provisions.
New Developments.

Amendment of Franchise. It shall be the policy of the City to liberally amend this franchise or a specific franchise award ordinance, upon application of Grantee, when necessary to enable Grantee to take advantage of any developments in the field of transmission of television and/or radio signals which will afford it an opportunity more effectively, efficiently or economically to serve its customers.

This section shall not be construed to require the City to make any amendment or to prohibit it from authorizing improvement or redesign of a system without application by Grantee.

Protection of Subscriber's Privacy.

Use of Data from Subscriber. A Grantee shall not initiate or use any form, procedure or device for procuring non operating or nonessential information or data from Subscribers' terminals by use of the network, without prior notification to and approval from each Subscriber so affected.

Subscriber Lists. Grantee shall not, without prior valid authorization from each Subscriber so affected, provide any list designating Subscribers' names and addresses to any party not engaged in the normal function of providing service(s) to the System or its Subscribers.

Program Alteration. Except as deletions are required by law, all programs of broadcasting stations carried by Grantee shall be carried in their entirety as received with announcements and advertisements and without additions.

Obscenity/Pornography. No Grantee when engaged in origination cablecasting as defined by 47 CFR 5(2), and this Ordinance in its Basic Cable services, in its premium services or in any other service, shall transmit or permit the transmission of material that is obscene. (Ord. 2831, §8)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-19. Operation and Maintenance.
Reports Required. Grantee shall file with the City, on request, no more than once each calendar quarter, any of the following:

Facilities Report. An annual total facilities report setting forth the physical miles of plant constructed, rebuilt or in operation during the fiscal year. Such report shall also contain any revisions to the System "as built" maps filed with the City.

Subscriber Data. Grantee's schedule of charges, contract or application forms for regular Subscriber service, policy regarding the processing of Subscriber complaints, delinquent Subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures, and any other terms and conditions adopted as Grantee's policy in connection with its Subscribers shall be filed with the City and conspicuously posted in Grantee's local office.

Ownership Report. An Ownership Report, indicating all persons who at any time during the preceding year did own or control more than 10% of Grantee.

Conduct of Business Rules. All rules, regulations, terms and conditions which Grantee has adopted for the conduct of its business.

Technical Measurements. One (1) copy of a report on the System's technical measurements as set forth herein.

Financial Report. An annual financial report certified by an officer of Grantee for the previous calendar year, including gross revenues from all sources, gross Subscriber revenues from each category of service, net income and end-of-year balance sheet for Grantee.

Activities Report. An annual summary of Grantee's previous year's activities including but not limited to Subscriber totals and new services.

Complaints. An annual summary of complaints received and handled by Grantee; and

Future Plans. An annual projection of Grantee's plans for the future.

Information Required.

Maintenance of Information. Grantee shall at all times maintain:

A record of all complaints received and interruptions or degradation of service experienced for the preceding three (3) years.

A full and complete set of plans, records and "as-built" maps showing the exact location of all Cable Communication System equipment installed or in use in the City, exclusive of Subscriber service drops.

Filing. When not otherwise prescribed herein, all matters required to be filed with the City shall be filed with the City Clerk.

Maintenance and Complaints.

Business Offices. Grantee shall maintain appropriate business offices which shall be open during all usual business hours, have a publicly listed toll-free telephone and be so operated to receive Subscriber complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments on a twenty-four (24) hour basis. A written log shall be maintained listing all complaints and their disposition.

Interruptions. Grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by a notice and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the System. A written log shall be maintained for all service interruptions.

Repair Force. Grantee shall maintain a repair force of technicians which shall initiate response to Subscriber complaints or requests for service within twenty-four hours after receipt of the complaint or request on a business day.

Information to Subscribers. Grantee shall furnish each Subscriber at the time service is installed, written instructions that clearly furnish information concerning the procedures for making inquiries or complaints, including the name, address and local telephone number of the employee or employees or agent to whom such inquiries or complaints are to be addressed, and furnish information concerning the City office responsible for administration of the franchise award ordinance with the address and telephone number of the office.

Rights of Individuals.

Equal Rights. Grantee shall not deny service, deny access or otherwise discriminate against Subscribers, channel users, or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, natural origin, age or sex. Grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable Federal, State and local laws and regulations, and all executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination which are hereby incorporated and made part of this Ordinance by reference.

Equal Employment. Grantee shall strictly adhere to the equal employment opportunity requirements of the FCC, and other Federal, State and local laws and regulations, as amended from time to time.

Right of Privacy in Transmission. No signals shall be transmitted from a Subscriber terminal for purposes of monitoring individual viewing patterns or practices without the express written permission of the Subscriber. The request for such permission shall be contained in a separate document with a prominent statement that the Subscriber is authorizing the permission in full knowledge of its provision. Such written permission shall be for a limited period of time not to exceed one (1) year, which shall be renewable at the option of the Subscriber. No penalty shall be invoked for a Subscriber's failure to provide or renew such an authorization. The authorization shall be revocable at any time by the Subscriber without penalty of any kind whatsoever. Grantee shall be entitled to conduct system wide or individually addressed "sweeps" for the purpose of verifying system integrity, controlling return-path transmissions, or billing for services.

Continuity of Service Mandatory.

Right to Continuity. It shall be the right of all Subscribers to continue receiving service insofar as their financial and other obligations to Grantee are honored. In the event that Grantee elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify, or sell the system, or the City gives notice of intent to terminate or fails to renew this franchise award ordinance, Grantee shall act so as to ensure that all Subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service regardless of the circumstances.

In the event of a change of franchisee, or in the event a new operator acquires the System, Grantee shall cooperate with the City, new franchisee or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all Subscribers. During such period, Grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period during which it operates the System, and shall be entitled to reasonable costs for its services when it no longer operates the system.

Upon Failure City May Operate. In the event Grantee fails to operate the System for seven (7) consecutive days without prior approval of the City or without just cause, the City may, at its option, operate the System or designate an operator until such time as Grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to the City or a permanent operator is selected. If the City is required to fulfill this obligation for Grantee, Grantee shall reimburse the City for all reasonable costs or damages in excess of revenues from the system received by the City. However, this provision shall not affect the rights of any lien holders.

Grantee Rules and Regulations. Grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable Grantee to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under said franchise award ordinance, and to assure an uninterrupted service to each and all of its customers. Provided, however, that such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions hereof or applicable local, state and federal laws, rules and regulations. (Ord. 2831, §9)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-20. Rights Reserved to Grantee.
Right of Grantee. Should Grantee become dissatisfied with any material decision or ruling of the Grantor pertaining to cable communications matters, Grantee may pursue such other remedies as are available, including the bringing of actions in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2831, §10)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-21. Miscellaneous Provisions.
Compliance with City, State and Federal Laws. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance to the contrary, Grantee shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations of the City, State and Federal government or any administrative agencies thereof. Provided, however, if any such State or Federal law or regulation shall require Grantee to perform any service, or shall permit Grantee to perform any service, or shall prohibit Grantee from performing any service, in conflict with the terms of this franchise or of any law or regulation of the City, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, Grantee shall notify the City of the point of conflict believed to exist between such regulation or law and the laws or regulations of the City or this franchise.

If the City determines that a material provision of this Ordinance is affected by any subsequent action of the State or Federal government, the City shall have the right to modify any of the provisions herein to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of this Ordinance.

Notices. All notices from Grantee to the City pursuant to this franchise shall be to the City Clerk. Grantee shall maintain with the City, throughout the term of the franchise award ordinance, an address for service of notices by mail. Grantee shall also maintain appropriate local offices and telephone numbers for the conduct of matters related to this franchise or the franchise award ordinance during normal business hours. Upon written request by Grantee, the City shall provide copies of all notices effecting this franchise ordinance or a franchise award ordinance to Grantee's lender.

Public Notice. Minimum public notice of any public meeting relating to this franchise or the franchise award ordinance shall be by publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the area at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting, posting at City Hall, and by announcement on at least two (2) channels of Grantee's Cable Communications System between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. for five (5) consecutive days prior to the meeting.

Captions. The captions to sections throughout this ordinance are intended solely to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions of this Ordinance. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this Ordinance.

No Recourse Against the Grantor. Grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the Grantor or its officials, boards, commissions, agents or employees for any loss, cost, expense, or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of the franchise or because of the enforcement of the franchise.

Nonenforcement by the Grantor. Grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this Ordinance or said franchise award ordinance by reason of any single or repeated failure of the Grantor to enforce compliance.

Theft of Services and Tampering.

Violation. No person, whether or not a Subscriber to the Cable System may intentionally or knowingly damage or cause to be damaged any wire, cable, conduit, equipment or apparatus of Grantee, or commit any act with intent to cause such damage, or to tap, tamper with or otherwise connect any wire or device to a wire, cable, conduit, equipment and apparatus or appurtenances of Grantee with the intent to obtain a signal or impulse from the Cable System without authorization from Grantee and compensation (at Grantee's option) to Grantee, or to obtain cable television or other communications service with intent to cheat or defraud Grantee of any lawful charge to which it is entitled.

Punishment. Any person convicted of violating any provision of this Section (a) above is subject to a fine of not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense or imprisonment of not more than ninety (90) days or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day's violation of this section shall be considered a separate offense.

Subsequent Action by State or Federal Agencies. Should the State of Missouri, the FCC or any other agency of the Federal government subsequently require Grantee to deliver any signals in addition to those required by this franchise or a franchise award ordinance, or to perform any act which is inconsistent with any provisions of this franchise award ordinance, Grantee shall so notify the Grantor. Upon receipt of such notification, the Grantor shall determine if a material provision of the franchise award ordinance is affected. Upon such determination, the Grantor shall have the right to modify or amend any of the sections of the franchise award ordinance to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of the franchise award ordinance. The Grantor may terminate the franchise award ordinance in the event the Grantor determines that substantial and material compliance with the original proposed terms of the franchise award ordinance has been frustrated by such State or Federal requirement. (Ord. 2831, §11)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-22. Acceptance.
Any ordinance awarding a franchise to a specific company and this Ordinance shall be accepted by Grantee by written instrument executed and acknowledged by it as a deed is required to be filed with the City Clerk within twenty (20) days after notification of the passage of the ordinance awarding a franchise. Such written instrument shall state and express the acceptance of this Ordinance and the ordinance awarding a franchise and their terms, conditions and provisions; and said Grantee shall agree in said instrument to abide by, to observe and perform same, and declare that statements and recitals therein are correct and that it has made and does make the agreements, statements and admissions in the ordinances recited to have been or to be made.(Ord. 2831, §12)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-23. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.(Ord. 2831, §13)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-24. Effective date.
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage and approval. (Ord. 2831, §14)

PASSED AND APPROVED THIS 3RD DAY OF FEBRUARY, 1992

________________________________

Mayor

ATTEST:

__________________________________

City Clerk

The terms and conditions as stated in Section 12 of this Ordinance are hereby accepted by Fidelity Cablevision, Inc. as of this 15th day of February, 1992.

FIDELITY CABLEVISION, INC.

By: _____________________________

John T. Davis, President

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 16-25 to 16-30. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Division 2 - Cable Television Contract: February 18, 2007
Sec. 16-31 to 16-32. Reserved.
Sec. 16-33. Definitions.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the definitions and word usage set forth in Section 2 of the Cable Ordinance are incorporated herein and shall apply in this Franchise Agreement. In addition, the following definitions shall apply:

Cable Ordinance: Ordinance No. 2831.

Franchise Agreement or Agreement: This contract and any amendments, exhibits or appendices hereto.

Franchisee: FIDELITY CABLEVISION, INC.

Normal Operating Conditions: The term “normal operating conditions” means those service conditions that are within the control of the cable operator directly affecting service. Those conditions which are not within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions directly affecting service. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system.
(Ord. 2832; Ord. 3823, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-34. Grant of Authority; Limits and Reservations.
Grant. Fidelity Cablevision, Inc., (Grantee) is hereby granted a nonexclusive revocable franchise to construct, operate, maintain and reconstruct a cable television system within the present and future limits of the City (Grantor). The franchise is granted subject to the requirements contained in Ordinance No. 2831 and the provision set forth herein.

Franchise Area: The Franchise is issued for the entire present territorial limits of the City of Rolla, Missouri, and any subsequent annexed areas.

Term: The Franchise and this Franchise Agreement shall expire at 12:01 a.m. on February 18, 2017, unless the Franchise is earlier revoked or terminated as provided herein or in the Cable Ordinance or its term is extended as provided herein pursuant to Section 2(p)(4).

Grant Not Exclusive: The Franchise and the right it grants to use and occupy the Public Rights-of-Way are not exclusive and do not explicitly or implicitly prelude the issuance of other franchises to operate Cable Systems or other communications systems within the City, affect the City’s right to authorize use of Public Rights-of-Way by other Persons to operate Cable Systems or other communications systems or for other purposes as it determines appropriate, or affect the City’s right to itself construct, operate or maintain a Cable System or other communications system, with or without a Franchise.

Franchise Agreement Subject to Other Laws. This Franchise Agreement is subject to and shall be governed by all terms, conditions and provisions of the Cable Ordinance as enacted and any applicable provision of federal, state, and local law. However, the Franchise Agreement will be the prevailing document in the event of conflicts or inconsistencies between this Agreement and the City’s Cable Ordinance. In the event of any conflicts between the requirements contained within this Franchise and the Cable Ordinance and the requirements of federal law, rules, and/or administrative agency rulings, the requirements contained in federal law et al. shall prevail and a Franchise shall not be held in noncompliance when its actions are consistent with the prevailing requirements.

Franchise Agreement Subject to Exercise of Police Powers: All rights and privileges granted herein are subject to the police powers of the City and its rights under applicable laws to regulate the Franchisee and the construction, operation and maintenance of the Franchisee’s Cable System, including, but not limited to, the right to adopt and enforce additional ordinances and regulations as the City shall find reasonably necessary in the exercise of its police powers, the right to adopt and enforce generally applicable zoning, building, permitting and safety ordinances and regulations, the right to adopt and enforce generally applicable ordinances and regulations relating to equal employment opportunities, and the right to adopt and enforce ordinances and regulations containing right-of-way, telecommunications, utility, cable television consumer protection, service standards, or rate regulation provisions, consistent with federal and state law.

Incorporation of Cable Ordinance by Reference: By acceptance of the Franchise, the Franchisee agrees to meet all requirements of the Cable Ordinance as enacted, which is hereby incorporated by reference into and made a part of this Franchise Agreement.

Approval and Effective Date: This Franchise Agreement shall be effective as of 12:01 a.m. on February 18, 2007, upon its approval and execution by the City and Fidelity.

Effect of Acceptance: By accepting the Franchise and executing this Franchise Agreement, the Franchisee:

acknowledges and accepts the City’s legal right to grant the Franchise, to enter into this Franchise Agreement, and to enact and enforce ordinances and regulations related to the Franchise;

accepts and agrees to comply with each provision of this Agreement; and (3) agrees that the Franchise was granted pursuant to processes and procedures consistent with applicable law, and that it will not raise any claim to the contrary.

Claims Related to Prior Franchise: The Prior Franchise is hereby terminated and superseded prospectively.

Franchisee Bears Its Own Costs: Unless otherwise expressly provided in this Franchise Agreement, all acts that the Franchisee is required to perform under the Cable Ordinance as enacted under this Agreement or other applicable law shall be performed at the Franchisee’s own cost and expense, without reimbursement by the City.

No Waiver:

The failure of the City on one or more occasions to exercise a right or to require compliance or performance under this Franchise Agreement, the Cable Ordinance or any other applicable law shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver of such right or a waiver of compliance or performance by the Franchisee, unless such right or such compliance or performance has been specifically waived in writing.

Waiver of a breach of this Agreement shall not be a waiver of any other breach, whether similar to or different from that waived. Neither the granting of the Franchise, nor any provision herein, nor any action by the City hereunder shall constitute a waiver of or a bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of the City, including without limitation the power of eminent domain.

No Recourse: The Franchisee shall have no recourse against the City for any loss, cost, expense, claim, liability or damage arising out of any action undertaken or not undertaken by Franchisee pursuant to the Franchise, this Franchise Agreement or the Cable Ordinance, whether or not such action or non-action was required by the Franchise, the Agreement or the Cable Ordinance, except as otherwise expressly permitted by federal law or this Agreement.

Construction of Franchise Agreement: The provisions of this Franchise Agreement shall be liberally construed in accordance with generally accepted rules of contract construction and to promote the public interest. The express provisions of the Franchise Agreement constitute a valid and enforceable contract between the parties. In the event of a clear conflict between the Cable Ordinance and this Agreement, the Agreement shall prevail, except where the conflict arises from the lawful exercise of the City’s police power.

Amendment of Franchise Agreement: The City shall liberally amend this Franchise Agreement upon the application of the Franchisee whenever necessary to enable the Franchisee to take advantage of developments in the field of cable communications, which, in the City’s opinion, will afford the Franchisee an opportunity to serve its Subscribers more efficiently, effectively and economically. Such amendments shall be subject to such conditions as the City and the Franchisee determine are reasonably necessary to protect the public interest.

Periodic Review:

The City shall conduct a review of the Cable System during the six-month period that begins thirty-six (36) months prior to the expiration date of this Agreement. Such review shall be completed during such six-month period, and in sufficient time to allow the City to exercise its options hereunder. Such review shall be conducted to enable the City to determine the needs of the community and whether they are being met by the Cable System. The determination under this paragraph shall be based upon the reasonable cable-related needs and interests of the community, considering all relevant factors including the costs to the Franchisee of meeting those needs and interests.

To assist in the City’s review, the Franchisee shall submit a report to the City describing advances in cable technology nationwide, the results of any testing of such technology by Franchisee or its Affiliates, the potential benefits and disadvantages of those advances for the System and its Subscribers and potential Subscribers, and its plan and timetable for instituting any such advances in technology. Additionally, upon request by the City the Franchisee shall testify before the City or provide oral analysis of Franchisee’s review of the status of local cable competition.

The review may be conducted by City Council or by such person(s) as it may designate. The review may be conducted in conjunction with other franchise authorities. If the City Council designates reviewers, such reviewers shall provide a written report to the City Council in sufficient time to allow the City Council to exercise its options hereunder.

After conducting such a review, unless the provisions of subparagraph (5) apply, City may select one of the following courses of action:

After complying with the Cable Ordinance provisions on franchise modification, extend the term of this Agreement by a period of time no less than one year, and no more than four years, unless the Franchisee gives written notice that it object to such an extension. A written renewal notice from the Franchisee submitted during the aforesaid six-month period requesting commencement of a renewal proceeding under 47 USC section 546(a) shall not constitute an objection to extension unless it contains an express statement of such objection, but in the event of an extension, such renewal notice shall continue in effect through all additional extension cycles, In the event of such an extension, the City shall conduct another review of the Cable System pursuant to this subsection on a schedule based on the expiration date of this Agreement as extended. Such cycle of reviews and extensions may be repeated as often as deemed appropriate by the City subject to the terms of this Agreement and the Cable Ordinance. No extension shall affect the obligations of the Guarantors hereunder. No extension shall require payment of renewal fees by the Franchisee.

Commence a franchise renewal proceeding under 47 USC section 546(a).

Conduct informal franchise renewal negotiations under 47 U.S.C. section 546(h).

Conclude the review process (except the City shall comply with the Cable Act if the Franchisee submits a timely written renewal notice that is not withdrawn).

This review process shall not override any remedies of the City, including but not limited to remedies of revocation. (Ord. 2832; Ord. 3823, §1)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-35. Regulation and Oversight.
Severability: In the event that a court or agency of competent jurisdiction declares by final decision that any provision of this Franchise Agreement is unenforceable according to its terms or is otherwise void, said provision shall be considered a separate, distinct and independent part of this Agreement, and such declaration shall not affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions of this Agreement. Alternatively, the City may modify any such provisions to the reasonable extent necessary to make such provision enforceable if such modifications are consistent with the full intent and purposes of this Agreement.

Preemption: In the event that federal or state laws, rules or regulations preempt a provision or limit the enforceability of a provision of this Agreement, then, subject to the City’s rights under the foregoing subsection, the provision shall be read to be preempted to the extent and for the time, bur only to the extent and for the time, required by law. In the event such federal or state law, rule or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed so that the provision hereof that had been preempted is no longer preempted, such provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect, and shall thereafter be binding on the parties hereto, without the requirement of further action on the part of the City.

Notice: As soon as reasonably practicable following knowledge thereof, the Franchisee shall notify the City of any point of conflict believed to exist between the Cable Ordinance, this Agreement and any other provisions of law. By executing this Agreement, Franchisee represents that it is not aware of any such conflict at the time of such execution, other than that which it has already stated and objected to in writing. (Ord. 2832; Ord. 3823, §1)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-36. Provision of Cable Service.
The Franchisee shall make Cable Service available to all Persons within the Franchise Area who request Service, so long as their financial and other obligations to the Franchisee are satisfied, and subject to reasonable construction standards and schedules and subject to availability of legal access to the location. Franchisee shall extend its System. (Ord. 2832; Ord. 3823, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-37. System Facilities, Equipment and Services.
(a) System: The Franchisee’s Cable System shall at all times meet or exceed its capacity and quality as of the last day of the Prior Franchise.

(b) Emergency Alert: The Franchisee shall provide for an emergency alert override to the extent reasonably feasible and, at a minimum, in full compliance with FCC Guidelines. (Ord. 2832; Ord. 3823, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-38. Channels and Facilities for Public, Educational and Governmental Use.
(a) Access Channels:

(1) The Franchisee shall provide City with two channels, for non-commercial Public Access, Educational, and Governmental (PEG) use, provided the first channel is “substantially utilized”. A PEG channel shall be considered “substantially utilized” when forty hours per week are locally programmed on that channel for at least three consecutive months. In determining whether a PEG channel is substantially utilized, a program may be counted not more than four times during a calendar week.
(2) In the event Franchisee increases the channel capacity of its System beyond the minimum required hereunder, in addition to the requirements of subsection (a)(1), the City may require the Franchisee to make available one (1) additional standard video channel for public educational or governmental programming, provided the City requests such channel within 90 days of written notice from Franchisee of the capacity increase and the existing PEG channel(s) are “substantially utilized” as set forth in 6.a.
(b) Management of Channels: The City may designate one (1) or more entities, including a non-profit access management corporation, to manage the use of all or part of the public, educational, and governmental access channels consistent with the City’s rules, regulations and procedures. Franchise shall not be obligated to deal with such designated entity and may deal directly with City on all access channel matters.

(c) Editorial Control: Except as expressly permitted by federal law, the Franchisee shall not exercise any editorial control over the content of programming on the designated access channels (except for Franchisee’s own programming cablecast on those channels).

(d) Unused Capacity: Franchisee may provide programming on any unused capacity of PEG channels.

(e) Copyright Protection: Franchisee shall not duplicate any original programming for which the access channels have exclusive copyrights. (Ord. 2832; Ord. 3823, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-39. Franchise Fee.
(a) Payment of Franchise Fee. The Franchisee shall pay a Franchise fee for the use of the City’s Right-of-Way and to compensate the City for all costs associated with administering and regulating the cable system. The amount of the Franchisee fee shall be five percent (5%) of the Franchisee’s annual Gross Revenues and such fee shall be paid on a quarterly basis within sixty days after the end of the quarter.

(b) Reporting and Auditing of Fee Payments.

(1) The Franchisee shall provide the City with a revenue statement clearly showing the Gross Revenues covering the Franchise reporting period, and the amount of the Franchise fee due to the City for the calendar month within forty-five (45) days after the end of the quarter.
(2) The City shall have the right to audit the Franchisee’s financial records at the location where such records are maintained, for the purpose of re-computing any amounts to be payable to the City under this ordinance, provided, however, that such inspection shall take place within thirty-six (36) months following the receipt of such payment. Any additional amount due the City as a result of the audit made by the City shall be paid within thirty (30) days following written notice to the Franchisee by the City of the amount due, and such notice shall include a copy of the audit report. The cost of said audit shall be borne by the Franchisee, if an additional amount in excess of five percent (5%) of the Franchise fees due for the audit period are found to be due to the City.
(Ord. 2832; Ord. 3823, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-40. Insurance, Indemnification.
Insurance Required: Franchisee shall maintain throughout the entire length of the Franchise period, at least the following liability insurance coverage insuring the City and the Franchisee: worker’s compensation and employer liability insurance to meet all requirements of Missouri law and comprehensive general liability insurance with respect to the construction, operation, and maintenance of the Cable System, and the conduct of the Franchisee’s business in the City, in the minimum amounts of:

$2,000,000 for property damage resulting from any one accident;
$5,000,000 for personal bodily injury or death resulting from any one accident; and
$2,000,000 for all other types of liability.

Neither the provisions of this Section nor any damages recovered by the City shall be construed to limit the liability of Franchisee for damages under the Franchise.

Qualifications of Sureties: All insurance policies shall be with sureties qualified to do business in the State of Missouri with a B+7 or better rating of insurance by Best’s Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition, and in a form approved by the City.

Policies Available for Review: All insurance policies shall be available for review by the City, and Franchisee shall keep on file with the city certificates of insurance.

Additional Insureds; Prior Notice of Policy Cancellation: All general liability insurance policies shall name the City, its officers, boards, board members, commissions, commissioners, agents, and employees as additional insureds and shall further provide that any cancellation or reduction in coverage shall not be effective unless thirty (30) days’ prior written notice thereof has been given to the City Clerk. Franchisee shall not cancel any required insurance policy without submission of proof that the Franchisee has obtained alternative insurance reasonably satisfactory to the City Council that complies with the Cable Ordinance and this Franchise Agreement.

Failure Constitutes Material Violation. Failure to comply with the insurance requirements set forth in this Section shall constitute a material violation of the Franchise.

Indemnification:

Franchisee shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the City, its officials, boards, board members, commissions, commissioners, agents, and employees, against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings, and judgments for damages or equitable relief arising out of the construction, maintenance, or operation of its Cable System; copyright infringements or a failure by the Franchisee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors, or licensees of programs to be delivered by the Cable System; the conduct of the Franchisee’s business in the City; or in any way arising out of the granting of the Franchise or Franchisee’s enjoyment or exercise of this Franchise, regardless of whether the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or prohibited by the Cable Ordinance or this Franchise Agreement.

Specifically, but not by way of limitation on the scope of (1) above, Franchisee shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the City, and in their capacity as such, the officers, agents, and employees thereof, from and against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability, and judgments for damages or otherwise subject to Section 638 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. section 558, arising out of or alleged to arise out of the installation, construction, operation, or maintenance of its System, including but not limited to any claim against the Franchisee for invasion of the right of privacy, defamation of any Person, or the violation or infringement of any copyright, trade mark, trade name, service mark, or patent, or of any other similar right of any Person. This indemnity does not apply to programming carried on any channel set aside for public, educational, or government use, or channels leased pursuant to 47 U.S.C. section 532, unless the Franchisee refused to carry programming which Franchise believed was indecent or obscene programming and which the City noted in writing its believe that it should be carried.

The indemnity provision includes, but is not limited to, the City’s reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred in defending against any such claim, suit, or proceeding prior to Franchisee assuming such defense. The City shall notify Franchisee of claims and suits as soon as practicable, but failure to give such notice shall not relieve Franchisee of its obligations hereunder. Once Franchisee assumes such defense, the City may at its option continue to participate in the defense at its own expense.

Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Agreement, the City shall not be so indemnified or reimbursed in relation to any amounts attributable to the City’s own negligence, willful misconduct, intentional or criminal acts, including in the performance of its obligations under the Cable Ordinance or this Franchise Agreement.
(Ord. 2832; Ord. 3823, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-41. Franchise Violations.
Procedures Notice and Cure.
In the event of an alleged violation of the franchise, the following procedures shall be followed.

The City shall send to the Franchisee, by certified mail, a notice of any alleged violation(s) or failure to meet any of the terms or provisions of this Ordinance that shall set forth a detailed description of any alleged violation(s).

The Franchisee shall have thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of such notice to respond in writing, stating its explanation for the alleged violation(s) and what actions, if any, have been or will be taken to cure the alleged violation(s) or lack of compliance.

The City may accept the Franchisee’s explanation and/or remedy proposed. Alternatively, if the City does not accept the Franchisee’s explanation or believes that the violation(s) will not be cured within a reasonable period of time, it may send to the Franchisee a Notice of Violation at any time after the initial thirty (30) day period has elapsed.

If a Notice of Violation is issued, a hearing shall be held by the City that shall afford the Franchisee due process and an opportunity to present evidence. The City shall thereafter issue a written report stating its conclusions and the reason therefore. The City may determine (a) that any alleged violation has been correct or is being corrected by the Franchisee and that no further action is required; (b) that an extension of the time or other appropriate relief should be granted; (c) that the problem is beyond the Franchisee’s direct control and that the Franchisee is therefore not at fault; or, that the Franchisee is in violation of its franchise and appropriate action will be taken by the City. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to limit or restrict the Franchisee’s right to appeal the City’s actions in state or federal court.

In the case of any alleged violation of federal, state or local technical standards or safety codes which do not pose a substantial safety hazard, the Franchisee shall be given reasonable time to complete any required modifications or repairs which may be needed and the City shall not assess any penalty against the Franchisee so long as the Franchisee shows that it is working promptly, diligently and in good faith to correct any alleged technical violations. A “substantial safety hazard” shall be defined as one posing an imminent likelihood of causing significant bodily injury if not repaired immediately.

Franchise Termination and Continuity of Service.

In the event of a formal denial of renewal or revocation of a franchise – which denial or revocation is upheld by final judicial determination, including final adjudication of any appeal(s) which may be filed – the Franchisee shall have a period of one (1) year from final adjudication, including any appeal, within which to transfer or convey the assets of the cable system. Approval of such proposed transfer or assignment shall not be unreasonably withheld by the City.

In the event the franchise term expires prior to formal action being taken by the City to renew the franchise or deny franchise renewal, the Franchisee shall continue to operate the cable system pursuant to the terms and conditions of its then existing franchise until the franchise is extended, renewed or denied pursuant to applicable federal law and the provisions of this franchise. The renewal procedures contained in Section 626 of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended, shall be followed by the City and the Franchisee.

Either Franchisee or Franchisor may elect to terminate this Franchise on February 18, 2017 by giving the other party written notice at least 37 months prior to the termination date.

Force Majeure. In the event the Franchisee is prevented or delayed in the performance of any of its obligations under this Ordinance by reason of flood, fires, hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes or other acts of God, unavoidable casualty, insurrections, war, riot, sabotage, vandalism, strikes, boycotts, lockouts, labor disputes, or omissions or delays by utility companies upon whom Franchisee is dependent for pole attachments or easement use, shall have a reasonable time under the circumstances to perform its obligations under this Ordinance or to procure a reasonable and comparable substitute for such obligations. Under such circumstances the Franchisee shall not be held in default or noncompliance with the provisions of the Ordinance nor shall it suffer any penalty relating thereto. (Ord. 2832; Ord. 3823, §1)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-42. Miscellaneous Provisions.
Governing Law: This Franchise Agreement was made in and shall be governed in all respects by the law of the State of Missouri.

Notices: Unless otherwise expressly stated herein, notices required under this Franchise Agreement shall be mailed first class, postage prepaid, to the addressees below. Each party may change its designee by providing written notice to the other party, but each party may only designate one entity to receive notice.

Notices to the Franchisee shall be mailed to:

FIDELITY CABLEVISION, INC.
Attention: Legal Department
64 North Clark Street
Sullivan, Missouri 63080

Notices to the City shall be mailed to:

City Clerk
City of Rolla
901 North Elm Street
Rolla, Missouri 65401

Time of Essence: In determining whether the Franchisee has substantially complied with this Franchise Agreement, the parties agree that time is of the essence.

Captions: The captions and headings of this Agreement are for convenience and reference purposes only, and shall not affect in any way the meaning and interpretation of any provisions of this Agreement.

Integration: This Agreement set forth the entire agreement between the parties respecting the subject matter hereof. No other agreements, covenants, representations or warranties, express or implied, oral or written, have been made by any party to another with respect to the subject matter of this Agreement. All prior and contemporaneous conversations, negotiations, possible and alleged agreements, representations, covenants and warranties with respect to the subject matter hereof are waived, merged herein and therein and superseded hereby and thereby.

Office: Franchise shall maintain a local office for payments.
AGREED TO THIS ______________ DAY OF ___________________, 2007.

FIDELITY CABLEVISION, INC.

__________________________
Name: _____________________
Title: ______________________
Authorized Officer

(Ord. 2832; Ord. 3823, §1)

(Return to Contents)

Secs. 16-43 to 16-45. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Division 3 - Cable Television Contract: April 7, 2003
Sec. 16-46. Intent.
The City of Rolla, Missouri (hereinafter also referred to and known as Grantor) hereby grants to Ark-Mo Cable TV, Inc., d/b/a Phelps County Cable TV (hereinafter referred to and known as Grantee) a cable television franchise in accordance with the provisions of Ordinance No. 2831 and this Ordinance. (Ord. 3556, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-47. Short title.
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Ark-Mo Cable TV, Inc., d/b/a Phelps County Cable TV Ordinance". This ordinance is referred to in Ordinance No. 2831 as the "franchise award ordinance". (Ord. 3556, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-48. Definitions.
All words, terms, phrases and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in Ordinance No. 2831, unless otherwise specifically excepted herein. (Ord. 3556, §3)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-49. Granting of franchise.
Grant. Ark-Mo Cable TV, Inc., d/b/a Phelps County Cable TV (Grantee) is hereby granted a nonexclusive revocable franchise to construct, operate, maintain and reconstruct a cable television system within the present and future limits of the City (Grantor). The franchise is granted subject to the requirements contained in Ordinance No. 2831 and the provision set forth herein.

Right to Issue Franchise. Grantee acknowledges and accepts the right of Grantor to issue a franchise and Grantee agrees it shall not now or at any time hereafter challenge this right in any way or in any City, State or Federal Court.

Right to Delegate Regulation. Grantee acknowledges and accepts the right of Grantor, at Grantor's sole option, to delegate regulatory powers to a properly authorized entity, and Grantee agrees it shall not now or at any time hereafter challenge this right in any way in any City, State or Federal Court.

Effective Franchise Date. The effective date of the franchise shall be the date of final passage of this ordinance; provided that if Grantee does not file with the City Clerk within twenty (20) days after notification of final passage a written, signed and notarized acceptance of all terms and conditions of the franchise, the franchise shall be null and void.

Term of Franchise. The term of the franchise shall be fifteen (15) years from the effective date subject to the limitations herein, at which time it shall expire and be of no force and effect; provided, that the Grantor may renew the franchise in accordance with the provisions of Ordinance No. 2831, or then applicable law.

Franchise Fees. For any twelve (12) month period, the franchise fees to be paid to Grantor by Grantee shall be five percent (5%) of Grantee's gross subscriber service revenues derived in such period from the operation of the cable system. Grantee shall calculate the five percent (5%) and then add said franchise fee to the subscriber’s monthly bill as a separate line item designated "franchise fees payable to City". In the event that the FCC or other regulatory bodies mandate that the Company obtain and pay a fee for the right to rebroadcast the signals of commercial television or radio stations, the charge for such right, may, at the Company's sole option, be passed on to the subscriber on a pro rata basis and no Franchise Fee shall be charged on such passed through costs. Such franchise fees shall be paid semi-annually beginning with the period ending June 30, 2003, and every six (6) months thereafter. Payment shall be made in full within ninety (90) days of the end of the applicable period.

Rates and Programming. Initial rates shall be established as set out on Addendum A. Likewise, initial programming shall be as set out on Addendum A. Grantor shall regulate rates as the law allows, or at its discretion, as set out in Ordinance No. 2831. However, during such time as two or more cable communications systems, or any MMDS (multi-channel, multi-point distribution system) or other multi-channel distribution system, ever exist in the City, and provided each such system makes their services available to fifty percent (50%) or more of the existing homes in the City with a ten percent (10%) penetration, effective competition shall be deemed to exist. Grantee shall not alter the definition of Basic Cable Service, as set out on Addendum A, without the approval of Grantor, which can only be made by Amendment of this Ordinance. (Ord. 3556, §4)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-50. Improvements requirements.
(1) System Improvement Schedule. The cable television system service shall be offered to all City residents in the initial service area immediately from the effective date of this Ordinance. The cable television systems service shall be offered to all City residents within sixty (60) months of the effective date of this Ordinance.

(2) Initial Service Area. The initial service area shall include that area known as the "southside annexation area" and as more particularly described in Ordinance No. 3227.

(3) Line Extension Policy.

(A) Unoccupied Areas - - Platted and Unplatted. Also at the time of system improvements, service shall be extended to unoccupied platted and non-platted areas upon request and at the normal per foot cost to the requesting person for the time and materials.

(B) Newly Annexed Area. After initial service and improvements are completed, service to occupied buildings in platted subdivisions containing thirty (30) or more occupied non-commercial buildings per cable plant mile in newly annexed areas shall be provided within six (6) months.

(C) Areas Not Meeting Line Extension Policy. In areas not meeting the line extension policy of 30 homes per cable mile, service shall be provided according to the following formula:

Base costs of construction per mile divided by the number of requesting subscribers per mile, minus a sum equal to base construction costs divided by 30 homes per mile equals the cost to individual subscribers for the extension service.

FOR EXAMPLE:

$7500 Presumed base cost of construction. Subscribers requesting.

15

$ 500

$ 250 Sum equals to base construction cost divided by 30 homes per mile.

equals 250 Cost to requesting subscriber.

(4) Annual Report of Grantee.

(A) Contents of Report. Grantee shall report to Grantor the following information on an annual basis: total number of line extension requests received during the previous calendar year; brief description of each request and the disposition or result of the request; report of all line extension or expansion by Grantee during the previous calendar year not otherwise disclosed in report, to include area of line extension or expansion and total number of accounts established in the area of expansion.

(B) Date of Report. The above report shall be due each year no later than February 15th of each year. (Ord. 3556, §5)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-51. System design and performance standards.
System Configuration. The cable television system shall consist of a cable network as defined in Section 16-13(3) of Ordinance No. 2831.

Channel Capacity. The cable television system shall be installed to delivery signals at frequencies up to four hundred fifty megahertz (450 MHz).

Emergency Override. Grantee shall provide an emergency override capability to permit Grantor to interrupt and cablecast a message on all channels simultaneously in the event of disaster or public emergency.

Performance Testing. Grantee shall perform all tests necessary to determine compliance with the technical standards as set out herein and the FCC, if any. Absent regulation by the FCC, system sweeping and balancing, and leakage tests shall occur at least semiannually, in the fall and spring.

Written records of test results shall be maintained, and shall be available for Grantor's inspection upon request.

Subscriber Service. Grantee shall provide to subscribers within the service area the following:

TV Guide. A program guide accurately listing the various programs on the various channels. Each program shall be listed according to time, date and channel. The TV/program guide shall be made readily available to subscribers in the week prior to the week for which the TV/program guide is applicable. Compliance with this section may be achieved by continuing the provision of the program guide existing at the time of the passage of this Ordinance.

Payment Center Accessible to Handicap. Grantee shall provide a payment center and/or business office accessible to handicapped persons. Grantee shall have ninety (90) days from the effective date of this ordinance to provide either a ground level entry to the business office or provide a ramp (which shall be built according to the same standards required of municipal governments to provide handicapped access existing at the time of the passage of this Ordinance). (Ord. 3556, §6)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-52. Service and programming requirements.
(1) Initial Service and Programming. Grantee shall provide initial service and programming as set out in Addendum A. (Ord. 3556, §7)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-53. Miscellaneous provisions.
Intent. In order to achieve utilization of access channels that is in the best public interest, it is the intent of the City to ensure that the access and community channels are made available to various public, educational and governmental entities, such that these channels may be open to all residents of the City and available for all forms of public expression, community information, and debate of public issues. Grantee shall make available up to two (2) NTSC channels for use by public, educational and governmental entities. The City Council shall designate the entity to be assigned to each available channel. If all channels are not assigned, then the unassigned channels shall remain available for future assignments by the City Council. Each entity chosen or designated to receive a channel shall substantially follow forms, functions and procedures hereinafter set.

Functions. The entity to whom the public access channel has been granted shall have the following functions:

Responsibility for program production for and management of the channel.

To assure that no censorship or control over program content of the channel exists, except as necessary to comply with prohibition of material that is obscene, or the FCC prohibition of material that contains commercial advertising, or conducts a lottery.

To devise, establish and administer all rules, regulations and procedures pertaining to the use and scheduling of the channel.

To prepare, in conjunction with the company, such regular or special reports as may be required or desirable.

To hire and supervise staff.

To make all purchases of material and equipment that may be required.

To develop additional sources of funding, such as foundation, Federal, or State grants, to further create programming.

To perform such other functions relevant to the Public Access Channels as may be appropriate.

Access Rules. The entity to whom a Public Access Channel is assigned shall complete a set of rules for the use of its Channel and which shall be promptly forwarded to the City, the rules shall, at a minimum, provide for:

Access on a first-come, first-service nondiscriminatory basis for all residents of the City;

Prohibition of advertising for commercial or political purpose, as defined by the FCC;

Prohibition of any presentation of lottery information, or obscene or indecent material;

Public inspection of the log of procedures, which shall be retained by the entity for a period of two (2) years;

Procedures by which individual or groups who violate any rule may be prevented from further access to the channel.

FCC Required Tests. The inspection and evaluation shall comply with the technical standards set out in this Ordinance and Ordinance No. 2831 and with FCC standards, if any and if applicable, whichever are stricter. All FCC required tests shall be certified by Grantee and submitted to the City simultaneously with submittal by Grantee to the FCC.

Activities Prohibited.

The company shall not allow its cable or other operations to interfere with television reception of persons not served by the company, nor shall the System interfere with operators on other spectra or channels granted by the FCC, or obstruct or hinder in any manner, the operation of the various utilities serving the residents of the City.

The company shall not, as to rates, charges, service facilities, rules, regulations, or in any other respect, make or grant any preference or advantage to any person, nor subject any person to any prejudice or disadvantage, provided that nothing in this franchise shall be deemed to prohibit the establishment of a graduated schedule of charges and classified rate schedules to which any customer coming within such classification would be entitled

Compliance with Cable Act. Grantee and Grantor affirm by execution hereof that this process occurred by reason of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, and that execution hereof signifies compliance with the completion of the requirements therein. (Ord. 3556, §8)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 16-54. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. (Ord. 3556, §9)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-55. Forfeiture, revocation or abridgement.
The franchise granted herein may be revoked, forfeited or otherwise terminated per the terms and conditions set out in Ordinance No. 2831, Section 16-14 (10). (Ord. 3556, §10)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-56 Effective date.
This order shall be in full force and effect after its approval. (Ord. 3556, §11)

Done this 7th Day of April, 2003.

APPROVED

________________________________

Honorable Joseph E. Morgan, Mayor

ATTEST:

__________________________________

Carol Daniels, City Clerk

The terms and conditions as stated in Section 16-49(4) of this Ordinance are hereby accepted by Ark-Mo Cable TV, Inc., d/b/a Phelps County Cable TV, as of this ____ day of ______, 2003.

Ark-Mo Cable TV, Inc., d/b/a Phelps County Cable TV

_________________________

Gene Barnett, Partner

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 16-57 to 16-72. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article III - United Telephone Service Agreement*
Sec. 16-73. Granting a franchise to the United Telephone Company.
That the United Telephone Company of Missouri, a corporation organized under the laws of the State of Missouri, with a license to do business in the State of Missouri, its successors and assigns, be and they are hereby granted the right, in operating a telephone system, to construct and maintain all the necessary poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, fixtures, telephone plant, and telephone apparatus of whatsoever nature for the purpose of conducting such business, to erect and maintain such telephone poles and string the same with wire and cable along the streets, avenues, boulevards, alleys, easements and other public places of said City of Rolla, and to construct or lay and maintain such conduits as Grantee, its successors and assigns, may require, under the streets, avenues, boulevards, alleys, easements and other public places, aforesaid, for the purpose of such business under the following terms and restrictions, to-wit:

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-74. Term of license.
The term of this grant shall be for two (2) years from this date, subject to all ordinances regulating, taxing and controlling telephone lines or systems, in the City of Rolla, Missouri, and either party shall have the right to review and submit mutually agreed upon changes in writing to the other party. The agreement will be automatically renewed at this time for an additional two (2) years, until a total of twenty (20) years from this date; subject to the right of either the City of Rolla or the United Telephone Company of Missouri to give to the other written notice of non renewal at least sixty (60) days prior to the end of each two year period. (Ord. 2113, §1; Ord. 2716, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-75. Service to subscribers.
The Grantee, its successors and assigns, shall conduct telephone business in such a manner as shall be to the benefit of the City of Rolla, and its inhabitants, rendering good telephone service at reasonable rates as authorized by the Missouri Public Service Commission, or any other state or local governmental agency charged by law with the power to regulate public utilities. (Ord. 2113, §2; Ord. 2716, §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-76. Construction and use of facilities.
All poles and overhead wires/cables or underground conduit erected or constructed under this Ordinance shall be placed, whether on streets, avenues, boulevards, alleys, easements or other public places, as not to interfere unnecessarily with ordinary travel on such streets, avenues, boulevards, alleys, easements or other public places. All poles erected or underground conduit constructed under this Ordinance shall be located as not to injure unnecessarily any drains, sewers, catch basins, or other like public improvements, and said Grantee shall forthwith repair any damages so caused to the satisfaction of the Administration of said City, and in default thereof, said City may repair such damage and charge the cost thereof to, and collect same from said Grantee. (Ord. 2113, §3; Ord. 2716, §3.)

*Licensing of telecommunications companies - See Ch. 25, Art. III.

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-77. Poles or underground conduits of the Grantee shall not interfere with other franchise business.
The poles or underground conduits of the Grantee, its successors and assigns, shall be placed, erected or constructed in such a manner as not unreasonably to interfere with the orderly conduct of the business and the rights of any other public utilities having a right or franchise to operate its business in said City. (Ord. 2113, §4; Ord. 2716, §4.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-78. Location of poles and underground conduit to be approved by City Administration.
All work of locating, erecting, relocating or removing of poles or placing underground conduit under and by virtue of this Ordinance, shall be done with the approval of the City Administration, or its authorized representatives. (Ord. 2113, §5; Ord. 2716, §5.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-79. General financial and insurance provisions.
Indemnification.

Extent. Grantee shall upon acceptance of the franchise award ordinance granted indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, employees and from any and all claims, suits, judgments or damages in any way arising out of or through or alleged to arise out of or through the act of the city in granting a franchise award ordinance and the acts or omissions of Grantee, its servants, employees, or agents. Both such indemnifications shall cover such claims arising in tort, contracts, violations of U.S. or State Constitutions, statutes, ordinances, regulations, or from any source or on the basis of any theory whatsoever.

Tender of Defense. In the event any such claims shall arise, the City shall tender the defense thereof to Grantee; provided, however, that the City, in its sole discretion, may participate in the defense of such claims at the expense of Grantor.
Insurance.

Kinds, Amounts. Grantee shall maintain through the term of the franchise award ordinance insurance in amounts at least as follows:

Worker's Compensation Insurance: Such coverage as may be required by the worker's compensation insurance and safety laws of the State of Missouri and amendments thereto.

Commercial General Liability: $1,000,000 combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury or property damage liability.

Business Automobile Liability: Insuring owned, non-owned and hired autos with limits of $1,000,000 combined single limit per accident for bodily injury and property damage liability.

Copies Furnished. Grantee shall furnish the city with copies of such insurance policies or certificates of insurance, annually.

Endorsement. Such insurance policies, excluding Worker's Compensation coverage, provided for herein shall name the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees as additional insureds and shall contain the following endorsement:

Grantee shall furnish the city with certificates of insurance which will evidence that the insurance will not be cancelled or materially altered without first giving the city thirty (30) days prior written notice.

No Limitation of Liability. The minimum amounts set forth herein for such insurance shall not be construed to limit the liability of Grantee to the city under the franchise award ordinance issued hereunder to the amounts of such insurance.

Adjustment of Established Amounts. The city shall have the power from time to time to review the adequacy of the required insurance coverage amounts.
(Ord. 2113, §6 Ord. 2716, §6; Ord. 2858, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-80. Movement of large structures or equipment under wires or cables.
The said telephone company shall remove, raise or adjust its aerial plant after forty-eight (48) hours notice by the Administration of the City of Rolla, or its authorized representatives;, for the purpose of permitting the moving of houses, or other structures, along the streets of said City; however, the person or persons for whose benefit such telephone plant is removed, raised or adjusted, shall first secure proper permission from said City for the moving and agree to pay said telephone company for its related costs and damages. If desired, an advance deposit by the mover may be required by the telephone company. (Ord. 2113, §7 Ord. 2716, §7.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-81. Cutting and trimming trees and shrubs.
When trees upon and/or overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks, public places or easements of said City need to be trimmed so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with any wires and/or cables on the poles, all the said trimming is to be done under the supervision and direction of any city official or representative to whom said duties have been or may be delegated and the cost for said trimming shall be prorated among all users of the poles and lines. (Ord. 2113, §8; Ord. 2716, §8.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-82. Joint use agreements of poles.
The telephone company shall, whenever feasible, enter into agreements with other public utilities operating within said City for the joint usage of poles. (Ord. 2113, §9; Ord. 2716, §9.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-83. Audit of Grantee required annually.
Grantee hereby agrees to furnish to the City of Rolla, Missouri, a certified statement of local service revenues on an annual basis. (Ord. 2113, §10; Ord. 2716, §10.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-84. License payments.
In consideration for rights and privileges herein granted, the said telephone company shall pay five (5%) percent of local service revenues to the City of Rolla effective January 1, 1990, and such payments shall be made quarterly for each year of the period covered during the term of this Franchise. Same shall be in lieu of any general or special license tax, occupation tax, or any other such tax for the period covered during the terms of this Ordinance. (Ord. 2113, §12; Ord. 2716, §11.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-85. City to review and establish license payments.
Said City shall at the close of each second year of this agreement, review the percent of local service revenues and establish the percent to be collected for the following two year period. (Ord. 2113, §11; Ord. 2716, §12.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-86. Acceptance of license to be filed with city clerk.
Said telephone company shall file its acceptance of this Ordinance with the clerk of said City, within thirty (30) days after its passage and approval. (Ord. 2113, §13; Ord. 2716, §13.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-87. Forfeiture of franchise.
Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of this Ordinance shall work a forfeiture of this franchise. (Ord. 2113, §14; Ord. 2716, §14.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-88. Terms may apply to succeeding Grantees.
The franchise, as well as the rights hereunder, may be assigned by the Grantee as well as all succeeding Grantees, at their option, and the assigns shall succeed to all the rights, duties and liabilities of the Grantee hereunder. (Ord. 2113, §15; Ord. 2716, §15.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-89. Severability.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. (Ord. 2113, §16; Ord. 2716, §16.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-90. Effective date.
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and approval

PASSED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ROLLA, MISSOURI, AND APPROVED BY THE MAYOR THIS 8TH DAY OF JANUARY 1990.

APPROVED:

Floyd Ferrell (Signed)

Mayor

ATTEST:

Carol Daniels (Signed)

City Clerk

APPROVED AS TO FORM:

J. W. Wiggins (Signed)

City Counselor (Ord. No. 2113, §17; Ord. 2716, § 17.)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 16-91 to 16-95. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article IV - Natural Gas Service Franchise
Sec. 16-96. Grant.
The City of Rolla, Missouri (hereinafter "City") hereby grants a franchise to UtiliCorp United Inc., a Delaware corporation doing business as Missouri Public Service (hereinafter "Grantee"), its successors and assigns to construct, reconstruct, excavate for, place, maintain, repair, operate, and use all necessary or appropriate mains, service pipes, conduits, conductors, tanks, vaporizers, underground vaults, regulators, and other equipment with all necessary or appropriate appurtenances and appliances in connection therewith, in, along, across, over, and under the streets, roads, alleys, sidewalks, bridges, and other public places within the present and future corporate limits of the City, and areas dedicated to the City for public utility use with and said use of public rights of way and public places being subject to the approval of the Public Works Director or the Rolla Municipal Utilities General Manager, for the purpose of furnishing, transporting, and distributing gas for light, heat, power, and other purposes within City, and in territory adjacent to City and for the purpose of transporting and transmitting gas through City, all such equipment, appliances, and apparatus to be installed and maintained with due regard to rightful use by other persons, with vehicles or otherwise, of the streets, roads, alleys, sidewalks, bridges, and other public places and areas dedicated to City for public utility use. (Ord. 2924, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-97. Construction, construction schedule.
This grant of franchise authority shall be conditioned upon Grantee beginning construction within 1) twelve (12) months of approval by the Missouri Public Service Commission (hereinafter "PSC"), or b) contract date of gas acquisition from a gas pipeline entity with a metering point at City, whichever last occurs. Grantee agrees to use its best efforts to negotiate a contract for gas acquisition as soon as practicable.

Grantee estimates that a substantial portion of the initial distribution system will be complete within three (3) years of commencement of construction of the distribution system, unless events occur beyond the reasonable control of Grantee.

Grantee agrees that the plan submitted to the Director of Public Works on May 20, 1993, shall serve as Grantee's tentative preliminary construction plan.

Grantee further agrees to provide the City's Public Works Director, upon request by City, copies of construction design drawings and construction specifications relating to construction of the City's gas system (hereinafter "the distribution system") filed with the Missouri Public Service Commission (hereinafter "PSC"). (Ord. 2924, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-98. PSC rates and regulations.
Grantee shall propose initial and subsequent rates to the PSC subject to approval by the PSC. Grantee shall seek approval of the PSC to permit Grantee to convert, as is economically justifiable, Rolla residential house piping from LP gas to natural gas at no cost to customers during the phase of initial construction of the distribution system. The conversion program proposal is subject to PSC approval. (Ord. 2924, §3)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-99. Gas supply.
Grantee shall furnish reasonable assurance to City of the availability of a gas supply at competitive prices prior to commencing initial construction of the distribution system. This section shall not apply following commencement of the initial construction of the distribution system. (Ord. 2924, §4)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-100. Extensions of system.
Extensions of, and additions to, the distribution system maintained by Grantee, its successors or assigns, in the City shall be made in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the PSC. (Ord. 2924, §5)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-101. Mortgage of assets allowed.
Grantee may make, execute, or enter into any deed, deed of trust, mortgage, conditional sales contract, or any loan, lease, pledge, sale, gift, or similar agreement concerning any of the facilities and property, real or personal, involved in the operation of the distribution system. (Ord. 2924, §6)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-102. Indemnity.
Grantee shall hold said City harmless from all liability imposed upon it on account of injury or damage to person or property caused by Grantee, its contractors, subcontractors, agents, or employees in the course of or in connection with any construction, reconstruction, excavation, placement, maintenance, operation, or use of mains, service pipes, conduits, conductors, tanks, vaporizers, underground vaults, regulators, and other equipment, in, along, across, or under any of the streets, roads, alleys, sidewalks, bridges, or other public places in the City in the exercise of any of the rights and privileges conferred by this Ordinance. Rather than enter into a separate agreement with Rolla, MPS agrees to this Section 16-102 as its indemnification and hold harmless agreement with Rolla. (Ord. 2924, §7)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-103. Franchise fee.
As part of the consideration for the rights and privileges conferred by this Ordinance, Grantee shall pay to City in the manner and subject to applicable tariffs and the terms and conditions as hereinafter set forth, an amount equal to five percent (5%) of its gross receipts from sales of gas and/or gas transportation service from each customer (hereinafter "Franchise Fee").

The obligation of Grantee with respect to the Franchise Fee as herein provided shall remain in full force and effect during the term of this Franchise until, and will terminate upon, the effective date of the levy or imposition by City, in the manner provided by law, of any lawful tax as now or as may hereafter be applicable to the business of distributing or selling gas and/or gas transportation service, or upon the proceeds of sales of gas or the receipts from gas transportation service or upon the right or privilege of engaging in such business within said corporate limits, whether said tax be designated as an occupation tax, a license tax, or otherwise; but not including a sales tax levied or imposed pursuant to the City Sales Tax Act or any other applicable tax law.

Grantee shall pay the Franchise Fee herein provided monthly, and said fee shall be computed upon the basis of gross revenue from the first day through the last day of each month beginning the second calendar month after the effective date of this Franchise. The Grantee shall calculate the Franchise Fee due said City monthly, and within sixty (60) days after the last day of each month file a statement notifying said City of the amount of gross revenue subject to the payment of the said Fee which was received during the month, and at the time of filing such statement shall pay to said City the Fee due.

The term "gross receipts" means the aggregate amount of all sales and charges from the business of supplying gas or gas transportation service made by Grantee or any affiliated company of Grantee in said municipality during any period less discounts, late payment charges, credits, refunds, sales taxes, franchise fees, and uncollectible accounts. Gross receipts derived from the furnishing of such service to City shall not be included in gross receipts nor shall the Franchise Fee be due on such gross receipts. (Ord. 3066, §2).

City may grant a twelve (12) month abatement of this Franchise Fee to an industry which:

Announces it will create twenty-five (25) or more full-time equivalent positions for which City is able to apply for a Community Development Block Grant for infrastructure improvements, or

Has created during the most recent twelve (12) months, twenty-five (25) or more full-time equivalent positions in the City over the preceding twelve (12) month period. One full-time equivalent position shall be equal to one thousand eight hundred (1,800) hours worked over the preceding twelve (12) months. Adequate personnel records shall be provided for review to substantiate the application for abatement.
Grantee shall be notified in writing by City of such abatement. Abatement shall commence on the beginning of Grantee's gas billing cycle next following Grantee's receipt of the notice of abatement. (Ord. 2924, §8)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-104. Revocation.
Grounds for revocation. Subject to the "Procedures Prior to Revocation" provided herein, City reserves the right to revoke any franchise granted hereunder and rescinds all rights and privileges associated with the Franchise in the following circumstances, each of which shall represent a default and breach under this Franchise:

If Grantee should fail to perform any of its material obligation under this Ordinance or under such documents, contracts, and other terms and provisions entered into by and between City and Grantee.

If Grantee should fail to provide or maintain in full force and effect, the liability coverage as required herein.

If within the distribution system, Grantee ceases to provide services mandated by the PSC for any reason within the reasonable control of Grantee, this action shall not prevent Grantee from discontinuing service for nonpayment, where residences or commercial establishments are vacant or have ceased to be operational, or any other reason permitted under Grantee's tariff on file with the PSC.

Grantee shall not be declared in default or be subject to any sanction under any provision of this Ordinance in any case in which performance of any such provision is prevented for reasons beyond Grantee's control. A default shall not be deemed to be beyond Grantee's control if committed by a corporation or other business entity in which Grantee holds a controlling interest or which holds a controlling interest in Grantee, whether held directly or indirectly.

Procedure prior to revocation.

City shall make written demand in sufficient detail so that the complaint can be understood that Grantee must comply and to what extent Grantee must comply with any such requirement, limitation term, condition, rule or regulation, or correct any action deemed cause for revocation. If the failure, refusal, or neglect of Grantee continues for a period of thirty (30) days following such written demand, City may place its request for termination of the Franchise upon a regular Council meeting agenda. City shall cause to be served upon such Grantee, at least ten (10) business days prior to the date of such Council meeting, a written notice of this intent to request such termination, and the time and place of the meeting, notice of which shall be published by the City Clerk at least once ten (10) business days before such meeting in a newspaper of general circulation within the City.

The Council shall hear any persons interested therein, and shall determine, in its discretion, whether or not any failure, refusal or neglect by Grantee was with just cause.

If such failure, refusal or neglect by Grantee was with just cause, the Council shall direct Grantee to comply within such times and manner and upon such terms and conditions as are reasonable.

If the Council shall determine such failure, refusal, or neglect by Grantee was without just cause, then the Council may, by resolution, declare that the Franchise of such Grantee shall be terminated unless there be compliance by the Grantee within such period as the Council may set. (Ord. 2924, §9)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-105. Insurance.
Types and amounts of insurance will be carried in accordance with PSC requirements, if any. Grantee shall provide a Certificate of Insurance for General Commercial Liability coverage in the amount of Two Million Dollars ($2,000,000.00) per occurrence. The Certificate of Insurance shall name the City as additional Insured with respect to liability coverage arising within the corporate boundaries of Rolla. Grantee will also provide a Certificate of Insurance showing proof of Workers' Compensation Insurance. Grantee additionally shall provide a Certificate of Insurance for Vehicle and Equipment Liability Insurance in the amount of One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence. The Certificate of Insurance shall name the City as additional Insured with respect to liability coverage arising within the corporate boundaries of Rolla.

All three of the required Insurance Certificates shall be provided ten (10) days' advance notice to City in the event of policy cancellation, termination, or insurance provider changes. Upon request of Rolla, all required Certificates of Insurance shall be submitted to the City. (Ord. 2924, §10)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-106. Right-of-way usage.
Notification of construction. Grantee shall notify City prior to the commencement of activity of its intention to commence construction in any streets. City shall cooperate with Grantee in granting any permits required. Proposed construction shall be performed in accordance with the pertinent provisions of the Ordinance of the City.

Minimum interference. All gas lines, equipment, and structures shall be so installed and located insofar as is practical to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners and at all times shall be kept and maintained in a safe and adequate condition and in good order and repair. Grantee shall, at all times, employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failure and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public. Suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares, or other devices shall be used at such times and places as are reasonably required for the safety of all members of the public. Any other fixtures placed in any public way by Grantee shall be placed in such a manner as not to unduly interfere with the usual travel on such public way.

Restoration of streets. Whenever Grantee shall disturb the surface of any street, alley, public highway, or ground for any purpose mentioned herein, it shall restore the same to the condition in which it was prior to the opening thereof, and when any opening is made by Grantee in any hard surface pavement in any street, alley, or public highway, Grantee shall promptly refill the opening and restore the pavement. City may refill and/or repave in case of neglect of Grantee. The cost thereof, including the cost of inspection and supervision, shall be paid by Grantee. All excavations made by Grantee in the streets, alleys, and public highways shall be properly safeguarded for the prevention of accidents.

Removal of facilities. Whenever, in case of fire or other disaster, it becomes necessary in the judgment of the City's emergency personnel to remove any of Grantee's facilities, no charge shall be made by Grantee against City for restoration and repair, unless such acts amount to gross negligence by City. Grantee shall be notified immediately by the City of such removal of facilities.

Improvements by City. With respect to any property of Grantee located over, on, or under City streets, roads, alleys, sidewalks, bridges, or other public places within the corporate limits of City, Grantee at its expense shall protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove any property of Grantee when, in the opinion of the City the same is required by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway or street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, transportation facilities, tracks, or any other types of structures, improvements by governmental agencies, whether acting in a governmental or proprietary capacity, or any other structure or public improvement. Grantee shall in all cases have the privilege, subject to the corresponding obligations, to abandon any property of Grantee in place. In exercising these rights, City will use its best efforts and judgment to weigh the interest of all involved parties, and to take into consideration the most cost-effective manner of making any changes in the location. Nothing hereunder shall be deemed a taking of the property of Grantee and Grantee shall be entitled to no surcharge by reason of anything hereunder.

Payment upon Grantee's failure. Upon failure of Grantee to commence, pursue, or complete any work required by law or by the provisions of this Franchise to be done in repairing any street, within the time prescribed in a permit issued by City to Grantee and to the reasonable satisfaction of the City, Grantee shall pay to City the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by City to Grantee within thirty (30) days after receipt of such itemized report.

Reservations of street rights. Nothing in the Franchise shall be construed to prevent City from constructing sewers, grading, paving, repairing, and/or altering any street, alley, or public highway, or laying, repairing, or removing water main or constructing or establishing any other public work. All such work shall be done, insofar as practicable, in such manner as not to obstruct, injure or prevent the free use and operation of the wire, pipes, or appurtenances of Grantee. If any such property of Grantee herein shall interfere with the construction or repair of any street or public improvement, whether it be construction, repair, or removal of a sewer line or water main, the improvement of a street or any other public improvement, all such wires, conduits, or other appliances and facilities shall be removed, left in place, or replaced in such manner as shall be directed by Grantee so that the same shall not interfere with the said public work of City, and in the event that when said property of Grantee was installed by Grantee the property was over, on, or under City streets, roads, alleys, sidewalks, bridges, or other public places within the corporate limits of the City, such removal or replacement shall be at the expense of Grantee. In exercising these rights, City will use its best efforts and judgment to weigh the interest of all involved parties, and to take into consideration the most cost-effective manner of making any changes in the location.

In the event of such vacation or discontinued use, City shall provide an easement for any existing portions of Grantee's facilities which are located in vacated or to be abandoned streets, alleys, public highways, or any portions thereof. (Ord. 2924, §11)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 16-107. Maintenance and complaints.
Business office. Grantee shall maintain an appropriate business office within the City limits of Rolla which shall be open during all usual business hours, have a publicly listed telephone toll free to residents of City, and be so operated to receive subscriber complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments on a twenty-four (24) hour basis. All complaints and documentation thereof shall be handled in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the PSC.

Repairs. Grantee shall conduct its repair service in accordance with the service standards prescribed by the PSC.

Information to subscribers. Grantee shall furnish to each subscriber at the time service is installed, written instructions that clearly set forth procedures for making inquiries or complaints, including the name, address, and legal telephone number of the employee or employees or agent to whom such inquiries or complaints are to be addressed, and furnish information concerning the City office responsible for administration of the Franchise with the address and telephone number of the office. (Ord. 2924, §12)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 16-108. Captions.
The captions to sections through this Ordinance are intended solely to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions of this Ordinance. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this Ordinance. (Ord. 2924, §13)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-109. Nonenforcement by City.
Grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this Ordinance or said Franchise by reason of any single or repeated failure of City to enforce compliance.

A. No recourse against city. Grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against City or its officials, boards, commissions, agents, or employees for any loss, cost, expense, or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of the Franchise or because of the lawful and valid enforcement of this Franchise. (Ord. 2924, §14)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-110. Theft of service and tampering.
Violation. No person, whether or not a customer of Grantee may intentionally or knowingly damage or cause to be damaged, any fixture, conduit, equipment, or apparatus of Grantee, or commit any act with intent to cause such damage, or to tap, tamper with, or otherwise connect device to a fixture, conduit, pipe, equipment, and apparatus or appurtenances of Grantee with the intent to obtain gas from the distribution system without authorization from Grantee and/or compensation to Grantee, or to obtain gas with intent to cheat or defraud Grantee of any lawful charge to which it is entitled.

Punishment. Any person convicted of violating any provision of this section is subject to a fine of not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense, or imprisonment of not more than ninety (90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day's violation of this section shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 2924, §15)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-111. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. (Ord. 2924, §16)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-112. Election and acceptance required.
This Ordinance shall not be effective unless and until the grant of rights, permission, and authority herein contained are approved by a majority of the qualified voters voting hereon at an election, pursuant to another Ordinance providing for such election. If such grant is so approved at such election, this Ordinance, and the grant herein contained shall be and continue in force and effect for a period of twenty (20) years from the date of such election; providing, however, that Grantee, its successors and assigns, shall, within sixty (60) days after the date of approval by a majority of the voters at such election, file with the City Clerk an acceptance of the provisions of this Ordinance; and provided further that if such acceptance is not so filed within said period of sixty (60) days, all rights, privileges, and authority herein granted shall become null and void. Any franchise granted hereunder shall be nonexclusive. (Ord. 2924, §17)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-113. Disclaimers.
Neither acceptance of, nor compliance with, the provisions of this Ordinance shall in any way impair or affect, or constitute or be construed as a relinquishment or waiver of any right, permission, or authority which Grantee, its successors or assigns, may have independently of this Ordinance. (Ord. 2924, §18)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-114. Repeal by reference.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance or with any of its provisions are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed. (Ord. 2924, §19)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-115. City permits required.
This Ordinance shall not relieve Grantee of the obligation to comply with any ordinance now existing in the City or enacted in the future requiring to obtain written permits or other approval from City prior to commencement of construction of facilities within the streets thereof. (Ord. 2924, §20)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-116. PSC rules, regulations, and tariffs.
As a further part of the rights and privileges conferred by this Ordinance, Grantee shall provide gas service in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the PSC and the Gas Tariff on file with the PSC as the same may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 2924, §21)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-117. Sale of facilities to City.
Both parties agree to enter into good faith negotiations for the sale to City of all facilities constructed pursuant to the rights granted through Section 16-96 (Franchise Grant) above at the request of either party; 1) upon completion of the fifteenth (15th) year of this Franchise as measured from its effective date, or 2) upon revocation pursuant to this Ordinance. In the event the terms of such a sale are agreed upon between the parties, reasonable efforts will be made to coordinate the actual transfer; 1) at the expiration of this Franchise's twenty (20) year term with any required regulatory approvals, or 2) within a reasonable time following revocation and required regulatory approvals.

This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its final passage and approval.

PASSED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OR ROLLA, MISSOURI, AND APPROVED BY THE MAYOR THIS 7TH DAY OF JUNE, 1993.

APPROVED:

___________________________

Mayor

ATTEST:

___________________________

City Clerk

APPROVED AS TO FORM:

___________________________

City Counselor

(Ord. 2924, §22)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 16-118 to 16-122. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article V - Fidelity Communications Franchise
Sec. 16-123. Granting a Franchise to Fidelity Communications Services I, In c.
In accordance with the terms of Section 25-42 of the Rolla Code, Fidelity Communications Services I, Inc., (hereinafter "FCSI"), a Missouri general business corporation which has been certificated by the Missouri Public Service Commission to provide basic local exchange telecommunications service in certain parts of the State of Missouri, and in particular in the exchange of Sprint Inc., (successor to United Telephone Company of Missouri) serving the City of Rolla, is hereby granted permission, in operating a telecommunications system within the City of Rolla, to construct and maintain all necessary poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, fixtures, telecommunications plant and apparatus of whatsoever nature for the purpose of conducting such business, to erect, operate and maintain the same along the streets, avenues, boulevards, alleys, public easements and other public places of said City of Rolla, under the terms and conditions set forth herein. (Ord. 3376, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-124. Term of license.
The initial term of this grant of permission shall be for two (2) years from the effective date of this ordinance. The grant shall be automatically renewed at the conclusion of the initial two (2) year period for an additional two (2) year renewal term unless either the City of Rolla or FCSI gives the other written notice of non-renewal at least sixty (60) days prior to the end of the initial period. After the initial term, this grant shall continue to be automatically renewed, subject to the same requirement of at least sixty (60) days prior written notice prior to the end of the two (2) year renewal period, until a total of ten (10) two (2) years periods have elapsed. The City of Rolla shall have the right during the initial of any renewal term, by ordinance applicable in a non-discriminatory manner to all similarly situated utilities, to impose additional conditions on this grant as a part of any restructuring of the City's ordinances concerning franchises for utilities in the City or the use of City right of way or both. (Ord. 3376, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-125. General terms and conditions.
Sections 25-24, 16-75, 16-76, 16-77, 16-78, 16-80, 16-81, 16-82, 16-83, 16-85, 16-86, 16-87, 16-88, 16-89, 16-105, 16-109, 16-111, 16-115 of the Rolla Code are hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set out herein and made applicable to FCSI. (Ord. 3376, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-126. License fee payments.
As part of the consideration for the rights and privileges conferred by this license, FCSI hereby agrees to and shall pay the City an amount equal to five (5%) percent of its local service revenues and all recurring and/or non-recurring charges designed to recover the cost of facilities which are physically located within the City of Rolla. Such payments shall be made quarterly for each year during which the license granted by this ordinance is in effect. FCSI shall calculate the amount of the fee monthly, and within sixty (60) days of the end of each calendar quarter file a statement with the City showing the basis of the calculation of the fee and submit the payment shown by the calculation. The fee payment shall be in addition to any other applicable taxes. Any payment not made on a timely basis shall be subject to a late payment fee at an interest charge, computed from such due date on such amount due, at the annual rate equal to 12% on any unpaid balance and a sum of money equal to expenses, costs, and attorney's fees, if any, incurred by the City by reason of delinquent payment. The late payment fee shall be in addition to any other remedies available to the City for FCSI's breach. The City shall have full audit rights for all fee statements. (Ord. 3376, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-127. Indemnity.
FCSI hereby agrees to indemnify and shall hold the City of Rolla and any and all of its employees, agents or contractors harmless from any and all liability imposed upon it or them or both on account of injury or damage to person or property or both caused by FCSI, its contractors, subcontractors, agents or employees in the course of or in connection with any construction, reconstruction, excavation, placement, maintenance, operation, or use of any of the facilities utilized or to be utilized in the course of FCSI's business in the City in the exercise of any of the rights and privileges conferred by this ordinance, whether or not the injury or damage involves any negligence, action or inaction on the part of the City or its employees, agents or contractors. (Ord. 3376, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 16-128. Service agreement to form an Educational and Governmental Cable Channel.
That the Mayor of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is authorized to enter into a Cable Service Agreement with the Rolla Public Schools (RPS) and Fidelity Cablevision, Inc. for the purpose of forming an Educational and Governmental Channel as outlined in Exhibit A. (Ord. 3857, §1)

(Return to Contents)

Secs. 16-129 to 16-132. Reserved.

Chapter 17 - Gambling
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter



Chapter Contents:
Article I - In General
§ 17-1. Keeping of gaming devices prohibited.
§ 17-2. Seizure of gaming devices, etc., by police.
§ 17-3. Warrant for seizure of gaming devices - Issuance.
§ 17-4. Same - Contents; execution.
§ 17-5. Same - Notice of hearing.
§ 17-6. Rights of owner of property seized.
§ 17-7. Disposition of seized property.
§ 17-8. Witnesses at trials of gambling offenses.
§§ 17-9 to 17-13. Reserved.


Article II - Billiard, Pool, and Other Similar Tables
§ 17-14. Keeper defined.
§ 17-15. "Kelly Pool" prohibited.
§ 17-16. Betting prohibited.
§§ 17-17 to 17-21. Reserved.


Article I - In General
Sec. 17-1. Keeping of gaming devices prohibited.
No person shall set up or keep any table or gaming device, commonly called ABC, faro bank, EO, roulette, equality, keno, slot machine, punch board, stand, or device of whatever pattern, kind or make, or however worked, operated or manipulated, or any kind of gambling table or gambling device, adapted, devised and designed for the purpose of playing any game of chance for money or property; nor shall any person induce, entice or permit any person to bid or play at or upon any such gaming table or gambling device, or on the side or against the keeper thereof. (Ord. 478, §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 17-2. Seizure of gaming devices, etc., by police.
Whenever the chief of police or his deputy, or any of the police officers of the city shall have knowledge or satisfactory information that there is any gaming table or gambling device kept or used within the city, it shall be their duty to forthwith seize such table or device and the keeper thereof and bring them before the police judge, where the keeper thereof shall receive a speedy trial, and such gambling table or device shall be destroyed or forfeited to the city. (Ord. 478, §8.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 17-3. Warrant for seizure of gaming devices - Issuance.
Upon complaint being made on oath, in writing, to the police judge of the city, that any of the property or articles named in Section 17-1 are kept within the city, if he shall be satisfied that there is reasonable ground for such complaint, shall issue a warrant to the chief of police, or to any other police officer of the city, directing him to search for and seize any of the articles or property named in Section 17-1. (Ord. 478, §3.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 17-4. Same - Contents; execution.
The search warrants mentioned in Section 17-3 shall describe the place to be searched or the things to be seized, as nearly as may be, and shall direct the officer serving the same to seize such articles or property and bring them before the police judge issuing the warrant. The officer who shall be charged with the execution of the warrants specified in Section 17-3 shall have power, if necessary, to break open doors for the purpose of executing such warrant and for that purpose may summon to his aid the power of the city. (Ord. 478, §4.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 17-5. Same - Notice of hearing.
The police judge issuing the warrant specified in Section 17-3 shall set a day, not less than five nor more than twenty days after the day of such service and seizure, for determining whether such property is the kind of property mentioned in Section 17-1, and shall order the officer having such property in charge to retain possession of it until after such hearing. Written notice of the date and place of such hearing shall be given, at least five days before such date, by posting a copy of such notice in a conspicuous place upon the premises in which such property is seized, and by delivering a copy of such notice to any person claiming an interest in such property, whose name may be known to the person making the complaint, or to the officer issuing or serving such warrant, or leaving the copy of such notice at the usual place of abode of such person with any member of his family or household above the age of fifteen years . Such notice shall be signed by the police judge. (Ord. 478, §5.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 17-6. Rights of owner of property seized.
The owner of the property named in Section 17-2 may appear at the hearing provided in Section 17-5 and defend against the charges as to the nature and use of the property so seized, and the police judge shall determine from the evidence produced at such hearing whether the property is the kind of property mentioned in Section 17-2. (Ord. 478, §6.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 17-7. Disposition of seized property.
If the police judge shall determine that the property or articles seized are of the kind mentioned in Section 17-1 he shall cause the same to be publicly destroyed by burning or otherwise, and if he finds that such property is not of the kind mentioned he shall order the same returned to its owner. If it appears that it may be necessary to use such articles or property as evidence in any criminal prosecution, the police judge shall order the officer having possession of them to retain such possession until such necessity no longer exists. They shall neither be destroyed nor returned to the owner until they are no longer needed as such evidence. (Ord. 478, §7)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 17-8. Witnesses at trials of gambling offenses.
Any person called as a witness to testify against another for gaming is a competent witness to prove the offense, although he may have been concerned as a party and is compelled to testify as other witnesses, but he shall not be liable to indictment or punishment. (Ord. 478, §9)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 17-9 to 17-13. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article II - Billiard, Pool, and Other Similar Table
Sec. 17-14. Keeper defined.
Every person who controls or owns a billiard table, pigeon hole table, bagatelle table, Jenny Lind table or pool table, and permits others to play thereon, except when kept solely for pleasure, is hereby declared to be a keeper of such table. (Ord. 195, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 17-15. "Kelly Pool" prohibited.
No keeper as defined in Section 17-14 shall permit any person to play what is commonly known as "Kelly Pool" on any table designated in Section 17-14.

Every person convicted of the offense mentioned in this Section shall, in addition to any other penalty, forfeit his license as a keeper. (Ord. 195, §§2, 3.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 17-16. Betting prohibited.
No person shall bet or wager anything of value upon the result of any game played upon any of the tables mentioned in Section 17-14. (Ord. 195, § 4.)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 17-17 to 17-21. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)

Chapter 18 - Garbage, Trash and Refuse
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter


Chapter Contents:
Article I - In General
§ 18-1. Definitions.
§ 18-2. City to have exclusive right to collect and remove refuse.
§ 18-3. Recycling of solid waste materials encouraged.
§ 18-4. Authorization for commercial solid waste haulers.
§ 18-5. Allowance for customers to dispose of their own refuse; allowance not to relieve customers of other provisions and minimum charges; exception.
§ 18-6. Service charge rates for residential refuse collection.
§ 18-7. Prohibited practices.
§ 18-8. Enforcement of service charge collection.
§ 18-9. Yard waste procedures.
§§ 18-10 to 18-13. Reserved.


Article II - Residential Refuse Disposal and Collection
§ 18-14. Residential collections; special collections.
§ 18-15. Residential refuse container and storage requirements.
§ 18-16. Service charge rates for residential refuse collection.
§ 18-17. Service charge to be included and itemized on electric and/or water service bill.
§ 18-18. Exemption.
§§ 18-19 to 18-22. Reserved.


Article III - Commercial Refuse Disposal and Collection
§ 18-23. Number of commercial collections; special collections.
§ 18-24. Commercial refuse container and storage requirements.
§ 18-25. Service charge rates for commercial refuse collections.
§ 18-26. Service charge bills to be prepared by city.
§§ 18-27 to 18-31. Reserved.


Article IV - Refuse Service Review Board
§ 18-32. Review Committee; selection of members; authority.
§§ 18-33 to 18-37. Reserved.


Article V - Recovery of Emergency Related Expenses
§ 18-38. Procedure for recovery of expenses incurred in emergency actions in response to releases or threatened releases of material into or upon the environment.
§§ 18-39 to 18-43. Reserved.


Article I - In General
Sec. 18-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section:

      Commercial refuse customer – Means any commercial, industrial or institutional establishment or group of establishments together with its/their owner(s) and/or occupants or officer(s), and housing facilities containing more than two adjoining dwelling units (duplexes).

      City – Means the City of Rolla as a governmental entity.

      Collection Service – Means to travel from location to location gathering loose or containerized solid waste materials.

      Commercial hauler – Means any person who, except as an agent of the City, collects and disposes of solid waste and receives money or other considerations for said service.

      Director – Means the Director of the City of Rolla Environmental Services Department. (Ord. 3892 §1)

      Dwelling unit – Means any room or group of rooms located within a structure which form(s) a single habitable unit with facilities for living, sleeping, cooking and hygiene.

      Garbage – Means all animal and vegetable wastes subject to decay resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.

      Hazardous waste – Means any waste or combination of wastes, which, because of quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illnesses, or pose a present or potential threat to humans and/or the environment.

      Infectious waste – Means waste that is capable of producing an infectious disease because it contains pathogens of sufficient virulence and quantity so that exposure to the waste by a susceptible human host could result in an infectious disease. These wastes include blood and blood products, sharps and other items contaminated with blood, discarded biological products, human and animal bi-products, etc.

      Major appliances – Means clothes washers and dryers, water heaters, trash compactors, dishwashers, conventional ovens, ranges, stoves, woodstoves, air conditioners, dehumidifiers, refrigerators and freezers, and any other appliances as regulated by the State of Missouri due to their hazardous components (i.e. Freon, mercury switches, PCB/s).

      Municipal waste – Means household wastes and commercial, agricultural, governmental, industrial and institutional wastes which have chemical and physical characteristics similar to household wastes.

      Occupant – Means any person who singly or jointly or severally with others shall be in actual possession of any dwelling unit either as owner or tenant.

      Recyclable materials – Means those materials which can be diverted, removed, or recovered from the waste stream to be used, reused, sold or recycled whether or not they require subsequent separation and processing. Recyclable materials include but are not limited to paper, paper products, cardboard, plastics, bottles, cans, glass, metals, etc.

      Recycling – Means the separation and reuse or remanufacture of recyclable materials which might otherwise be disposed of by landfilling.

      Refuse – Means both garbage and solid waste as defined in this Section.

      Regulated waste – Means any waste material requiring special handling and/or disposal as specified by law. Regulated waste includes, but is not limited to lead-acid batteries, yard waste, tires, major appliances, used oil, asbestos, contaminated soil, etc.

      Residential refuse customer – Means the occupant and/or owner of any detached single-family dwelling unit, up to and including duplexes.

      Rummage – To rummage means "to physically exam and/or search through."

      Scavenge – Scavenging, or to scavenge, means "to rummage or search through a refuse or recycling container for purposes of removal of items."

      Solid waste – Means municipal wastes, garbage, refuse, and other discarded materials including, but not limited to, solid and semi-solid waste materials resulting from residential, commercial, institutional, industrial, and governmental activities.

      Yard waste – Means organic debris (e.g. grass clippings, leaves, tree limbs, bark, branches, flowers, etc.) which is produced as part of yard and garden development and maintenance. The definition of yard waste shall include Christmas trees that do not contain ornaments, tensile, or flocculent.  (Ord. 3768, §1; Ord. 3892 §1; Ord. 4295, §1)

CROSS REFERENCES:
Health and Sanitation, Ch. 19; Nuisances, Ch. 28; Sewers and Water, Ch. 35; removal storage, etc. of rubbish, etc. from burned buildings, §36-56.
STATE REFERENCES:
Garbage disposal RSM. §71.680, §71.690.
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 18-2. City to have exclusive right to collect and remove refuse.
The City, through its duly authorized agents, shall have an exclusive right to provide collection services for the removal of refuse, solid waste, and unprocessed recyclable materials within the incorporated limits of the City of Rolla, MO and it shall be unlawful for any other person or entity to provide a collection service, for the removal of refuse, solid waste, and unprocessed recyclable materials in the City, except as may otherwise be provided in this section. No person or entity shall duplicate the collection services provided by the City unless authorized to do so. As used in this section, "unprocessed recyclable materials" means loose recyclable materials that have not been compressed, compacted, baled, bundled, crushed, granulated, or otherwise consolidated for transport to an end market. As used in this section "end market" means a manufacturer that will use the processed recyclables as feedstock or raw materials in the production of new goods. However, nothing contained herein shall prevent a person or entity that generates recyclable materials from transporting the recyclable materials they have generated to a business engaged in purchasing and processing recyclable materials. 

The storage, collection, processing and disposal of solid waste will be managed in accordance with local and state laws and rules.  All processing facilities and disposal areas utilized shall have appropriate local and state permits.  (Ord. 3768, §1; Ord. 4295, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 18-3. Recycling of solid waste materials encouraged.
The City shall, as a matter of public welfare, promote recycling as a preferred waste management alternative, make available collection services and drop-off facilities, and, as approved by the City Council, adopt such charges as will encourage refuse customers to recycle appropriate solid waste materials.

In addition to the City’s existing programs and services, persons or entities are encouraged to target recyclable materials or recycling services not being addressed by the City’s collection/drop-off services. Commercial customers with significant quantities are encouraged to recover materials for recycling. Not-for-profit entities are encouraged to utilize recycling opportunities for fund raising efforts.

Upon request by the City, any person, business, or entity providing recycling services within the City of Rolla, shall provide to the City, records of types and quantities of materials recycled.  (Ord. 3768, §1; Ord. 4295, §1)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 18-4. Authorization for commercial solid waste haulers.
A person may be authorized to operate as a commercial solid waste hauler within the city upon obtaining such licenses as may be required by the city and a determination by the City Council that the public convenience and necessity are served by such authorization, and, that the service to be provided by the hauler applying for said authorization, cannot be provided by the City.

All vehicles used to collect and transport solid waste shall be maintained in a safe, clean and sanitary condition. The vehicles are to be of standard refuse packer body design with watertight and covered bodies. If a roll-off style truck is used, the roll-off container must be tarped when being transported carrying any contents.  (Ord. 3768, §1; Ord. 4295, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 18-5. Allowance for customers to dispose of their own refuse; allowance not to relieve customers of other provisions and minimum charges; exception.
Any refuse customer may collect his own refuse from his own premises and remove that refuse to a landfill or transfer station approved by the state, provided that in so doing no nuisance is caused or maintained.  (Ord. 3768, §1; Ord. 4295, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 18-6. Service charge rates for residential refuse collection.
Each residential refuse customer shall pay to the City a service charge of $12.75 per month for the weekly collection of the contents of each 35 gallon container, all acceptable yard wastes in biodegradable bags, and all specified recyclables. Each residential refuse customer shall pay to the City a service charge of $15.25 per month for the weekly collection of the contents of each 90 gallon container, all acceptable yard wastes in biodegradable bags, and all specified recyclables. (Ord. 4170, §2; Ord. 4295, §1; Ord. 4448, §1)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 18-7. Prohibited practices.
It shall be unlawful for any refuse customer to:

Deposit refuse in any refuse container other than his/her own or that is assigned for his/her use by the City.

Accumulate or dispose of refuse in any manner or at any location which the City Council deems a nuisance to the public health or safety.

Fail to place their refuse container at the nearest street curb or street edge on the date of collection for collection purposes, except refuse customers who have provided the City with a written verification from a physician stating they are physically unable to place the refuse container at the street, in which case all refuse will be placed in securely tied plastic bags.

Place the refuse container at the curb or street edge more than twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the scheduled collection, or failure to remove the refuse container from the curb side or street edge to the front line of the house within twenty-four (24) hours of the day of collection. A violation will result in the property owner being notified of the requirement to remove the container from the street edge. Noncompliance within a 5-day time limit will result in the tenant being notified of the requirement via posting of the property and the property owner being notified via mail, and also can result in the issuance of a citation with a fine of $25 for the first offense, $50 for the second offense, and $75 for offenses thereafter. For purposes of enforcement, the property owner and the tenant of a property will be held jointly or severally liable.

Fail to place garbage in tied plastic bags prior to depositing such refuse in containers.

It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to rummage through or scavenge items from any refuse or recycling container owned serviced, or maintained by the City.

Place liquid waste (i.e. paint, waste oil, chemicals) in a refuse container or bags to be collected by the City.

Burn, paint, or otherwise deface any refuse or recycling container owned by the City.

Place bulk or loose refuse or waste items at the curb or street edge more than seventy-two (72) hours in advance of a pre-arranged collection or a scheduled annual citywide cleanup. (Ord. 4102)

Place hazardous, infectious or regulated waste in a refuse container that is not intended for such wastes and marked as such. Any infectious wastes generated from residential sources must be placed in a rigid leak-proof, puncture resistant container with a tight fitting lid. Infectious wastes generated from commercial sources cannot be discarded into the municipal solid waste stream unless processed and sterilized to specifications required by law.  (Ord. 3768, §1; Ord. 4295, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 18-8. Enforcement of service charge collection.
The city may enforce collection of such service charge as may be established in this Chapter by bringing legal action against any refuse customer to recover any sums due for services plus the cost of such action. Customers that are sixty or more days behind in paying for service shall have their refuse container(s) repossessed until such time that payment is made and the account is in good standing, and a $20.00 re-delivery fee will be charged before service is reinstated.  (Ord. 3768, §1; Ord. 4295, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 18-9. Yard waste procedures.
It shall be the duty of all customers to comply with the following procedures pertaining to yard waste:

All yard waste shall be separated by the owner or occupant from all other garbage and refuse accumulated on the premises and shall be composted on the premises or placed in paper biodegradable bags and set out for collection by the City.

All yard waste shall be collected from residential, commercial, industrial and institutional premises at least once each week.

Yard waste must be placed at the curb on the customers’ regular pick up day in a paper biodegradable bag.

The number of paper biodegradable bags containing yard waste which citizens may place out for collection shall be unlimited.

Persons choosing not to compost yard waste on their own property may place yard waste in paper biodegradable bags.

Nothing in this Chapter is intended to prevent an owner from transporting yard wastes accumulating on premises of the owner, provided such yard waste is disposed of at city-approved composting station or neighborhood collection sites in accordance with policies established by the City.  (Ord. 3768, §1; Ord. 4295, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 18-10 to 18-13. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)

Article II - Residential Refuse Disposal and Collection
Sec. 18-14. Residential collections; special collections
The City shall provide residential customers with special collections as requested, for which the City shall be entitled to assess a reasonable charge as determined by the Director. Special collection fees are as follows: tires - $5.00 each (with a $10.00 minimum charge); limbs and brush – minimum charge $20.00 for the first 15 minutes of loading time plus $1.00 per minute charge thereafter; major appliances - $20.00 each; household waste and items too large to discard in the refuse container - $25.00 for each cubic yard; special collection fees shall be paid in advance of the collection service being requested. Paper shredding - $25.00 per man hour charged on a quarter-hour basis with a $10.00 minimum charge. Paper to be shredded shall be delivered to the shredding facility. (Ord. 4170, §1)

For those occasions when a resident has a bulk item or items to dispose of, the City may sell stickers to be affixed to each bulk item for collection on the resident’s regularly scheduled collection day. The rate to be charged shall be $5.00 per sticker. Items that can be lifted by one person will require one sticker; items requiring lifting by two persons will require two stickers. Stickers should be affixed to each item in such a manner as to be easily seen by collection crews. Regulated items (i.e. appliances, tires, yard waste) will not be eligible for collection using stickers, but may be collected for a separate fee as specified in (a) above.

Annually, a pick-up of bulk waste items will be provided at no additional cost to residential customers. Certain items, including regulated items, will be exempted from this pick-up as determined by the Director.  (Ord. 3768, §1; Ord. 4069; Ord. 4102; Ord. 4295, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 18-15. Residential refuse container and storage requirements.
It shall be the duty of every residential refuse customer to comply with the following provisions pertaining to the storage of refuse:

All refuse shall be placed at the designated collection point, normally the curb or street edge in front of the residence, in containers provided by the City, in accordance with the provisions of Section 18-7.  Refuse other than bulk waste items too large for the roll-out container must be placed out for regular collection in the container(s) provided by the City. All loose and/or offensive (putrescible) refuse shall be placed in tied plastic bags prior to being placed in the collection container.

Refuse containers shall be kept tightly closed and maintained in a clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times. The periodic cleaning and sanitizing of the refuse container shall be the responsibility of each residential customer.  (Ord. 3768, §1; Ord. 4295, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 18-16. Service charge rates for residential refuse collection.
Each residential refuse customer shall pay to the City a service charge of $11.50 per month for the weekly collection of the contents of each 35 gallon container, all acceptable yard wastes in biodegradable bags, and all specified recyclables. Each residential refuse customer shall pay to the City a service charge of $14.00 per month for the weekly collection of the contents of each 90 gallon container, all acceptable yard wastes in biodegradable bags, and all specified recyclables. (Ord. 4170, §2; Ord. 4295, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 18-17. Service charge to be included and itemized on electric and/or water service bill.
The service charges established in Section 18-16 herein shall be included and itemized on municipal utilities electric and/or water service bills and payment of such charges shall be made at the same time and in the same manner as electric and/or water bills are paid.

However, should any residential refuse customer receive neither municipal electric or water service, then the City shall prepare and mail special service charge bills to such customers.  (Ord. 3768, §1; Ord. 4295, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 18-18. Exemption.
Residential customers may be exempt from the monthly charge if the dwelling is unoccupied for a minimum of one (1) month and giving prior notification to the City’s Environmental Services Director.  (Ord. 3768, §1; Ord. 3892, §3; Ord. 4295, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 18-19 to 18-22. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article III - Commercial Refuse Disposal and Collection
Sec. 18-23. Number of commercial collections; special collections.
The City shall provide commercial customers with special collections as requested, for which the City shall be entitled to assess a reasonable charge as determined by the Director. Special collection fees are as follows: tires - $5.00 each (with a $10.00 minimum charge); limbs and brush – minimum charge $20.00 for the first 15 minutes of loading time plus a $1.00 per minute charge thereafter; major appliances - $20.00 each; special household waste, including transfer station fees and involving items too large to discard in a refuse container - $25.00 for each cubic yard; paper shredding - $25.00 per hour charged on a quarter-hour basis with a $10.00 minimum charge, paper to be delivered to the shredding facility, (paper will not be picked up for shredding).  (Ord. 4170, §3; Ord. 4295, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 18-24. Commercial refuse container and storage requirements.
It shall be the duty of every commercial refuse customer to comply with the same provisions pertaining to the storage of refuse as set for residential customers in Section 18-15 herein.

It shall be the duty of every commercial refuse customer to provide adequate and appropriate space to accommodate the refuse container(s) necessary to accommodate the solid waste generated by each business.  The space provided must be easily accessible and on a hard surface approved by the Environmental Services Director.  (Ord. 3768, §1)

Any new development or re-development that will result in a commercial refuse customers as defined in Section 18-1 herein must provide plans for refuse container storage and access for collection. Such plans must be approved by the Environment Services Department prior to issuance of a construction permit. Any altering of the approved plans without prior approval from the Environmental Services Department can result in interruption in, and/or loss of, refuse service. Space requirements for various size containers are determined by the Environmental Services Department. The Department has issued standard guidelines for the size and spacing for acceptable solid waste pickup areas. This information can be found on the City’s website or is available by contacting the office of the Environmental Services Department.  (Ord. 4295, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 18-25. Service charge rates for commercial refuse collection.
Each commercial refuse customer shall pay to the city a service charge for collection as follows:

    a.  Each commercial refuse customer shall subscribe to one of the following service levels and pay monthly to the City the following service charge (s) for the corresponding container and frequency of service.

One (1) cubic yard container
1 service per week	$ 42.40/month
2 services per week	$ 84.80/month
3 services per week	$127.20/month
4 services per week	$169.60/month
5 services per week	$212.00/month
There will be a $25.00 charge for any additional service request.

Two (2) cubic yard container
1 service per week	$ 66.50/month
2 services per week	$133.00/month
3 services per week	$199.50/month
4 services per week	$266.00/month
5 services per week	$332.50/month
There will be a $30.00 charge for any additional service request.

Four (4) cubic yard container
1 service per week	$112.40/month
2 services per week	$224.80/month
3 services per week	$337.20/month
4 services per week	$449.60/month
5 services per week	$562.00/month
There will be a $40.00 charge for any additional service request.

Six (6) cubic yard container
1 service per week	$159.40/month
2 services per week	$318.80/month
3 services per week	$478.20/month
4 services per week	$637.60/month
5 services per week	$797.00/month
There will be a $50.00 charge for any additional service request.

The initial container requested will be delivered at no extra charge. However, there will be a $25.00 fee for changing container sizes after the initial delivery.

Each commercial refuse customer shall pay to the City a service charge of $15.25 per month for collection of one (1) 90-gallon roll-out container once per week.
Customers utilizing the City’s construction/demolition container service shall pay to the City a rental charge of $5.00 per day (Monday through Friday) plus a charge of $100.00 per pull plus appropriate landfill or transfer station tipping fees for each open top roll-off container. There shall be a minimum of one pull charged per month per box.
Each customer shall pay to the City, a service charge of $5.00 per day (Monday through Friday) for use of each 4-yard container, plus a charge of $80.00 each time a 4-yard container is emptied, and, each customer shall pay to the City, a service charge of $5.00 per day (Monday through Friday) for use of each 6-yard container, plus a charge of $110.00 each time a 6-yard container is emptied. There shall be a minimum of one empty service charged per box per month.
Each customer shall pay to the City a service charge of $115.00 per pull for standard units, and $130.00 per pull for units requiring double handling to turn the unit around, plus appropriate landfill or transfer station fees for each hydraulically operated roll-off compactor.
Each customer requesting to have the City haul regulated waste shall pay the established container fees as specified in Section 18-25 herein as well as all other applicable disposal fees in addition to a $2.50 per mile transportation fee.
Each customer shall pay to the City a fee of $50.00 to have a roll-off or construction/demolition container relocated at the customer’s request.
(Ord. 4170, §4; Ord. 4295, §1; Ord. 4448, §2)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 18-26. Service charge bills to be prepared by city.
The service charges established in Section 18-25 herein shall be included and itemized on municipal utilities electric and/or water service bills and payment of such charges shall be made at the same time and in the same manner as electric and/or water bills are paid. However, should any commercial refuse customer receive neither municipal electric or water service, then the City shall prepare and mail special service charge bills to such customers.  (Ord. 3768, §1; Ord. 4295, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 18-27 to 18-31. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article IV - Refuse Service Review Committee
Sec. 18-32. Review Committee; selection of members; authority.
Should any solid waste and/or refuse customer desire an exemption from any of the provisions of this Chapter, he shall make his request known to the Director of Environmental Services. Such committee shall have the authority to uphold, modify, or suspend any of the provisions of this Chapter, provided that in so doing no nuisance to the public health, safety, or welfare is caused or maintained. The Council shall annually reappoint three of its members, representing the widest coverage of the City possible, to review such request or to hear said appeal.  (Ord. 3768, §1; Ord. 3892, §4; Ord. 4295, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Secs 18-33 to 18-37. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article V - Recovery of Emergency Related Expenses
Sec. 18-38. Procedure for recovery of expenses incurred in emergency actions in response to releases or threatened releases of material into or upon the environment.
When used in this section, "emergency action" shall mean all exigent activities conducted in order to prevent or mitigate harm to the public health and safety or the environment from a release or threatened release of any material into or upon land, water or air.

When used in this section, "governmental entity" shall include the City of Rolla, and any entity responding under a mutual aid agreement with the City of Rolla.

When used in this section, "person" shall include any individual, corporation, association, partnership, firm, trustee, legal representative, or any combination thereof.

When used in this section, "recoverable expenses" shall include the full costs of the responding governmental entity that are reasonable, necessary and allocable to an emergency action. Recoverable expenses shall not include expenditures that are incurred in the course of providing routine firefighting protection. Expenses allowable for recovery may include, but are not limited to:

Disposable materials and supplies consumed and expended specifically for the purpose of the emergency action.

Compensation of employees for the time and efforts devoted specifically to the emergency action.

Rental or leasing of equipment used specifically for the emergency action (e.g., protective equipment or clothing, scientific and technical equipment).

Replacement costs for equipment owned by the governmental entity that is contaminated beyond reuse or repair, if the equipment was a total loss and the loss occurred during the emergency action (e.g., self-contained breathing apparatus irretrievably contaminated during the response).

Decontamination of equipment contaminated during the response.

Special technical services specifically required for the response (e.g., costs associated with the time and efforts of technical experts or specialists not otherwise provided for by the governmental entities).

Other special services specifically required for the emergency action.

Laboratory costs of analyzing samples taken during the emergency action.

Any costs of cleanup, storage, or disposal of the released material.

Costs associated with the services, supplies and equipment procured for a specific evacuation of persons or property.

Medical expenses incurred as a result of response activities.

Legal expenses and administrative costs that may be incurred as a result of the emergency action, including efforts to recover expenses pursuant to this Chapter.

When used in this section, "release" shall mean any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping or disposing into or upon land, water or air, of any material which the city determines may be harmful to the public health and welfare or the environment.

When used in this section, "threatened release" shall mean any imminent or impending event potentially causing but not resulting in a release, but causing the governmental entities to undertake an emergency action.

Any person causing or responsible for a release or threatened release resulting in an emergency action shall be strictly liable to the governmental entity for the recoverable expenses resulting from the emergency action. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that any person owning or controlling property causing a release or threatened release is responsible for such release or threatened release.

The city administrator of the City of Rolla shall keep an itemized record of its recoverable expenses resulting from the emergency action. Promptly after completion of the emergency action, he shall certify those expenses to the city clerk.

The city clerk shall submit a written, itemized claim for the total certified expenses incurred by the City of Rolla for the emergency action to the responsible party and a written notice that, unless the amounts are paid in full to the City of Rolla within 30 days after the date of the mailing of the claim and notice, the city counselor of the City of Rolla will file a civil action for the stated amount.

The city clerk may cause a lien in the amount of the recoverable expenses to be placed on any real property located within the boundaries of the City of Rolla owned by the person causing or responsible for the emergency action.

Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to conflict with the state or federal laws requiring persons causing or responsible for releases or threatened releases from engaging in remediation activates and/or paying the costs thereof.

In the event a release occurs, the person causing or responsible for such release shall immediately notify the city clerk and request emergency action. Failure of any person to report any release shall be an ordinance violation and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment of not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment.  (Ord. 3768, §1; Ord. 4295, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Secs 18-39 to 18-43. Reserved.

Chapter 19 - Health and Sanitation
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter

Chapter Contents:
Article I - IN GENERAL
§ 19-1. Board of health - Composition; quorum.
§ 19-2. Same - Powers and duties generally.
§ 19-3. Enforcement of Chapter - Duties of police generally.
§ 19-4. Same - Same - Right of entry to inspect cellars, etc., for nuisances; removal of nuisances.
§ 19-5. City held harmless from damages arising out of city owned vehicles traveling on privately owned driving surfaces.
§§ 19-6 to 19-9. Reserved.
Article II - INDOOR SMOKE FREE AIR ACT OF 2011
§ 19-10.Prohibition of Smoking in Indoor Workplaces and Public Places.
§ 19-10-a. Definitions.
§ 19-10-b. Application of Article to City-Owned Facilities.
§ 19-10-c. Prohibition of Smoking in Enclosed Public Places.
§ 19-10-d. Prohibition of Smoking in Places of Employment.
§ 19-10-e. Prohibition of Smoking in Private Clubs with Employees.
§ 19-10-f. Prohibition of Smoking in Enclosed Residential Facilities.
§ 19-10-g. Where Smoking Not Regulated.
§ 19-10-h. Declaration of Establishment as Nonsmoking.
§ 19-10-i. Posting of Signs.
§ 19-10-j. Non-retaliation; Non-waiver of Rights.
§ 19-10-k. Enforcement.
§ 19-10-l. Violations and Penalties.
§ 19-10-m. Public Education.
§ 19-10-n. Governmental Agency Cooperation.
§ 19-10-o. Other Applicable Laws.
§ 19-10-p. Liberal Construction.
§ 19-10-q. Severability.
§ 19-10-r. Effective Date.
§§ 19-11 to 19-15 Reserved
ARTICLE III.  OUTDOOR WOOD BURNING FURNACES
§ 19-16.  Purpose and Authority.
§ 19-17.  Definitions.
§ 19-18.  Applicability – New and Existing Outdoor Wood Burning Furnaces.
§ 19-19.  Installation Standards.
§ 19-20.  Operations.
§ 19-21.  Penalties.
§ 19-22.  Severability.
 


Article I - In General
Sec. 19-1. Board of health - Composition; quorum.
The board of health of the city shall be composed of the members of the health committee and the county health officer. A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum at any meeting of the board. (Ord. 842, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 19-2. Same - Powers and duties generally.
The board of health shall exercise general supervision over the health of the city, with full power to take all measures necessary to promote the cleanliness and salubrity thereof; to abate nuisances of every description on public or private property; to prevent the introduction into the city of malignant, contagious or infectious diseases and to adopt such regulations, restrictions, or measures deemed advisable and to prevent the introduction or spreading of contagious or infectious diseases within the city. (Ord. 842, §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 19-3. Enforcement of Chapter - Duties of police generally.
It shall be the duty of the city police to attend any meetings of the board of health and to serve all precepts and notices issued by the board; to execute all orders of the board directed to them; to attend to the abatement and removal of nuisances and to perform such other duties in relation to nuisances as the board may direct as often and such manner as may be required by it to examine the condition of all streets, lanes, avenues, alleys, market places and all public squares of the city and report to the board all nuisances found; to notify persons upon whose premises, or premises occupied by them, of any nuisances which may exist, to remove the same and if they be not removed to make report in writing to the board; to visit at least once a week and oftener when required by the board, every part of the city; to arrest any person found violating this Code or any city ordinance which relates to the sanitary regulations of the city; and to watch for and arrest persons throwing, or permitting to be thrown, conducting or allowing to be conducted from their premises into the streets and alleys, any filth or other matter prohibited by this Chapter, and in other respects to exercise the utmost diligence in enforcing this Code and other ordinances in regard to the health department. (Ord. 842, §3.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 19-4. Same - Same - Right of entry to inspect cellars, etc., for nuisances; removal of nuisances.
City police are authorized to enter in the daytime and examine all cellars, yards, enclosures and tenements within the city. Wherever nuisances exist or filth is suffered to accumulate, or water is found in any cellar or basement under any building, city police are authorized to direct the owner or occupier of the premises to remove the same and if such removal be not so made, the fact shall be reported to the board of health. Permits may be granted by any member of the board of health for cleaning privies or the removal of nuisances. (Ord. 842, §4.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 19-5. City held harmless from damages arising out of city owned vehicles traveling on privately owned driving surfaces.
(a) That the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, hereby finds and declares it to be the public policy of the City of Rolla that the City should not be held responsible for any damage done to the surface of any privately owned driving surface, including, but not limited to driveways and parking lots, by any City owned vehicle in the performance of City services.

(b) If any property owner does not notify the respective City department in writing prior to the provision of services that his private driving surface cannot accommodate certain vehicles, then the property owner shall be deemed by the City to have waived any claim arising from foreseeable damages to said property.

(c) That this Ordinance shall be considered a hold harmless agreement between the City of Rolla and every person owning property in the City of Rolla, as to the damages mentioned in paragraph (b) of this Ordinance, and every property owner shall by publication of this Ordinance be placed on notice of the same. (Ord. 2889, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 19-6 to 19-9. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)


Article II - INDOOR SMOKE FREE AIR ACT OF 2011
Sec. 19-10.            Prohibition of Smoking in Indoor Workplaces and Public Places.
WHEREAS, this Article shall be known as the City of Rolla Indoor Smoke Free Air Act of 2011.

WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Rolla, Missouri does hereby find that: The 2006 U.S. Surgeon General’s Report, The Health Consequences of Involuntary Exposure to Tobacco Smoke, has concluded that (1) secondhand smoke exposure causes disease and premature death in children and adults who do not smoke; (2) children exposed to secondhand smoke are at an increased risk for sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), acute respiratory problems, ear infections, and asthma attacks, and that smoking by parents causes respiratory symptoms and slows lung growth in their children; (3) exposure of adults to secondhand smoke has immediate adverse effects on the cardiovascular system and causes coronary heart disease and lung cancer; (4) there is no risk-free level of exposure to secondhand smoke; (5) establishing smokefree workplaces is the only effective way to ensure that secondhand smoke exposure does not occur in the workplace, because ventilation and other air cleaning technologies cannot completely control for exposure of nonsmokers to secondhand smoke; and (6) evidence from peer-reviewed studies shows that smokefree policies and laws do not have an adverse economic impact on the hospitality industry. (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The Health Consequences of Involuntary Exposure to Tobacco Smoke: A Report of the Surgeon General. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. Office on Smoking and Health, 2006)

WHEREAS, the Public Health Service’s National Toxicology Program (NTP) has listed secondhand smoke as a known carcinogen. (Environmental Health Information Service (EHIS), "Environmental tobacco smoke: first listed in the Ninth Report on Carcinogens," U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), Public Health Service, NTP, 2000; reaffirmed by the NTP in subsequent reports on carcinogens, 2003, 2005)

WHEREAS, a significant amount of secondhand smoke exposure occurs in the workplace. Employees who work in smoke-filled businesses suffer a 25-50% higher risk of heart attack and higher rates of death from cardiovascular disease and cancer, as well as increased acute respiratory disease and measurable decrease in lung function. (Pitsavos, C.; Panagiotakos, D.B.; Chrysohoou, C.; Skoumas, J.; Tzioumis, K.; Stefanadis, C.; Toutouzas, P., "Association between exposure to environmental tobacco smoke and the development of acute coronary syndromes: the CARDIO2000 case-control study," Tobacco Control 11(3): 220-225, September 2002.)

WHEREAS, secondhand smoke is particularly hazardous to elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive airway disease. (California Environmental Protection Agency [Dal EPA]), "Health effects of exposure to environmental tobacco smoke", Tobacco Control 6(4): 346-353, Winter, 1997.) The Americans with Disabilities Act, which requires that disabled persons have access to public places and workplaces, deems impaired respiratory function to be a disability. (Daynard, R.A., "Environmental tobacco smoke and the Americans with Disabilities Act, "Nonsmokers’ Voice 15(1): 8-9.)

WHEREAS, given the fact that there is no safe level of exposure to secondhand smoke, the American society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) bases its ventilation standards on totally smokefree environments. ASHRAE has determined that there is currently no air filtration or other ventilation technology that can completely eliminate all the carcinogenic components in secondhand smoke and the health risks caused by secondhand smoke exposure, and recommends that indoor environments be smokefree in their entirety. (Samet, J.; Bohanon, Jr., H.R.; Coultas, D.B.; Houston, T.P.; Persily, A.K.; Schoen, L.J.; Spengler, J.; Callaway, C.A., "ASHRAE position document on environmental tobacco smoke," American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE), 2005.)

WHEREAS, hundreds of communities in the U.S., plus numerous states, including Arizona, Delaware, Illinois, Iowa, Massachusetts, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Utah and Washington, have enacted laws requiring all workplaces, restaurants, bars and other public places to be smokefree, as have numerous countries, including Bhutan, France, Iceland, Ireland, New Zealand, Norway, Singapore, Uruguay, and the United Kingdom constituent countries of England, Northern Ireland, Scotland, and Wales.

WHEREAS, the smoking of tobacco is a form of air pollution, a positive danger to health, and a material public nuisance.

WHEREAS, accordingly, the City Council of the City of Rolla, Missouri finds and declares that the purposes of this ordinance are (1) to protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in public places and places of employment; and (2) to guarantee the right of nonsmokers to breathe smokefree air, and to recognize that the need to breathe smokefree air shall have priority over the desire to smoke.

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ROLLA, MISSOURI, AS FOLLOWS:
(a) Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this Article, shall be construed as defined in this Section:

"Bar" means an establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guest on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of those beverages, including but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, and cabarets.
"Business" means a sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other business entity, either for-profit or not-for-profit, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold; professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, or other professional services are delivered; and private clubs.
"Employee" means a person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit.
"Employer" means a person, business, partnership, association, corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust, or non-profit entity that employs the services of one or more individual persons.
"Enclosed Area" means all space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed on all sides by permanent or temporary walls or windows (exclusive of doorways), which extend from the floor to the ceiling.
 "Health Care Facility" means an office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control clinics, nursing homes, long-term care facilities, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, psychiatrists, dentists, and all specialists within these professions. This definition shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within health care facilities.
"Place of Employment" means an area under the control of a public or private employer that employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, private offices, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways, and vehicles. A private residence is not a "place of employment" unless it is used as a childcare, adult day care, or health care facility.
"Private Club" means an organization, whether incorporated or not, which is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times, which is operated solely for a recreations, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and which only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. The affairs and management of the organization are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting. The organization has established bylaws and/or a constitution to govern its activities. The organization has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 U.S.C. Section 501.
"Public Place" means an enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including but not limited to, banks, bars, educational facilities, gaming facilities, health care facilities, hotels and motels, laundromats, public transportation vehicles and facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, indoor sports arenas, theaters, and waiting rooms, A private residence is not a "public place" unless it used as a childcare, adult day care, or health care facility.
"Restaurant" means an eating establishment, including but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term "restaurant" shall include a bar area within the restaurant.
"Service Line" means an indoor line in which one (1) or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money, including but not limited to, ATM lines, concert lines, food vendor lines, movie ticket lines, and sporting event lines.
"Shopping Mall" means an enclosed public walkway or hall area that serves to connect retail or professional establishments.
"Smoking" means the burning of tobacco for the purpose of inhaling or exhaling the fumes of that burning substance.
"Sports Arena" means sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys, and other similar places where members of the general public assemble to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports or other events.
(Ord. 4010 §1; Ord. 4030, §1)

(b) Application of Article ot City-Owned Facilities.
All enclosed facilities, including buildings and vehicles owned, leased or operated by the City of Rolla, Missouri, shall be subject to the provisions of this Article.
(Ord. 4010 §2; Ord. 4030, §2)

(c) Prohibition of Smoking in Enclosed Public Places.
Smoking shall be prohibited in enclosed public places subject to the exclusions within this ordinance, within the City of Rolla, Missouri, including but not limited to the following places:

Aquariums, galleries, libraries, and museums.
Areas available to and customarily used by the general public in businesses and non-profit entities patronized by the public, including but not limited to, banks, laundromats, professional offices, and retail service establishments.
Bars.
Bingo facilities.
Childcare and adult day care facilities.
Convention facilities.
Educational facilities, both public and private.
Elevators.
Gaming facilities.
Health care facilities.
Hotels and motels, except as otherwise provided.
Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes, and other multiple-unit residential facilities.
Polling places.
Public transportation vehicles, including buses and taxicabs, under the authority of the City of Rolla, Missouri, and ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of public transportation facilities, including bus, train, and airport facilities.
Restaurants.
Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, and other common-use areas.
Retail stores.
Rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly, including school buildings, under the control of an agency, board, commission, committee or council of the City of Rolla, Missouri or a political subdivision of the State, to the extent the place is subject to the jurisdiction of the City of Rolla, Missouri.
Indoor service lines.
Shopping malls.
Sports arenas, including enclosed places in outdoor arenas.
Theaters and other facilities primarily used for exhibiting motion pictures, stage dramas, lectures, musical recitals, or other similar performances, (except when the smoking is part of a theatrical production).
(Ord. 4010 §3; Ord. 4030, §3)

(d) Prohibition of Smoking in Places of Employment.
Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed facilities within places of employment. This includes common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs restrooms, vehicles, and all other enclosed facilities.
This prohibition on smoking shall be communicated to all existing employees by the effective date of this Article and to all prospective employees upon their application for employment.
(Ord. 4010 §4; Ord. 4030, §4)

(e) Prohibition of Smoking in Private Clubs with Employees.
Smoking shall be prohibited in all private clubs during such events or activities utilizing the services of compensated employees. This prohibition shall not apply to private clubs that operate strictly with uncompensated volunteers.
(Ord. 4010 §5; Ord. 4030, §5)

(f) Prohibition of Smoking in Enclosed Residential Facilities. 
Smoking shall be prohibited in the following enclosed residential facilities:

All private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes.
At least 80% of hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests.
(Ord. 4010 §6; Ord. 4030, §6)

(g) Where Smoking not Regulated. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article to the contrary, the following areas shall be exempt from the provisions of Sections 3 and 4:

Private residences, except when used as a childcare, adult day care, or health care facility, and except as provided in Section 6.
Not more than twenty percent (20%) of hotel and motel rooms rented to guests and designated as smoking rooms. All smoking rooms on the same floor must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this Article. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to add additional nonsmoking rooms.
Outdoor areas of places of employment.
Private clubs at such time where all labor provided is by means of uncompensated volunteers.
(Ord. 4010 §7; Ord. 4030, §7)

(h) Declaration of Establishment as Nonsmoking.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article, an owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of an establishment, facility, or outdoor area may declare that entire establishment, facility, or outdoor area as a nonsmoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place in which a sign conforming to the requirements of Section 9 (A) is posted.
(Ord. 4010 §8; Ord. 4030, §8)

(i) Posting of Signs.
Either a "No Smoking" sign or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) at least 6" x 3" in size shall be clearly and visibly posted at each exterior entrance to every building by the owner, operator, or manager of that building within which a public place or place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this Article is located. The purpose of the signs and/or symbols is to inform customers, visitors and employees of this Article.
Every motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire within the City shall have at least one conspicuous sign, visible from the exterior of the vehicle, clearly stating that smoking is prohibited.
(Ord. 4010 §9; Ord. 4030, §9)

(j) Nonretaliation; Nonwaiver of Rights.
No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against an employee, applicant for employment, or customer because that employee, applicant, or customer exercises any rights afforded by this Article or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this Article. Notwithstanding Section 12, violation of this Subsection shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 for each violation.
An employee who works in a setting where an employer allows smoking does not waive or otherwise surrender any legal rights the employee may have against the employer or any other party.
(Ord. 4010 §10; Ord. 4030, §10)

(k) Enforcement.
This Article shall be enforced by the Chief of Police and the City Administrator or their designees. The Phelps/Maries Department of Health Department has agreed to assist with enforcement, data gathering and public education.
Notice of the provisions of this Article shall be given to all applicants for a business license in the City of Rolla, Missouri.
Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this Article may initiate enforcement with City Administration or the Rolla Police Department.
The Phelps/Maries Department of Health, and Rolla Community Development Department will assist with compliance with this Article while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections.
An owner, manager, operator, or employee of an establishment regulated by this Article shall inform persons violating this Article of the appropriate provisions thereof.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article, as employee or private citizen may bring legal action to enforce this Article.
In addition to the remedies provided by the provisions of this Section, the City Administrator or any person aggrieved by the failure of the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of a public place or a place of employment to comply with the provisions of this Article may apply for injunctive relief to enforce those provisions in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 4010 §11; Ord. 4030, §11)

(l) Violations and Penalties.
A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this Article shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50).
Except as otherwise provided in Section 10(A), a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment and who fails to comply with the provisions of this Article shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by:

A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100) for a first violation.
A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200) for a second violation within one (1) year.
A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500) for each additional violation within one (1) year.

In addition to the fines established by this Section, violation of this Article by a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment may result in the suspension or revocation of any permit or license issued to the person for the premises on which the violation occurred.
Each day on which a violation of this Article occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct violation.
(Ord. 4010 §12; Ord. 4030, §12)

(m) Public Education.
The City of Rolla and the Phelps/Maries County Department of Health shall engage in a continuing program to explain and clarify the purposes and requirements of this Article to citizens affected by it, and to guide owners, operators, and mangers in their compliance with it. The program may include publication of a brochure for affected businesses and individuals explaining the provisions of this ordinance.
(Ord. 4010 §13; Ord. 4030, §13)

(n) Governmental Agency Cooperation.
The City Administrator shall periodically request other governmental and educational agencies having facilities within the City of Rolla to establish local operating procedures in cooperation and compliance with this Article. This includes urging all Federal, State, City, and School District agencies to update their existing smoking control regulations to be consistent with the current health findings regarding secondhand smoke.
(Ord. 4010 §14; Ord. 4030, §14)

(o) Other Applicable Laws.
This Article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws.
(Ord. 4010 §15; Ord. 4030, §15)

(p) Liberal Construction.
This Article shall be liberally construed so as to further its purposes.
(Ord. 4010 §16; Ord. 4030, §16)

(q) Severability.
If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this Article or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect the other provisions of this Article which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this Article are declared to be severable
(Ord. 4010 §17; Ord. 4030, §17)

(r) Effective Date
This Article shall be effective on January 1, 2012.
(Ord. 4010 §18; Ord. 4030, §18)

(Return to Contents)

Secs. 19-11 to 19-15.  Reserved
(Return to Contents)


ARTICLE III.  OUTDOOR WOOD BURNING FURNACES.


Sec. 19-16.      Purpose and Authority.

Whereas, outdoor wood burning furnaces have been found to emit significantly high quantities of particulate matter and noxious fumes, and;

Whereas, poor and unapproved operating practice will exacerbate the effects of the smoke, and;           

Whereas, complaints related to adverse effects, impacts to health, comfort of life, and general nuisance have been recorded in Rolla for outdoor wood burning furnaces, and;

Whereas, the City of Rolla hereby adopts these regulations in order to protect the public health, comfort, and convenience from uncontrolled emissions of smoke and noxious fumes.

(Ord. 4114 §2)

(Return to Contents)


Sec. 19-17.      Definitions.
Clean Wood means wood that is not treated, coated, or had any adhesives or chemicals applied to it.

Emission means any discharge or release of an air contaminant to the ambient air space.

Emission point means any place including but not limited to a stack or vent from which any air contaminant is emitted to the ambient air space.

Incinerator means an appliance used to burn trash, rubbish, and other wastes.

Outdoor wood burning furnace means a freestanding wood-fired boiler, surrounded by a water jacket with smoke vent that is used to heat water that is carried by pipe to provide heat to a building or other destination. Outdoor wood burning furnaces do not include fire pits, chimneys, wood-fired barbeques, or equipment for melting, reclaiming, or refining of metals.

Odor means that property of gaseous, liquid, or solid materials that elicits a physiological response by the human sense of smell.
(Ord. 4114 §2)
(Return to Contents)


Sec. 19-18.      Applicability – New and Existing Outdoor Wood Burning Furnaces.
Prior to the installation of a new outdoor wood burning furnace system within Rolla, the property owner or his representative must first obtain a building permit from the City.  Permit applicants must demonstrate that they understand the requirements for proper installation.  The application must be accompanied by a written site plan indicating the proposed furnace location in relation to all existing structures and separating distances from the furnace to all buildings and outbuildings on site and all neighboring structures within 400 (four hundred) feet.  The plan must also indicate distances to all adjacent roads to the site and distances from the furnace to woods, brush, and flammable structures. Outdoor wood burning furnaces placed in service before the passage of this ordinance may continue to operate and shall be maintained in accordance with the provisions set-forth in Sec.19-20 and shall also be maintained in accordance with manufacturer’s requirements, but may not be replaced, modified or enlarged without complying with City regulations.
(Ord. 4114 §2)

(Return to Contents)


Sec. 19-19.      Installation Standards.
Outdoor wood burning furnaces shall be located a minimum of 300 (three hundred) feet from any structure designed or built for human occupancy, not presently being served by an outdoor wood burning furnace. 
A clear radius of 25 (twenty-five) feet must be maintained between any outdoor wood burning furnace and any trees or vegetation of a height greater than the height of the top of the fuel feed door.  

Tops of chimneys or points of emission from outdoor wood burning furnaces must be in no case less than 15 (fifteen) feet above the ground as measured by the ground immediately surrounded by the outdoor wood burning furnace and any other manufacturer’s requirements.

Tops of chimneys or other points of emission from outdoor wood burning furnaces must be 2 (two) feet higher than the peak of any structure on the property being served or any habitable structure within 300 (three hundred) feet of the furnace. 
(Ord. 4114 §2)
(Return to Contents)


Sec. 19-20.      Operations.
Only dried wood shall be used to fuel outdoor wood burning furnaces.

No burning of treated woods (plywood), trash, garbage, biological waste, any plastic materials, asphalt, rubber, newspaper, cardboard or any waste usually burned in an incinerator.

Outdoor wood burning furnaces shall be operated in a manner consistent with manufacturers operating procedures.  In no case shall the operations of an outdoor wood burning furnace cause a public nuisance or a public health risk.

Waste oil may not be used except when oil is burned in a heating or energy recovery device.
   
All outdoor wood burning furnaces shall be subject to the building codes, and all permits required in such codes of the City of Rolla shall be obtained as necessary.
(Ord. 4114 §2)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 19-21.      Penalties.
Any violation of these regulations shall be punishable as described in the Rolla City Code. (Ord. 4114 §2)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 19-22.      Severability.
If any provision contained in these regulations is deemed invalid for any reason, it shall be severed and shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions. (Ord. 4114 §2)

Chapter 20 - Housing
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter


Chapter Contents:
ARTICLE I. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
§ 20-1. International Property Maintenance Code - Adopted.
§ 20-2. Same - Amendments.
§§ 20-3 to 20-7. Reserved.

ARTICLE II. DISCRIMINATION
§ 20-8. Declaration of policy.
§ 20-9. Definitions.
§ 20-10. Discriminatory practices.
§ 20-11. Discrimination in the financing of a house.
§ 20-12. Exemptions.
§ 20-13. Administration.
§ 20-14. Enforcement.
§ 20-15. Severability.
§ 20-16. Savings clause
§§ 20-17 to 20-20. Reserved.

ARTICLE I. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Sec. 20-1. International Property Maintenance Code - Adopted.
(a)   That for the purpose of establishing minimum standards governing the condition and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to insure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures; known as "International Property Maintenance Code" of the City of Rolla, Missouri, and each and all of the regulations of the International Property Maintenance Code, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out at length herein.  (Ord. 2271-A, §1; Ord. 2596, §2-3; Ord. 2927, §2; Ord. 3151, §2; Ord. 3549, §2; Ord. 4454, §2)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 20-2. Same - Amendments.
101.1 Title, is hereby amended by inserting the words "City of Rolla, Missouri".

106.4.3 Expiration. Every permit issued shall be valid for one year after issuance unless work authorized by the permit is not commenced within 180 days after it's issuance, or if the authorized by the permit is not commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. At that time the permit would become void and re-application would need to be made.

106.4.4 Extensions. A one-time, one-year extension of a permit may be obtained at a cost of one half of the original permit fee.

106.5.2 Fee schedule. Refer to fee schedule provided in Section 108.7 of the International Building Code.

106.5.3 Fee refunds. Delete.

108.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a Misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.

108.5 Unlawful Continuance. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $500.00.

      (c)   This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after January 1, 2019.  (Ord. 2596, §3; Ord. 2927, §2; Ord. 3549, §2; Ord. 4454, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 20-3 to 20-7. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)


ARTICLE II DISCRIMINATION
Sec. 20-8. Declaration of policy.
The city council of the City of Rolla hereby declares it to be the public policy of the City to eliminate discrimination and safeguard the right of any person to sell, purchase, lease, rent or obtain real property without regard to race, sex, color, religion, religious affiliation, handicap, familial status, national origin or ancestry. This ordinance shall be deemed an exercise of the police powers of the City of Rolla, Missouri, for the protection of the public welfare, prosperity, health and peace of the people of Rolla. (Ord. 2896, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 20-9. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein unless the context otherwise indicates.

Person shall include any individual, form partnership or corporation.

Aggrieved Persons shall include any person who is attempting to provide housing for himself and/or his family in the City of Rolla, Missouri.

Discriminate shall mean distinctions in treatment because of race, sex, color, religion, religious affiliation, handicap, familial status, or national origin of any person. (Ord. 2896, §2)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 20-10. Discriminatory practices.
It shall be a discriminatory practice and a violation of this ordinance for any person to:

Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, sex, color, religion, religious affiliation, handicap, familial status or national origin.

To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, sex, color, religion, religious affiliation, familial status, handicap, or national origin.

Make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on race, sex, color, religion, religious affiliation, handicap, familial status, or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination.

Represent to any person because of race, sex, color, religion, religious affiliation, handicap, familial status or national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available.

For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood or a person or persons of a particular race, sex, color, religion, religious affiliation, familial status, handicap, or national origin.

Bars discrimination in the sale or rental of housing on a basis of a handicap, and requires the design and construction of new multifamily dwelling with four (4) or more units to meet certain adaptability and accessibility requirements.

Bars discrimination in the sale or rental of housing because a family has children, but exempts certain types of buildings that house older persons, e.g. Section 202 housing. (Ord. 2896, §2)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 20-11. Discrimination in the financing of a house.
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the making commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan to a person applying therefore for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount or conditions of such loan, because of the race, sex, color, religion, religious affiliation, handicap, familial status, or national origin of such person or of any person associated with him in connection with such financing. (Ord. 2896, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 20-12. Exemptions.
The provisions of this ordinance, and particularly Section 20-11 hereof, shall not apply to the following:

A rental or leasing of a dwelling unit in a building which contains housing accommodations for not more than two (2) families living independently of each other, if the owner or members of his family reside in such dwelling unit.

A rental or leasing to less than five (5) persons living in a dwelling unit by the owner if the owner or members of his family reside therein.

Any single family house sold or rented by an owner provided that such house is sold or rented:

without the use of sales or rental facilities or services of real estates brokers, agents, salesmen, or persons in the business of selling or renting dwelling, and without the publication, posting or mailing of any advertisement in violation of Section 20-10(c) of this ordinance, provided however, that nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to effect or transfer the title, and that any such private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single family houses at any one time.

For the purposes of subsection 20-10(d), a person shall be in the business of selling or renting dwelling if:

he/she has, within the preceding twelve months, participated as principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein, or

he/she has, within the preceding twelve months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein, or

he/she is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy, by or occupied by five or more families. (Ord. 2896, §2)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 20-13. Administration.
There is hereby created a Fair Housing Committee whose membership shall consist of the mayor of the City, and the city council.

Every complaint of a violation of this ordinance shall be referred to the Fair Housing Committee. The Fair Housing Committee shall forthwith notify the person against whom the complaint is made. The identity of the aggrieved person shall be made known to the person against whom the complaint is made at that time. If the Fair Housing Committee, after investigation, finds there is no merit to the complaint, the same shall be dismissed. If the Fair Housing Committee finds that there is merit in the complaint, in their opinion, then and in that event, the Fair Housing Committee will endeavor to eliminate the alleged discriminatory practice by conference and conciliation.

If the Fair Housing Committee is unable to eliminate the alleged discriminatory practice by a conference and conciliation, then and in that event, the Fair Housing Committee shall forward said complaint to the city attorney for handling. The final determination of whether or not to prosecute on said complaint shall be left to the city attorney. (Ord. 2896, §2)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 20-14. Enforcement.
Any person convicted of a violation of this ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or by imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

The city attorney, instead of filing a complaint in municipal court of said city, may, as an alternative remedy, seek to have the alleged discriminatory practices abated by an action for an injunction to be maintained in the appropriate circuit court of the State of Missouri. (Ord. 2896, §2)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 20-15. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of these standards shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this ordinance which shall continue in full force and effect. To this end the provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. (Ord. 2896, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 20-16. Savings clause.
This ordinance shall not affect violations of any other ordinance, code or regulation of the City of Rolla existing prior to the effective date hereof. Any such violations shall be governed and shall continue to be punishable to the full extent of the law under the provisions of those ordinance, codes or regulations in effect at the time the violations was committed. (Ord. 2896, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 20-17 to 20-20. Reserved.

Chapter 21 - Human Rights
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter


(This Chapter was repealed by Ord. 2575 - December 7, 1987.)

Chapter 22 - Improvements
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter


Chapter Contents:
Article I - In General

§ 22-1. Preparation of preliminary report.
§ 22-2. Authorization of work by city council.
§ 22-3. Proceedings relative to street improvements.
§ 22-4. Proceedings relative to sewers.
§ 22-5. Contracting for improvements.
§ 22-6. Special tax bills-Payment.
§ 22-7. Same - Procedure upon payment.
§ 22-8. Same - Lien against property.
§ 22-9. Same - Prima facie evidence of certain facts; actions and judgments on same.
§§ 22-10 to 22-14. Reserved.

Sec. 22-1. Preparation of preliminary report.
Upon the application of any person for the establishment of a sewer district or the paving of any street, the city engineer shall prepare and submit to the city council a preliminary report setting out substantially the district proposed or the paving proposed, together with such other information and data as may be available from the department of public works concerning any such proposed improvement.

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 22-2. Authorization of work by city council.
Before the department of public works shall proceed with the engineering of any proposed sewer district or paving project, the city council shall, by resolution, authorize the commencement of work on any such proposed project.

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 22-3. Proceedings relative to street improvements.
In the improvement of public highways, including streets, avenues, alleys and squares, to be paid for in whole or in part by special tax bills upon real property or by use of the public improvement fund, reimbursed by the collection of such tax bills, the following procedures shall be used:

(1) The city engineer shall cause to be prepared, filed with the director of public works, subject to inspection of the public, and submitted to the city council, plans, specifications and estimates of cost of the proposed improvement.

(2) The city council shall, by resolution, declare the work or improvement necessary, state the nature thereof and the method of payment and refer to the plans, specifications and estimates of cost filed in the office of the director of public works. The city council shall cause the resolution to be published in some daily newspaper printed in the city for five consecutive issues, and, at the same time, shall cause not less than three copies of the resolution to be posted in conspicuous places within the limits of the proposed improvement. If a majority of the resident owners of the property liable to taxation therefore, at the date of the passage of such resolution, who shall own a majority of the front feet owned by the residents of the city abutting on the highway or part thereof proposed to be improved do not, within ten days after the completion of such publication, file with the city clerk their protest against such improvement, the city council may, by ordinance, adopt the plans and specifications filed with the director of public works, establish or re-establish the grade and curb line, provide for the improvement and specify the interest rate and manner of payment of special tax bills issued pursuant thereto, and the mayor shall advertise for bids therefore, according to the plans and specifications provided, by publication in some daily newspaper published in the city for five consecutive issues. On receipt of such bids, the mayor shall, in his office, at the time designated by him in the advertisement for bids, publicly open them, and in writing, report to the city council the name and bid of the lowest responsible bidder. No bid may be considered which is above the estimate of cost previously filed. Thereafter, the city council may, by ordinance, authorize the mayor to enter into a contract with such bidder for the work on behalf of the city, and require and authorize the mayor to approve a bond from the contractor for faithful performance of the contract and for the payment by the contractor for all labor done or materials used in the improvement. The contract and bond need not be confirmed by ordinance. Where the bids are above the estimate or no bids are received or for any reason a legally enforceable contract cannot be let, readvertisement for bids by the mayor may be had as often as may be deemed expedient.

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 22-4. Proceedings relative to sewers.
In the construction of sewers, sanitary and storm, to be paid for in whole or in part by special tax bills upon real property or use of the public improvement fund, reimbursed by the collection of special tax bills, the following procedure shall be followed:

(1) The city council shall, by ordinance, establish and define the district or joint district in which sewers are to be constructed.

(2) The city engineer shall cause to be prepared, filed with the director of public works and submitted to the city council plans, specifications and estimate of cost of the proposed improvement.

(3) The city council shall, by resolution, declare the work or improvement necessary, state the nature thereof and the method of payment therefore and refer to the plans, specifications and estimate of cost filed in the office of the director of public works. The city council shall cause the resolution to be published in some daily newspaper printed in the city for five consecutive issues, and at the same time shall cause not less than three copies of the resolution to be posted in conspicuous places within the limits of the district or joint district. The city council shall take no further action upon the proposed improvement until at least seven days shall have passed from the date of the last newspaper publication.

(4) Thereafter, the city council may, by ordinance, adopt the plans and specifications filed with the director of public works, provide for the improvement and specify the interest rate and manner of payment of special tax bills issued pursuant thereto, and the mayor shall advertise for bids thereafter, according to the plans and specifications provided by publication in some daily newspaper printed in the city for five consecutive issues. On receipt of such bids, the mayor shall, in his office, at the time designated by him in the advertisement for bids, publicly open them and in writing report to the city council the name and bid of the lowest responsible bidder. No bid may be considered which is above the estimate of cost previously filed. Thereafter, the city council may, by ordinance, authorize the mayor to enter into a contract with such bidder for such work on behalf of the city, and require and authorize the mayor to approve a bond from the contractor, and for the payment by the contractor of all labor done or materials used in such improvement. The contract and bond need not be confirmed by ordinance. Where the bids are above the estimate or no bids are received or for any reason a legally enforceable contract cannot be let, readvertisement for bids by the mayor may be had as often as may be deemed expedient.

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 22-5. Contracting for improvements.
Contracts for improvements made under this Chapter shall be let in accordance with the requirements of state law, this Code or other ordinances of the city.

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 22-6. Special tax bills-Payment.
The owner of property described in a special tax bill may pay such tax bill at the time and in the amounts therein specified to either the legal holder of such special tax bill or, if the owner of any property shall make representation that the legal holder cannot be found or refuse to accept tender payment, then payment may be made to the director of finance. The city treasurer shall be deemed the lawful agent in such cases to accept payment on behalf of the legal holder of special tax bill.

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 22-7. Same - Procedure upon payment.
When payment of a special tax bill in full, with interest shall be made directly to the legal holder of such bill, such holder shall endorse on the back thereof a receipt for the amount paid and deliver the same to the party making such payment, together with a certificate addressed to the city treasurer, stating that such tax bill has been paid and that the owner of the property therein described is entitled to have satisfaction thereof entered on the register of special assessments for improvements. The city treasurer shall file such certificate upon receipt of the same and shall certify on the back of such bill that such satisfaction has been properly entered on such register. When payment of a special tax bill in full, with interest, shall be made directly to the city treasurer he shall prepare a certificate, a copy of which shall serve as a receipt, indicating that such payment has been made and the owner of the property described in the tax bill is entitled to have satisfaction thereof entered on the register of special assessments for improvements, which certificate shall be filed with the certificates hereinbefore required, and the city treasurer shall at that time enter satisfaction of such tax bill on the register of special assessments for improvements. The city treasurer shall then secure the tax bill from the legal holder thereof, certifying on the back of such tax bill that satisfaction has been properly entered on the record, and endorsing a receipt on the back of the bill for the amount paid; thereafter surrendering the tax bill to the person having paid such bill.

If any tax bill shall be lost before satisfaction thereof has been entered on the record of special assessments, the city treasurer shall, upon the affidavit of the person entitled to such bill that the same has been lost, together with the affidavit of the contractor or his assignee that the same has been paid, if payment shall be made to the legal holder thereof, enter satisfaction of such bill on the register of special assessments.

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 22-8. Same - Lien against property.
Every special tax bill issued by the city in payment of public works constructed shall be a lien against the property therein described, from the date of its issuance, which lien shall continue for a period of six years thereafter, unless otherwise provided by special ordinance, but if suit is brought on any such tax bill within the time herein limited, the lien shall continue until the termination of the legal proceedings to collect the same, including any sale of the property charged. Every such special tax bill and lien thereof shall be assignable, and any such tax bill, with the interest therein provided, may be collected by suit by the owner thereof, in the name of such owner, in any court of competent jurisdiction. In the institution of such suit, it shall be sufficient for the plaintiff to plead the making and issuance of the tax bill and sued on, giving date and content thereof, and assignment thereof, in case of assignment, and alleging that the party or parties made defendants own or claim to own the land charged or some estate or interest therein, as the case may be.

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 22-9. Same - Prima facie evidence of certain facts; actions and judgments on same.
A special tax bill shall, in any action thereon, be prima facie evidence of the validity of the bill, of the doing of the work, of the furnishing of materials charged for and of the liability of the property to the charge stated in the bill; provided, that any defendant may plead in reduction of the bill any mistake or error in the amount thereof, or that the work was not done according to the provisions of the contract. No suit on any tax bill shall be affected by any irregularity affecting the other tax bills or rendering any other tax bill invalid in whole or in part. If the plaintiff recovers in his suit, the judgment shall be special and the plaintiff shall recover the amount found due, including interest and costs to be levied on the land described in the tax bill and shall be satisfied on special execution issued to sell the land in payment of such judgment, interest and costs. Such judgment shall bear interest at the same rate as the tax bill.

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 22-10 to 22-14. Reserved.

Chapter 23 - Industrial Development
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter


Chapter Contents:
Article I - In General
§ 23-1. Findings and determinations.
§ 23-2. Approval of application and authorization to form the authority.
§ 23-3. Approval of articles.
§23-4. Election of directors.
§§ 23-5 to 23-9. Reserved.

Sec. 23-1. Findings and determinations.
The city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, hereby finds and determines that it is wise, expedient, necessary and advisable that an industrial development corporation under the name of "The Industrial Development Authority of the City of Rolla, Missouri" (The "Authority"), be formed. (Ord. 2133, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 23-2. Approval of application and authorization to form the authority.
The application is hereby approved and the applicants are hereby granted permission and authorized to proceed to form and organize the authority pursuant to the provisions of the Industrial Development Corporation Act. (Ord. 2133, §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 23-3. Approval of articles.
The form of articles of incorporation proposed to be used in organizing the authority and attached as Exhibit B are hereby approved, and the applicants are hereby authorized and directed to execute, acknowledge and file said articles of incorporation with the Secretary of the State of Missouri, in the form attached hereto. Such articles shall not hereafter be amended without the approval of the Rolla City Council. (Ord. 2133, §3.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 23-4. Election of directors.
Persons who are duly qualified electors of and tax-payers in the City of Rolla, Missouri and who are not officers or employees of the City of Rolla, Missouri shall be elected directors of the authority, each such person to serve his or her term until his or her successor is duly elected and has commenced his or her term of office. (Ord. 2133, §4; Ord. 2222, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 23-5 to 23-9. Reserved.

Chapter 24 - Library
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter


Chapter Contents:
Article I - In General
§ 24-1. Library board of trustees - Established.
§ 24-2. Composition; qualifications, appointment and term of members.
§ 24-3. Officers.
§ 24-4. Powers and duties generally.
§ 24-5. Records.
§ 24-6. Compensation of members.
§§ 24-7 to 24-11. Reserved.

Sec. 24-1. Library board of trustees - Established.
There is hereby established and created an executive department of the city to be known as the library board of trustees.

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 24-2. Composition; qualifications, appointment and term of members.
The library board of trustees created pursuant to Section 24-1 shall consist of nine persons, who shall possess the qualifications of being voters of the city and interested in literature and education, and who shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by a majority vote of the city council. Three of such persons shall be appointed each year for a term of three years. No person shall serve more than three consecutive terms as a member of such board; and no officer of the city may serve as a member of such board.

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 24-3. Officers.
The library board of trustees shall elect from its members, all necessary officers from among themselves to create an efficient working board.

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 24-4. Powers and duties generally.
The library board of trustees shall have supervision of the city library, the employment of librarians, the purchase of books, and do everything necessary and proper so that the library shall be efficiently operated.

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 24-5. Records.
The library board of trustees shall keep accurate records of all books purchased, money received from the library levy, the money spent, and a true record of all the proceedings.

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 24-6. Compensation of members.
The members of the library board of trustees shall receive no compensation for their services.

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 24-7 to 24-11. Reserved.

Chapter 25 - Licenses
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter


Chapter Contents:
Article I - In General
§ 25-1. Definitions.
§ 25-2. Business licenses required of certain businesses and occupations.
§ 25-3. Application.
§ 25-4. Investigation and issuance.
§ 25-5. Appeal.
§ 25-6. Fees.
§ 25-7. Waiting period.
§ 25-8. Records.
§ 25-9. License to be prominently displayed.
§ 25-10. Change of location of business.
§ 25-11. Licensed business to be operated only on licensed premises.
§ 25-12. Assignment or transfer of license.
§ 25-13. Authority of license to engage in more than one business.
§ 25-14. Separate license for each separate and distinct business entity.
§ 25-15. Revocation.
§ 25-16. Exemptions.
§ 25-17. Requirement of retail sales license and evidence of workers' compensation insurance prior to license issuance.
§ 25-18. Licenses renewals.
§ 25-19. Duration, expiration of licenses; prorating license fees; penalty for failure to obtain.
§ 25-20. Refunds of license fee.
§ 25-21. Issuance to debtor of city - Prohibited.
§ 25-22. Payment of license tax prior to licensing.
§ 25-23. Duty of the Finance Department to issue licenses, restrictions.
§ 25-24. Annual statement required - Utility.
§ 25-25. Rummage sales exempt from license.
§ 25-26. False declaration in application; penalty.
§ 25-27. General penalty provisions.
§§ 25-28 to 25-33. Reserved.

ARTICLE II. REGULATING THE LICENSING OF PRIVATE DETECTIVES, PRIVATE SECURITY AGENCIES AND PRIVATE WATCHMEN
§ 25-34. Business license for private detectives and private security agencies.
§ 25-35. Uniform, vehicles, etc.
§§ 25-36 to 25-41. Reserved.

ARTICLE III. LICENSING OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS COMPANIES
§ 25-42. Reserved
§ 25-43. Payments.
§§ 25-44 to 25-50. Reserved.

ARTICLE IV - LICENSING OF MASSAGE THERAPY ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 25-51. Massage establishments, defined; operating requirements.
§ 25-52. License to be issued, when.
§ 25-53. Acts prohibited.
§ 25-54. Applicability to existing massage therapists.
§ 25-55. Massage therapy establishment business license, requirements.
§ 25-56. Issuance of permit for a massage therapy establishment.
§§ 25-57 to 25-62. Reserved.

Article I - In General
Sec. 25-1. Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter certain terms are hereby defined as follows:

Business - the engaging in the sale or the selling of any goods, wares, merchandise or the performing of any service anywhere, or at any store, stand or place occupied and maintained for that purpose within the city limits.

Contractor - a person or company who specializes in a skilled trade and sells either his labor or material (or both) at a predetermined price (either hourly, unit or lump sum) and controls the enterprise for profit.

Food processing establishment - a commercial establishment in which food is processed or otherwise prepared and packaged for human consumption.

Food-service establishment - any fixed or mobile restaurant; coffee shop; cafeteria; short-order cafe; luncheonette; grill; tearoom; sandwich shop; soda fountain; tavern; bar; cocktail lounge; night club; roadside stand; industrial-feeding establishment; private, public or nonprofit organization or institution routinely serving food; catering kitchen; commissary or similar place in which food or drink is prepared for sale or for service on the premises or elsewhere; and any other eating or drinking establishment or operation where food is served or provided for the public with or without charge.

Health authority - the health authority of Phelps County or his/her designated representative.

Itinerant vendor - any person who engages in or conducts a temporary or transient business of selling goods, wares and merchandise with the intention of continuing in such business in any one place for a period of not more than one hundred and twenty days, and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, hires, leases or occupies, either in whole or in part, a room, building, or other structure, for the exhibition and sale of goods.

Manufacturer - any person who shall hold or purchase personal property for the purpose of adding to the value thereof by any process of manufacturing, refining, or by the combination of different materials.

Merchant - any person who shall deal in the selling of goods, wares and merchandise, either by retail or wholesale, at any stand, store or place occupied for that purpose.

Mercantile agent - any person having a place of business in the city where orders for the sale and delivery of merchandise are taken, or who shall go from place to place within the city and take orders for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise, for future delivery, either by himself or by some other person.

Peddler - any person, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise or farm products, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers; and further shall mean any person who solicits orders and, as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers of the items sold.

Persons - used herein shall include the singular and the plural and shall also mean and include any person, firm or corporation, association, club, co-partnership or society, or any other organization.

Physical location – a store, shop or building, when the business is operated in an enclosed structure, under one roof with access to the entire inside premises through a common door. When a business does not operate in an enclosed structure, the physical location is a continuous single area used by one operator for the conduct of a specific type of business.

Rummage sale - a sale of small personal property for the purpose of cleaning out the attic, garage or basement, etc., which is not held more than four (4) periods per year, each period not to exceed three (3) days. (Ord. 2644, §1.)

Solicitor - any person, who for gain or profit, advertises a product for sale either by telephone, radio, newspaper or in person; takes orders for the product; delivers the same to the purchaser; and keeps no inventory and merchandise in stock.

Traveling stores - the stock of trade in goods, ware and merchandise or other personal property or some part thereof, which is carried from place to place by railroad, truck, wagon or other vehicles for the purpose of selling same either by public outcry or otherwise and having no certain place at which said property is to be disposed of. (Ord. 2530, §1; Ord. 3013, §4; Ord. 3682, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 25-2. Business licenses required of certain businesses and occupations.
It shall be unlawful of any person, partnership, or corporation within the corporate limits of the City of Rolla to engage in the business of being a contractor, itinerant vendor, manufacturer, merchant, mercantile agent, peddler, solicitor, or any of the occupations set forth in Section 94.110 of the RSMo, without first obtaining a license to do business in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Article.

A copy of Section 94.110 RSMo is attached hereto, marked Exhibit "A", and incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 2530, §1; Ord. 2734, §§ 1, 2; Ord. 3682, §1)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 25-3. Application.
Applicants for a license hereunder must file with the city a sworn application in writing, on a form to be furnished by the Finance Department, which shall include the following information:

Name and description of the business, if applicable, the goods to be sold.

Address (legal and local), business telephone and fax number and the number of employees (both full and part time).

If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship.

The proposed opening date of the business.

If a vehicle is to be used, a description for the same, together with license number thereof.

A copy of applicant's state retail sales license (if applicable) or Interstate Commerce Commission exemption certificate (if applicable).

Two sources of identification of applicant, including either applicant's operator's license or social security number.

A statement as to whether applicant has ever been convicted of any violation of laws or ordinance of this or any other state or municipality other than minor traffic violations (traffic violations other than DWI).

No license required under the provisions of this section shall be issued by the Finance Department to any person until such person produces a copy of a certificate of insurance for workers' compensation coverage if the applicant for the license is required to cover his/her liability under Chapter 287, RSMo. It is further made a violation of this Chapter to provide fraudulent information to the department. (Ord. 2530, §1; Ord. 2945, §1; Ord. 3682, §1)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 25-4. Investigation and issuance.
Upon receipt of such application, the City shall review the information contained therein and shall, with the exception noted in subsection (b) hereof, determine in each case whether the license to do business shall be issued. If the applicant is found to be unsatisfactory, the City shall endorse on such application disapproval and the reasons therefore and shall notify the applicant that the application is disapproved and that no license will be issued.

Upon approval by the City and upon payment of the fee as set forth below, a license to do business shall be issued to the applicant by the City.

No business license shall be granted to food processing establishments or food-service establishments without the written approval of the health authority. The business license applicant shall pay any fees, charges, or costs associated with health inspections. Fees shall be paid by the business license applicant directly to the County of Phelps. (Ord. 2530, §1; Ord. 3013, §5; Ord. 3055, §1; Ord. 3682, §1)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 25-5. Appeal.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the City in the denial of an application for license as provided in this Chapter shall have the right of appeal to the City Council of the City of Rolla, Missouri. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the City Administration, within seven days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's first known address, a written statement setting forth fully the ground for the appeal. The City Administration shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be made postage prepaid, to the licensee at his/her last known address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for hearing. The decision and order of the City Council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 2530, §1; Ord. 3682, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 25-6. Fees.
Upon application and approval for a City business license, there shall be levied and collected from every person desiring such license, a processing fee therefore. For new merchants and manufacturers such fees shall be $50.00 and said license shall be valid for a period ending June 30th of every year. The processing fee for business license renewals shall be $35.00.

Peddlers and itinerant vendors shall pay a license processing fee of $50.00 and, if approved, said license shall be valid for a period of thirty (30) days. (Ord. 2530, §1; Ord. 2589, §1; Ord. 3054, §2; Ord. 3236, §2; Ord. 3682, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 25-7. Waiting period.
No license shall be issued prior to the passage of a reasonable time to allow the processing and verification of the application. (Ord. 2530, §1; Ord. 2588, §1; Ord. 3682, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 25-8. Records.
The Finance Department shall keep a record of all licenses issued. In addition, the Finance Department shall keep a record of any complaints against any person licensed under the provisions of this Chapter and of any convictions for violations of this Chapter. (Ord. 2530, §1; Ord. 3682, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 25-9. License to be prominently displayed.
All licenses issued hereunder shall be carefully preserved and prominently displayed in a conspicuous manner in the place of business authorized to be conducted by said license. In the case of peddlers, a license or license copy, issued by the city and containing the words "licensed peddler", shall be carried constantly by the licensee. When the licensed peddler has more than one person in his/her employ, each such employee shall carry a copy of such license.

Failure to carry said license shall be a violation of this Chapter and will constitute forfeiture of the license. (Ord. 2530, §1; Ord. 3369, §1; Ord. 3682, §1)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 25-10. Change of location of business.
In case of a change of location after the issuing for license, the holder of the license must notify the City of its new address and obtain a new license sticker for a reprocessing and reinspection fee of $35.00. (Ord. 2530, §1; Ord. 3314, §2; Ord. 3682, §1)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 25-11. Licensed business to be operated only on licensed premises.
No person to whom a license is issued may carry on the business named therein at any other location than the one named in or endorsed on the license. (Ord. 2530, §1; Ord. 3682, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 25-12. Assignment or transfer of license.
No license issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall be assigned or transferred. (Ord. 2530, §1; Ord. 3682, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 25-13. Authority of licensee to engage in more than one business.
Any person taking out a merchant's license may be allowed to manufacture goods belonging to his/her line of trade without additional license. Any person taking out a merchant's license or shop license for any particular trade herein mentioned may be allowed to keep for sale any other line of goods or wares in the same store or shop without obtaining more than one license.

Any person operating related businesses at one or more locations, will be required to take out a separate license for each location.

Any person operating unrelated businesses at one or more locations will be required to take out a license for each business location. (Ord. 2530, §1; Ord. 3682, §1)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 25-14. Separate license for each separate business entity.
A separate license shall be obtained for each separate business entity conducted, operated, maintained, or carried on by any person engaged in any business for which this Chapter requires a license.

In the event ownership of a business is transferred, the new owner thereof shall apply for a license as per the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 2530, §1; Ord. 3682, §1)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 25-15. Revocation.
Licenses issued under the provisions of this Chapter may be revoked by the City Council of the City of Rolla, after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes:

Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for license.

Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of carrying on the business.
Any violation of this Chapter.

Otherwise conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public.

Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his/her last known address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for hearing. (Ord. 2530, §1; Ord. 3682, §1)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 25-16. Exemptions.
Any person claiming exemption from licensing by reason of engaging in interstate commerce shall be subject to registering with the Finance Department the same information required on applications for licenses as herein above provided.

Local (i.e., Phelps County) churches, charities, service clubs, and fraternal and not-for-profit organizations shall be exempt from the licensing provisions set forth in this Chapter. (Ord. 2530, §1; Ord. 3682, §1)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 25-17. Requirement of retail sales license and evidence of workers' compensation insurance prior to license issuance.
No person shall be granted a license under the provisions of this Chapter unless such person shall have a valid state retail sales license or an Interstate Commerce Commission exemption certificate unless such person is otherwise authorized to engage in business in this State without such license or exemption.

No license required under the provisions of this section shall be issued by the Finance Department to any person until such person produces a copy of a certificate of insurance for workers' compensation coverage or completes a workers' compensation waiver, if the applicant for the license is required to cover his liability under Chapter 287, RSMo. It is further made a violation of this Chapter to provide fraudulent information to the department.

Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to create or constitute a liability to or a cause of action against the City in regard to the issuance or non-issuance of any license for failure to provide evidence of workers' compensation coverage.

The Finance Department is directed to take appropriate actions, including altering the license application form, to require a statement and evidence of workers' compensation insurance.

That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after August 28, 1993. (Ord. 2530, §1; Ord. 2945, §§1-3; Ord. 3682, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 25-18. Licenses renewals.
All licenses provided for herein shall be renewed annually. The license period shall be from July 1, through June 30th of each year. For those licenses that have been in business continually for the one year period immediately preceding the renewal date, no new application need be submitted to the Finance Department; a new license will be issued upon payment of the required fee as set forth above. All food processing or food service establishments must procure a favorable health inspection by the health authority sometime during the previous calendar year, at the expense of the applicant. Otherwise the application procedure set forth must be followed. (Ord. 2530, §1; Ord. 3013, §6; Ord. 3054, §2; Ord. 3682, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 25-19. Duration, expiration of licenses; prorating license fees; penalty for failure to obtain.
Except as otherwise provided, no license issued under the provisions of this Chapter is to be granted for a longer period or a shorter period of time than one (1) year.

All licenses issued under this Article will be issued to expire on June 30th first following date of issue.

Any license issued for a new business or a change of business ownership during the year will be issued to expire on June 30th following date of issue. (Ord. 3236, §3)

All licenses required to be purchased under this Article will be subject to a penalty of ten (10) percent per month when purchased on or after August first following due date.

Violations of this section shall be enforced by the Rolla Police Department. (Ord. 2530, §1; Ord. 3054, §2; Ord. 3682, §1)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 25-20. Refunds of license fee.
No money paid for any license issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall be refunded by the city. (Ord. 2530, §1; Ord. 3682, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 25-21. Issuance to debtor of city prohibited.
No license or renewal required under the provisions of this Chapter shall be issued to any person if such person or firm is in arrears in the payment of any tax, fee or other charge due to the City. (Ord. 2530, §1; Ord. 3682, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 25-22. Payment of license tax prior to licensing.
Required: Any person who desires to procure a license for any of the purposes mentioned in this Chapter, shall, before applying for a business license, pay to the collector of revenue in and for the City any and all delinquent City taxes, including penalties and interest.

Duty of Finance Department: It shall be the duty of the Finance Department to inform all applicants for licenses under the provisions of this Chapter of the amount of tax to be paid for any specified purpose, and to issue a receipt to all persons so applying for money so paid by such applicants, which receipt shall state amount of money so received, the license purpose for which it was paid, and the time for which such license is to be issued. (Ord. 2530, §1; Ord. 3682, §1)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 25-23. Duty of city to issue licenses, restrictions.
It shall be the duty of the Finance Department to issue licenses to any and all persons applying therefore and producing the receipt for the correct amount of money specified therefore, for the time and purpose for which such license is to be issued. Provided, that where, by the provisions of this Chapter it shall be necessary for the applicant for any license to do any thing other than pay the Finance Department the correct amount of money and take his/her receipt, as aforesaid, such applicant shall produce and furnish the Finance Department satisfactory evidence that such provisions have been complied with and that all things necessary or required to be done have been done, before a City license shall be issued. Provided further, that the Finance Department shall not issue any license provided for herein without first having been satisfied that the applicant is not delinquent in the payment of any other tax or fee due the City. (Ord. 2530, §1; Ord. 3682, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 25-24. Annual statement required - Utility.
It is hereby made the duty of every person or firm engaged in utility business to file with the Finance Department on the first day of December of each year, a sworn statement of the gross receipts of such person from such business from the first day of October of the previous year to the thirtieth day of September of the present year. (Ord. 2530, §1; Ord. 3682, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 25-25. Rummage sales exempt from licenses.
Rummage sales shall be exempt from licenses: Any person holding a rummage sale more than four (4) periods per year, each period not to exceed three (3) days and with each period not to be consecutive three (3)-day periods, shall be declared to be a merchant and shall buy an appropriate license and locate his/her business in a properly zoned area. Set-up and breakdown for each rummage sale shall be limited to twenty-four (24) hours before and after the sales. (Ord. 2530, §1; Ord. 2644, §1; Ord. 3682, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 25-26. False declaration in application; penalty.
Any person who, in making the application for license required in this Chapter, shall make a false declaration of the information required in said application shall be guilty of an offense and shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50.00 and not more than $500.00 and shall be subject to confinement in jail for a period not to exceed three months and shall be subject to both such fine and confinement. (Ord. 2530, §1; Ord. 3682, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 25-27. General penalty provisions.
Any person, including all employees of any person, who shall be found guilty of engaging in business within the corporate limits of the City of Rolla, Missouri without first obtaining a license therefore as required by this Chapter shall be subject to confinement in the jail for a period not to exceed (3) three months and shall be subject to both such fine and confinement. (Ord. 2530, §1; Ord. 3682, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 25-28 to 25-33. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article II - Regulating the Licensing of Private Detectives, Private Security Agencies and Private Watchmen
Sec. 25-34. Business license for private detectives and private security agencies.
It shall be unlawful for any person to do business as or be employed as a private detective, private policeman or private security agency or operate any such business without first having obtained a license to do business under the provisions of Chapter 25 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 2470, §1; Ord. 3315, §2; Ord. 3682, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 25-35. Uniform, vehicles, etc.
Uniforms, if used, by private watchman shall have to be approved in their style and color by the chief of Police prior to being used by the licensee. No police buttons, insignia, decorations which are marked in any way to the Rolla Police Department shall be authorized.

Badge design, style and colors by private watchman shall have to be approved in their style, color and design by the Chief of Police prior to being used by the licensee.

For vehicles used by private watchman, any markings will require approval of the Chief of Police prior to being used by the licensee. (Ord. 2470, §11; Ord. 3682, §1)
(Return to Contents)

Secs. 25-36 to 25-41. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article III - Licensing of Telecommunications Companies
Sec. 25-42. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 25-43. Payments.
In addition to the other obligations imposed on the licensee by Sections 16-73 through 16-90 is the obligation to make license payments as provided in Section 16-84.  (Ord. 3216, §2; Ord. 3682, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 25-44 to 25-50. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article IV - Licensing of Massage Therapy Establishments
Sec. 25-51. Massage establishments, defined; operating requirements.
It is hereby found and determined that the business of operating massage therapy establishments affects the public health, safety and general welfare of the people of the City of Rolla

For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this section:

Employee means any person over eighteen (18) years age, other than a massage therapist, who renders any service in connection with the operation of a massage therapy business and receives compensation from the operator of the business or patrons.

Licensee means the person to whom a license has been issued to own or operate a massage therapy establishment.

Massage means any method of pressure on or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of the external parts of the human body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical electrical apparatus or appliances with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointment or other such similar preparations commonly used in the practice of massage, under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that the person to whom the treatment is provided or some third person on his or her behalf will pay money or give any other consideration or any gratuity therefore.

Massage therapy establishment means any establishment having a source of income or compensation derived from the practice of massage and which has a fixed place of business where any person engages in or carries on any of the activities as defined in the definition of "massage" and is licensed by the City of Rolla.

Massage therapist means any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, is licensed by the State of Missouri to engage in the practice of massage therapy.

Outcall massage therapy service means any business, the function of which is to engage in or carry on massages at a location designated by the customer or client rather than at a massage therapy establishment.

Patron means any person over eighteen (18) years of age who receives a massage under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he or she will pay money or give any other consideration therefore. Persons under the age of eighteen (18) may receive a massage with written consent of a parent or guardian.

Licensee means the person to whom a license has been issued by the State of Missouri to act in the capacity as a massage therapist.

Recognized school means any school or educational institution licensed to do business as a school or educational institution in the state in which with the American Massage Therapy Association, Inc. and which has been for its purpose the teaching of the theory, method, profession, or work of massage, which school requires a resident course of study not less than five hundred (500) hours before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation from such school or institution of learning following the successful completion of such course of study of learning.

Sexual or genital area means genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female.

Every portion of the massage therapy establishment, including appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition.

Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception area in a location available to all prospective customers.

All employees shall be clean and wear clean, nontransparent outer garments, covering the sexual and genital areas, whose use is restricted to the massage therapy establishment. A separate dressing room for each sex must be available on the premises with individual lockers for each employee. Doors to such dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be self-closing.

All massage therapy establishments shall be provided with clean, laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after each use thereof and stored in a sanitary manner.

No massage therapy establishment granted a license under the provisions of this Chapter shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published or distributed any advertisement, picture or statement which is known or through the exercise of reasonable care should be known to be false, deceptive or misleading in order to induce any person to purchase or utilize any professional massage therapy services.

No person shall permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to come or remain on the premises of any massage therapy establishment, as a massage therapist, employee or patron, unless such person is on the premises on lawful business.

No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep, or cause to be sold, given, dispensed, provided or kept, any alcoholic beverage on the premises of any massage therapy establishment.

No massage therapy establishment shall be kept open for any purpose between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. (Ord. 3030, §1; Ord. 3658, §2)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 25-52. License to be issued, when.
No license to operate a massage therapy establishment shall be issued unless an inspection by the building official reveals that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements:

Construction of rooms for toilets, tubs, steam baths and showers. Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths and showers shall be made waterproof with approved waterproofed materials and shall be installed in accordance with the city plumbing code.

Steam rooms and shower compartments shall have waterproof floors, walls and ceilings.

Floors of wet and dry heat rooms shall be adequately pitched to one or more floor drains properly connected to the sewer. Dry heat rooms with wooden floors need not be provided with pitched floors and floor drains.

A source of hot water must be available within the immediate vicinity of dry and wet heat rooms to facilitate cleaning.

Disinfecting and sterilizing equipment. The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing non-disposable instruments and materials used in administering massages. Such non-disposable instruments and materials shall be disinfected after use on each patron.

Closed storage areas. Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of clean linen, towels and other materials used in connection with administering massages. All soiled linens, towels and other materials shall be kept in properly covered containers or cabinets, which containers or cabinets shall be kept separate from the clean storage areas.

Toilet facilities. Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. A single water closet for both sexes may be used if, in the opinion of the building codes official, it would be impractical to provide separate facilities due to building size or other physical limitation. Urinals may be substituted for water closets after one water closet has been provided.

Lavatories or washbasins. Lavatories or washbasins provided with both hot and cold running water shall be installed in either the toilet room or a vestibule. Lavatories or washbasins shall be provided with soap and a dispenser and with sanitary towels.

Electrical equipment. All electrical equipment shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the City electrical code.
The chief of police or his authorized representatives may from time to time make inspection of each massage therapy establishment for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this Chapter are fully complied with. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to fail to allow such inspection officer access to the premises or hinder such officer in any manner. (Ord. 3030, §1; Ord. 3658, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 25-53. Acts prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage therapy establishment to touch with his or her hands or other part of the body, to fondle or massage any manner the sexual or genital areas of any other person.

It shall be unlawful for any person while in the presence of any other person in a massage therapy establishment to fail to conceal with a fully opaque covering the sexual or genital areas of his or her body.

It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder, or any person owning, operating or managing a massage therapy establishment knowingly to cause or permit any massage therapist or employee to perform any of the acts prohibited under state or municipal law. (Ord. 3030, §1; Ord. 3658, §2)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 25-54. Applicability to existing massage therapists.
This Article shall apply to all licensed persons operating a massage therapy establishment as of the date of passage of this Article.

The name and address of the recognized school attended, the date attended and a copy of the diploma or certificate of graduation awarded the applicant showing the applicant has successfully completed not less than five hundred (500) hours of instruction as required under Missouri law.

This Article shall not apply to hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums, persons holding an un-revoked certificate to practice the healing arts, cosmetologists or manicurists practicing within a salon under the laws of the state or to persons working under the direction of any such persons or in any such establishments, including those certified by the American Massage Therapy Association, Inc. (Ord. 3030, §1; Ord. 3658, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 25-55. Massage therapy establishment business license, requirements.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or to provide massage therapy services unless a valid business license has been issued by the City pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 25 of the Rolla City Code.

Every applicant for a massage therapy establishment business license shall file an application with the Finance Department upon a form prescribed. Each application shall include information as follows:

The name and residence address of each applicant; and if the applicant is a partnership or corporation, then the names and residence addresses of all partners and principals;

The location and mailing address of the proposed business;

A statement of the services and facilities to be provided;

A copy of the official Missouri state license issued to the applicant or any person who will provide services as a massage therapist at this location.
The application under this Article shall be referred to the Community Development Department for inspection of the proposed premises. (Ord. 3030, §1; Ord. 3658, §2)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 25-56. Issuance of permit for a massage therapy establishment.
The Finance Department may issue a license if all requirements for a massage therapy establishment described in this Article are met and may issue a license to all persons who apply to perform massage therapy services unless he finds the operation as proposed by the applicant if permitted would not have complied with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the building, health, city planning, housing, zoning, and fire codes of the City of Rolla. All persons providing massage therapy services in Rolla shall be licensed by the State of Missouri.

Any message therapy establishment license may be suspended or revoked by the license inspector for the violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter or for any act or conduct which would be sufficient cause for the denial of a license upon an original application. Before any such suspension or revocation the licensee shall be given at least ten (10) days written notice of the specific charges and an opportunity for a public hearing and presentation of evidence bearing upon the question. (Ord. 3030, §1; Ord. 3658, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 25-57 to 25-62. Reserved.

Chapter 26 - Milk and Milk Products
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter


(This Chapter was repealed by Ord. 2532 - May 4, 1987.)

Chapter 27 - Motor Vehicles and Traffic
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter


Chapter Contents:

Article I - In General
§ 27-1. Clerk of traffic violations bureau designated; authority of clerk.
§ 27-2. One-way traffic designated on certain streets.
§ 27-3. Protective headgear for operators of and passengers on motorcycles.
§ 27-4. Display of state vehicle license plate on motor vehicles.
§ 27-5. Right turn only at certain intersections.
§§27-6 to 27-9. Reserved.

Article II - Model Traffic Ordinance
§ 27-10. Adopted.
§ 27-11. City traffic engineer.
§ 27-12. Authority of state highway commission.
§ 27-13. Speed limits generally
§ 27-14. Driving on sidewalk.
§ 27-15. Bicycles; skate boards; roller blades; roller skates.
§ 27-16. Parking as to obstruct traffic.
§ 27-17. Parking on state-maintained highways.
§ 27-18. Traffic violations bureau.
§ 27-19. Penalties.
§§ 27-20 to 27-24. Reserved.

Article III - Operation of Vehicles
Division 1 - Generally
§ 27-25. Vehicles to keep to the right except on one-way streets.
§ 27-26. Passing other vehicles going in same direction.
§ 27-27. Two-way left turn lanes.
§ 27-28. Right-of-way of vehicles entering intersections.
§ 27-29. Distance between moving vehicles.
§ 27-30. Condition of vehicle generally.
§ 27-31. Careless and imprudent driving.
§ 27-32. Operator's or chauffeur's license required of person operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle.
§ 27-33. Operation of motor vehicle by person with suspended or revoked operator's license - Prohibited.
§ 27-34. Permitting an unlicensed person to operate a motor vehicle - Prohibited.
§ 27-35. Passing to the right of other vehicles.
§ 27-36. Nonlicensed all terrain vehicles - Prohibited.
§ 27-37. Proof of financial responsibility.
§§ 27-38 to 27-40. Reserved.
Division 2 - Driving While Intoxicated Or In Drugged Condition
§ 27-41. Driving while intoxicated, drugged.
§ 27-42. Excessive blood alcohol content.
§ 27-43. Definition.
§ 27-44. Percent by weight of alcohol, defined.
§ 27-45. Implied consent.
§ 27-46. Procedure on arrest.
§ 27-47. Procedure in the Municipal Court.
§ 27-48. Reports to highway patrol.
§ 27-49. Penalty.
§ 27-50. (Repealed by Ord. 3487, §1).
§ 27-51. Reimbursement of costs of arrest, when-limitations.
§ 27-52. Reserved.
§ 27-53. Expungement of records, alcohol related convictions.
§§ 27-54. Reserved.
Article IV - Equipment on Vehicles
§ 27-55. Lighting of vehicles generally.
§ 27-56. Mufflers required on all vehicles.
§ 27-57. Vehicles to be equipped with horns.
§ 27-58. Vehicles to be equipped with adequate brakes.
§ 27-59. Mud flaps required on trucks and tractor-trucks without rear fenders.
§ 27-60. Securing of loads on motor vehicles.
§ 27-61. Child restraints required for children under age four.
§ 27-62. Seat belts required for passenger cars.
§ 27-63. Tinting of windows and windshields in automobiles.
§ 27-64. Prohibiting the Operation of any Vehicle Which Results in Excessive Loud, Unusual or Explosive Noise.
§§ 27-65. Reserved.
Article V - Regulation Of Speed
§ 27-66. Maximum limits established generally.
§ 27-67. Maximum limits established on certain streets during school periods.
§ 27-68. Speed in trailer parks.
§ 27-69. Speed in Rolla Cemetery.
§ 27-70. Operation of motor vehicles in the Center and SplashZone parking lots.
§§ 27-71 to 27-73. Reserved.
Article VI - Stopping, Standing & Parking
§ 27-74. Leaving vehicles unattended.
§ 27-75. Registered owner of a motor vehicle responsible for parking violations in the absence of the driver of the motor vehicle.
§ 27-76. Restrictions on stopping of school bus to take on or discharge passengers.
§ 27-77. Vehicles to stop upon meeting or overtaking school bus stopped to receive or discharge school children.
§ 27-78. Vehicles to be parked on right side of street; exception.
§ 27-79. Overtime parking - Summons to show date and time issued.
§ 27-80. Penalty for parking ordinance violation.
§ 27-81. Parking to obstruct mailboxes
§ 27-82. Stopping at railroad crossings.
§ 27-83. Parking, etc., between property line and curb.
§ 27-84. Parking trucks, trailers, etc., on streets; removal of vehicles parked in violation of Section; towing or storage fee.
§ 27-85. Parking and/or storage of oversized trucks, trailers, or other vehicles on city streets.
§ 27-86.Parking of vehicles transporting flammable liquids, gases, corrosives or explosives; loading or unloading; penalties.
§ 27-87. Permit for parking construction equipment, tools, etc., on streets.
§ 27-88. No Turns – Enumerated generally..
§ 27-89. Stop intersections - Enumerated generally.
§ 27-90. Same - Intersection of Bishop Avenue (Highway 63) and Kingshighway.
§ 27-91. Same - Intersection of Bishop Avenue (Highway 63) and Ridgeview Road and Highway 72.
§ 27-92. Parking prohibited - On certain streets or parts of streets.
§ 27-93. Parking Prohibited on certain streets at certain times.
§ 27-94. Parking Prohibited – On certain municipal lots.
§ 27-95. Parking prohibited at all times within certain distance of street intersections.
§ 27-96.Parking prohibited on private parking lots.
§ 27-97. Ten-minute parking – From 8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M.
§ 27-98. Thirty minute parking – From 8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M.
§ 27-99. Thirty minute parking from 8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M. Monday through Friday.
§ 27-100. Reserved.
§ 27-101. One-hour parking - From 8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M.
§ 27-102. One-hour parking – On public parking lot of Rolla Public Library.
§ 27-103. Reserved.
§ 27-104. Two-hour parking - From 8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M. on certain municipal parking lots.
§ 27-105. Two-hour parking – From 8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M. – On certain streets or parts of streets.
§ 27-106. Public Parking Lot Permits.
§ 27-107. Ten-hour parking on certain municipal lots.
§ 27-108. Ten-hour parking on certain streets.
§ 27-109. Parking prohibited on residential streets in excess of seventy-two hours.
§ 27-110. Police parking only 7:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
§ 27-111. Parking prohibited from 7:00 A.M. to 9:00 A.M. and 3:00 P.M. to 5:00 P.M.
§ 27-112. Angle parking – On streets or parts of streets.
§ 27-113. Parking on right of way of Railway Company – Prohibited in certain areas; exception.
§ 27-114. Manner of parking on certain streets.
§ 27-115. Parking prohibited along a curb with yellow markings.
§ 27-116. Parking within marked boundaries.
§ 27-117. Parking prohibited on the Police parking lot located at Eleventh and Elm.
Article VII - Restricted Parking In The Downtown Business District
§ 27-118. Two-hour parking - From 8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M. on certain streets or parts of streets.
§ 27-119. Unlawful parking generally.
§ 27-120. Responsibility of vehicle owner for unlawful parking.
§ 27-121. Traffic officers to issue complaints.
§§ 27-122 to 27-126. Reserved.
Article VIII - Handicapped Parking
§ 27-127. Prohibition against parking in handicapped parking spaces.
§ 27-128. City engineer to designate parking spaces.
§ 27-129. City engineer to designate parking spaces on privately owned parking lots.
§ 27-130. Prohibition against parking in handicapped parking spaces in a privately owned parking facility.
§ 27-131 to 27-154. Reserved.
Article IX - Impoundment & Disposition of Motor Vehicles
§ 27-155. Definitions.
§ 27-156. Authority of police to remove vehicles.
§ 27-157. Leaving wrecked, non operating vehicles on city streets.
§ 27-158. Period of impoundment; option to return.
§ 27-159. Owner to apply for vehicle; pay costs.
§ 27-160. Satisfaction of traffic tickets.
§§ 27-161 to 27-170. Reserved.
Article X - Parades
§ 27-171. Parades - Permit required.
§ 27-172. Parade permits - Application.
§ 27-173. Parade permits - Duties of chief of police.
§ 27-174. Parade rules.
§ 27-175. Issuance of permit; special requirements; appeals for denial of permit.
§ 27-176. Penalty provisions.
§§ 27-177 to 27-181. Reserved.
Article XI - Fire Lanes
§ 27-190. Designation.
§ 27-191. Parking prohibited.
§ 27-192. Penalty.
§ 27-193. Enforcement.
§ 27-194. Presumption of liability.
§ 27-195. Reserved.


Article I - In General
Sec. 27-1. Clerk of traffic violations bureau designated; authority of clerk.
The judge of the municipal court may establish a traffic violations bureau and designate a person as violations clerk for such traffic violations bureau. Such traffic violations bureau shall be operated within the procedures as established by the rules of the Supreme Court of the State of Missouri for traffic violations bureaus.

The clerk of the traffic violations bureau shall serve as municipal court clerk.

The municipal court clerk shall have all the powers, rights, and duties vested in such office or applicable to such office as set forth in the Rules of Practice and Procedure in Municipal Courts and Traffic Courts as promulgated by the Supreme Court of the State of Missouri and the Ordinances of the City of Rolla, Missouri.

The clerk of the municipal court is authorized to issue warrants upon the filing of information by the prosecutor charging the commission of an offense of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 1970, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-2. One-way traffic designated on certain streets.
All motor vehicles, and all other vehicles, including bicycles, carts and wagons, driven, operated or propelled on, over and along certain designated streets in the city, shall be driven, operated or propelled in one direction only, as follows:

Fourth Street, between the intersection of Rolla Street and Pine Street in an easterly direction only.

Twelfth Street, between the intersection of Twelfth Street and Pine Street and the intersection of Twelfth Street and Rolla Street, in a westerly direction only.

Elm Street, from the intersection of Tenth Street to the intersection of Ninth Street, in a southerly direction only.

Elm Street, between the intersection of Elm Street and Twelfth Street and the intersection of Elm Street and Fourteenth Street, in a southerly direction only.

Park Street, between the intersection of Park Street and Sixth Street and the intersection of Park Street and Ninth Street, in a northerly direction only.

Pine Street, between the intersection of Pine Street and Sixth Street and the intersection of Pine Street and Twelfth Street, in a northerly direction only.

Rolla Street, between the intersection of Rolla Street and Sixth Street and the intersection of Rolla Street and Twelfth Street, in a southerly direction only.

State Street, between the intersection of State Street and Sixth Street and the intersection of State Street and Ninth Street, in a southerly direction only.

(Ord. 3902, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-3. Protective headgear for operators of and passengers on motorcycles.
Every person operating or riding as a passenger on any motorcycle upon any highway, street or alley of the city shall wear protective headgear at all times the vehicle is in motion.

The protective headgear required herein shall meet reasonable standards and specifications established by the director of revenue of the state.

The term "motorcycle" shall mean a motor vehicle operated on two wheels. (Ord. 1398, §§1 to 3)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-4. Display of state vehicle license plates on motor vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle or trailer upon the public streets, avenues, boulevards, parkways, or alleys, or state highways in the city without having displayed the valid license plates or temporary permit issued by the director of motor vehicle department of the state, entirely unobscured, unobstructed, and all parts thereof plainly visible and kept reasonably clean, and so fastened as not to swing. In the event only one license plate is issued, such plate shall be displayed on the rear of the motor vehicle.

It shall be unlawful for any person to park upon a public street a motor vehicle which does not have attached thereto a valid state license plate which has been issued by the proper authority for use on such motor vehicle. (Ord. 2316, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-5. Right turn only at certain intersections.
Only right turns shall be made at the following intersections.

On Elm Street at Seventh Street south side.  (Ord. 3544, §1)
On Elm Street at Seventh Street north side. (Ord. 3544, §1)

(Ord. 4036, §1, Ord. 4476, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 27-6 to 27-9. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article II - Model Traffic Ordinance
Sec. 27-10. Adopted.
Chapter 300, consisting of Sections 300.010 through 300.600, Revised Statutes of Missouri, commonly known as the "Model Traffic Ordinance," is hereby adopted as and for the traffic ordinance of the city with like effect as if recited at length herein.

The following sections of such model traffic ordinance which are not so adopted and which are expressly deleted: Section 300.060, Section 300.205, Section 300.330, Section 300.347 and Section 300.445.

Section 300.010, subsection (39) of such model traffic ordinance, pertaining to a definition of "Vehicle," is hereby amended to read as follows:

(39)"Vehicle," every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

(Ord. 1836, §1; Ord. 1859, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-11. City traffic engineer.
(a) The office of city traffic engineer is hereby established. The city engineer or other designated city officials shall serve as city traffic engineer in addition to his other functions and shall exercise the powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided in this Article.

(b) The city traffic engineer shall determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices, conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and devise remedial measures, conduct engineering investigations of traffic conditions, plan the operation of traffic on the streets and highways of the city, cooperate with other city officials in the development of the ways and means to improve traffic conditions and carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by this Code or other ordinances of the city, except as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 1836, §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-12. Authority of state highway commission.
(a) The function of the city engineer with all the powers, duties and authority given under Sections 300.010 through 300.600, Revised Statutes of Missouri, shall vest in the state highway commission for all controlled access highways, either divided or undivided and other highways, streets or highways, or state highways as defined in Section 300.010, Revised Statutes of Missouri, hereinafter called "highway," which are presently in existence and maintained by the state highway commission and any such highway or highways which are in the future built, constructed or which the state highway commission assumes the responsibility to maintain the corporate limits or within any area annexed by the city.

(b) The state highway commission shall have exclusive authority to place and maintain traffic control signs, signals and devices on all highways maintained by the state highway commission as defined in subsection (a) of this Section. The state highway commission is given express authority to delegate to the district engineer any power or authority vested in the state highway commission by this Article. (Ord. 1836, §3.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-13. Speed limits generally.
(a) The state traffic laws regulating speed or vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within the city; except, that the city may by ordinance declare and determine upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigation that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon specific streets or in certain areas, in which event it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared when signs are in place giving notice thereof, but no city ordinance shall regulate the speed of vehicles upon divided limited access highways.

(b) The city will submit to the state highway commission for approval any ordinances, rules, regulations or resolutions pertaining to the regulation of speed where such ordinances, rules or regulations are applicable to subsection (a) of Section 27-12. (Ord. 1836, §4.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-14. Driving on sidewalk.
The driver of a vehicle, except bicycles as later provided for, shall not drive within any sidewalk area except on a permanent or temporary driveway. (Ord. 1836, §5.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-15. Bicycles; skate boards; roller blades; roller skates.
(a) Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of the state declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by traffic ordinances of this city applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this Article and except as to those provisions of laws or ordinances which by their nature can have no application.

(b) No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing.

(c) No person shall ride a bicycle, a skate board, roller blades, roller skates, or other type of wheeled vehicle upon a sidewalk within a business district. (Ord. 3194, §1)

(d) Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. (Ord. 1836, §6.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-16. Parking as to obstruct traffic.
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in any manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic; however, this Section shall not apply to any highway included in subsection (a) of Section 27-12. (Ord. 1836, §7.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-17. Parking on state-maintained highways.
No person shall park any vehicle in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than twenty feet of width of roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. (Ord. 1836, §8.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-18. Traffic violations bureau.
(a) The police court of the city shall establish a traffic violations bureau to assist the court with the clerical work of traffic cases. The bureau shall be in charge of such persons and shall be open at such hours as the police judge may designate.

(b) The police judge shall designate the specified offenses under this law or under the traffic ordinances of the city and the state traffic laws in accordance with Supreme Court Rule No. 37.50 in respect to which payments of fines may be accepted by the traffic violations bureau in satisfaction thereof, and shall specify suitable schedules the amount of such fines for first, second and subsequent offenses, provided such fines are within the limits declared by law or ordinance, and shall further specify what number of such offenses shall require appearance before the court. (Ord. 1836, §9.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-19. Penalties.
Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Article shall be punished under the provisions of Section 1-7. (Ord. 1836, §10.)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 27-20 to 27-24. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article III - Operation of Vehicles
Division 1 - Generally
Sec. 27-25. Vehicles to keep to the right except on one-way streets.
All vehicles, when in operation shall be kept as close to the right-hand side of the street as possible; provided, however, that all vehicles, when in operation on any street upon which traffic is restricted to one direction only, may be driven in either the right-hand or left-hand lane of such street.

An operator or driver meeting another vehicle coming from the opposite direction on the same street shall turn to the right of the center of the street so as to pass without interference. (Ord. 862, §2; Ord. 1580, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-26. Passing other vehicles going in same direction.
An operator or driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle going in the same direction and desiring to pass the same shall pass to the left of the vehicle so overtaken; provided that the way ahead is clear of approaching traffic and the vehicle being passed is not crossing an intersection. An operator or driver overtaking and desiring to pass a vehicle shall sound his signal device and the operator or driver of the vehicle so overtaken shall promptly, upon such signal, turn his vehicle as far as reasonably possible to the right in order to allow free passage on the left of his vehicle. Provided, however, that this Section shall not apply to the operation of any vehicle on any street upon which traffic is restricted to one direction only. (Ord. 862, §2; Ord. 1580, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-27. Two-way left turn lanes.
Where a special lane for making left turns by drivers proceeding in opposite directions has been indicated by official traffic-control devices:

(a) A left turn shall not be made from any other lane.

(b) A vehicle shall not be driven in the lane except when preparing for or making a left turn from or into the roadway. (Ord. 2116, § 1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-28. Right-of-way of vehicles entering intersections.3
At an intersection of two streets, where vehicles are not required by this Code or other ordinances to stop, an operator of a motor vehicle shall have the right of way over an operator or driver of another motor vehicle who is approaching from the left and shall give the right of way to an operator or driver of a motor vehicle approaching from the right. The right of way shall mean the right to proceed when two or more vehicles will reach such intersection at approximately the same time. (Ord. 862, § 2.)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 27-29. Distance between moving vehicles.
All vehicles, when in operation on the public streets, shall be operated so as to remain a reasonably safe and prudent distance behind any other vehicle immediately in front thereof and proceeding in the same direction. (Ord. 862, §2; Ord. 1792, §1.)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 27-30. Condition of vehicles generally.
No person shall drive or conduct any vehicle in such condition or so constructed or so loaded as to be likely to cause delay in traffic or accident or injury to man, beast or property. (Ord. 862, §5.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-31. Careless and imprudent driving.
Every person operating a motor vehicle upon the public streets and thoroughfares of the city shall drive the same in a careful and prudent manner, and shall exercise the highest degree of care in such a manner as not to endanger the property of another or the life and limb of any person. Any person failing to operate a motor vehicle in such a manner shall be deemed guilty of careless and imprudent driving. (Ord. 862, §23; Ord. 1665, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-32. Operator's or chauffeur's license required of person operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle.
(a) No person shall operate or be in control of a motor vehicle within the City of Rolla without having first been issued a valid operator's or chauffeur's license as provided in Chapter 302 RSMo, and no person shall operate or be in control of a motorcycle within the city without first having been issued a valid operator's or chauffeur's license which shows that he has successfully passed an examination for the operation of a motorcycle as prescribed by Section 302.020 RSMo. (Ord. 2191, §1.)

(b) In accordance with Section 307.195 RSMo., it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motorized bicycle, as defined in Sections 301.010 and 307.180 RSMo., on any highway or street in the City of Rolla without having first been issued a valid operator’s or chauffer’s license as provided in Chapter 302 RSMo. (Ord. 3876, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-33. Operation of motor vehicle by person with suspended or revoked operator's license - Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon any city street or highway while their operator's license has been suspended or revoked by the Department of Revenue pursuant to chapter 302 of the Revised Statutes of the State of Missouri. (Ord. 2190, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-34. Permitting an unlicensed person to operate a motor vehicle - Prohibited.
(a) No person shall authorize or knowingly permit a motorcycle or other two or three wheeled self-propelled vehicle owned by him or under his control to be driven upon a highway by any person whose operator's or chauffeur's license does not indicate that the person has passed the examination for the operation of a motorcycle or has been issued an instruction permit therefore.

(b) No person shall operate a motor vehicle with an instruction permit or chauffeur's or operator's license issued to another person.

(c) No person shall cause or knowingly permit his child or ward under the age of 16 years to drive a motor vehicle upon any highway when such minor is not authorized to legally operate a motor vehicle.

(d) No person shall authorize or knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by him or under his control to be driven upon any highway by any person who is not authorized by law to operate a motor vehicle. (Ord. 2243, §§1 to 4.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-35. Passing to the right of other vehicles.
A driver or operator of a vehicle may overtake and pass to the right of another vehicle proceeding in the same direction only under the following conditions:

(a) When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn.

(b) When the street upon which the vehicle is being operated is a street with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for two or more lines of vehicles in each direction.

(c) When the street upon which the vehicle is being operated is a one-way street.

(d) The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right only under the foregoing conditions when such movement may be made in safety. (Ord. 1959, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-36. Nonlicensed all terrain vehicles - Prohibited.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate upon the public streets or sidewalks in the City of Rolla, Missouri any non-licensed all terrain vehicle.

(b) For the purposes of this Ordinance, the terms "all terrain vehicle" means a motorized vehicle having three or four wheels with tires that are designed for off the road driving.

(c) For the purpose of this Ordinance, the term "nonlicensed all terrain vehicle" means a vehicle that is not subject to licensing and registration laws of the State of Missouri.

(d) The penalty for violation of this Ordinance is a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars or a jail sentence not to exceed three months or both a fine and jail sentence within said limits. (Ord. 2567, §§1-4.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-37. Proof of financial responsibility.
(a) No owner of a motor vehicle registered in this State, or required to be registered in this State, shall operate, register or maintain registration of a motor vehicle, or permit another person to operate such vehicle, unless the owner maintains the financial responsibility which conforms to the requirements of the laws of this State. Furthermore, no person shall operate a motor vehicle owned by another with the knowledge that the owner has not maintained financial responsibility unless such person has financial responsibility which covers the person's operation of the other's vehicle; however, no owner shall be in violation of this subsection if he or she fails to maintain financial responsibility on a motor vehicle which is inoperable or being stored and not in operation.

(b) A motor vehicle owner shall maintain the owner's financial responsibility in a manner provided for in Section RSMo 303.160, or with a motor vehicle liability policy conforming to the requirements of the laws of this State. (Ord. 3584, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 27-38 to 27-40. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)

Division 2 - Driving While Intoxicated Or In Drugged Condition
Sec. 27-41. Driving while intoxicated, drugged.
A person commits the offense of driving while intoxicated if he operates a motor vehicle while in an intoxicated or drugged condition. (Ord. 2354, §2.)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 27-42. Excessive blood alcohol content.
A person commits the offense of driving with excessive blood alcohol content if he operates a motor vehicle with eight-hundredths of one percent (.08%) or more by weight of alcohol in his blood. (Ord. 2354, §2; Ord. 3488, §2)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 27-43. Definition.
As used in this Ordinance, the terms drive or operate means physically driving or operating or being in the actual physical control of a motor vehicle. (Ord. 2354, §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-44. Percent by weight of alcohol, defined.
As used herein, the term percent by weight of alcohol shall have the same meaning as provided by state law, in RSMo, Section 577.012. (Ord. 2354, §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-45. Implied consent.
Any person who operates a motor vehicle shall be deemed to have given consent to a chemical test or tests of his breath, blood, saliva or urine for the purpose of determining the alcohol or drug content of his blood. Such tests shall be performed according to the provisions of state law, in RSMo, Section 577.020 through 577.041. (Ord. 2354, §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-46. Procedure on arrest.
Any arrest for driving while intoxicated shall be handled as any other arrest for an offense of the same severity, except as follows:

(a) As soon as practicable following such arrest, the police department shall obtain the driving record of the persons arrested.

(b) Any person who has a driving record that indicates a prior conviction for driving while intoxicated or driving with excessive blood alcohol content within ten (10) years of the date of the present alleged offense shall be subject to prosecution for said alleged offense in the Circuit Court of Phelps County, Missouri, at the option of the State Prosecuting Attorney. When such a driving record is determined, the City Attorney shall inform the State Prosecuting Attorney of said driving record and the pending offense and the State Prosecuting Attorney, within five (5) days after the receipt of such information, shall inform the City Attorney whether or not the Municipal charge be dismissed and state charges filed. Failure on the part of the State Prosecuting Attorney to make such determination within the aforesaid period, shall be deemed a waiver on behalf of the State of Missouri to prosecute such persons for driving while intoxicated charge in the State Court.

(c) No person, regardless of his prior conviction record shall be prosecuted through the Municipal Court where it appears possible that a charge of vehicular manslaughter (RSMo, §577.005) or vehicle injury (RSMo, §577.008) might be sustained, until after the State Prosecuting Attorney shall have had the opportunity to review the case and to consider filing appropriate charges. (Ord. 2354, §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-47. Procedure in the Municipal Court.
No person charged with driving while intoxicated (Section 27-41) or driving with blood alcohol content (Section 27-42) shall have his case heard in Municipal Court except in accordance with the following procedure:

(a) The defendant should either be represented by an attorney, or should voluntarily waive his right to such representation by execution of a written waiver. If the defendant chooses to do neither (or if because he is an indigent is unable to employ an attorney), the prosecution of the case may be suspended and the case referred to the state prosecuting official.

(b) Neither the Municipal Judge nor any other municipal official shall have the power to revoke any operator's or chauffeur's license. (Ord. 2354, §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-48. Reports to highway patrol.
Effective July 1, 1983, a record of the final disposition in any court proceeding involving a violation of Section 27-41 or Section 27-42 shall be forwarded to the Missouri State Highway Patrol within fifteen (15) days by the Clerk of the Court. (Ord. 2354, §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-49. Penalty.
(a) Any person convicted of driving while intoxicated shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00, confinement in the county jail for not more than ninety days, or both such fine and confinement.

(b) Any person convicted of driving with blood alcohol content shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00, confined in the county jail for not more than ninety (90) days, or both such fine and confinement.

(c) Upon a plea of guilty or a finding of guilty for an offense of driving while intoxicated or driving with blood alcohol content, the court may (as a condition for suspending any permissible portion of any sentence or in addition to imposition of any penalties provided by law) order the convicted person to participate in and successfully complete an alcohol or drug related traffic offender education or rehabilitation program as described in RSMo. §577.049. Such a program may be used as a condition for suspending any permissible portion of any sentence only one time. (Ord. 2354, §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-50. Judgment for Missouri's Crime Victim's Compensation Fund.
(Ord. 2433, §1) (Repealed by Ord. 3487, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-51. Reimbursement of costs of arrest, when-limitations.
Upon a plea of guilty or finding of guilty for a violation of Section 27-41 or 27-42, the court may, in addition to imposition of any penalties provided by law, order the convicted person to reimburse the state or local law enforcement agency which made the arrest for the costs associated with such arrest.  Such costs shall include the reasonable cost of making the arrest, including the cost of any chemical test made under this chapter to determine the alcohol or drug content of the person’s blood, and the costs of processing, charging, booking and holding such person in custody.  (Ord. 2861, §1; Ord. 3600, §2)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 27-52. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-53. Expungement of records, alcohol related convictions.
After a period of not less than ten years, an individual who has pleaded guilty or has been convicted for a first alcohol-related driving offense which is in violation of this Code and which is not a conviction for driving a commercial motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol and who since such date has not been convicted of any other alcohol-related driving offense may apply to the court in which they pled guilty or was sentenced for an order to expunge from all official records all recordation of their arrest, plea, trial or conviction. If the court determines, after hearing, that such person has not been convicted of any alcohol-related driving offense in the ten years prior to the date of the application for expungement, and has no other alcohol-related enforcement contacts as defined in Section 302.525, RSMo, during that ten-year period, the court shall enter an order of expungement. The effect of such order shall be to restore such person to the status they occupied prior to such arrest, plea or conviction and as if such event had never taken place. No person as to whom such order has been entered shall be held thereafter under any provision of any law to be guilty of perjury or otherwise giving a false statement by reason of their failure to recite or acknowledge such arrest, plea, trial, conviction or expungement in response to any inquiry made of them for any purpose whatsoever and no such inquiry shall be made for information relating to an expungement under this section. A person shall only be entitled to one expungement pursuant to this section. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the Missouri Director of Revenue from maintaining such records as to ensure that an individual receives only one expungement pursuant to this section for the purpose of informing the proper authorities of the contents of any record maintained pursuant to this section. (Ord. 2981, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-54. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article IV - Equipment On Vehicles
Sec. 27-55. Lighting of vehicles generally.
Every motor vehicle shall, while traveling on the public streets and thoroughfares of the city, be equipped with such lights as may be required by state law. Such lights shall be capable of performing as required by law and shall be used accordingly. (Ord. 862, §10.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-56. Mufflers required on all vehicles.
Every motor vehicle, when used or driven on the streets, alleys or thoroughfares in the city, shall be equipped with a muffler, properly constructed and connected and attached to the motor, through which the exhaust from the motor of such motor vehicle is ejected, so as to deaden the sound of such exhaust. (Ord. 862, §11.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-57. Vehicles to be equipped with horns.
Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a horn, in good working order, capable of emitting a sound adequate in quantity and volume to give warning to the approach of such vehicle to other users on the street and to pedestrians. Such signaling devices shall be used for warning purposes only and shall not be used for making any unnecessary noise and no other sound producing signaling device shall be used at any time. (Ord. 862, §17.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-58. Vehicles to be equipped with adequate brakes.
All motor vehicles, except motorcycles, shall be provided at all times with two sets of adequate brakes, kept in good working order and motorcycles shall be provided with one set of adequate brakes, kept in good working order. (Ord. 862, §18.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-59. Mud flaps on trucks.
It is unlawful for any person to operate upon the public streets of the City of Rolla, Missouri a truck or truck-tractor trailer, without rear fenders, which is not equipped with mud flaps for the rear wheels. If mud flaps are used, they shall be wide enough to cover the full tread width of the tire or tires being protected; they shall be so installed that they extend from the underside of the vehicle body in a vertical plane behind the rear wheels to within eight inches of the ground, and shall be constructed of a rigid material or a flexible material which is of a sufficiently rigid character to provide adequate protection when the vehicle is in motion. No provision of this Section shall apply to a motor vehicle in transit and in process of delivery equipped with temporary mud flaps. (Ord. 2000, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-60. Securing of loads on motor vehicles.
All motor vehicles, and every trailer and semi-trailer operating upon the public streets of the City of Rolla, Missouri and carrying goods or material or farm products which may be reasonably expected to become dislodged and fall from the vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer as a result of wind pressure or air pressure and/or by the movement of the vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer shall have a protective cover or be sufficiently secured so that no portion of such goods or material can become dislodged and fall from the vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer while being transported or carried. (Ord. 2001, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-61. Child restraints required for children under age four.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person who is a resident of the State of Missouri to transport a child under the age of four years within the City of Rolla, Missouri, without having said child in a restraint system as set forth in Section (b) hereof.

(b) When any child under the age of four (4) years is transported in the front seat of a motor vehicle said child shall be restrained with a child passenger restraint system approved by the Missouri Department of Public Safety.

When any child under the age of four (4) years is transported in any seat other than the front seat of a motor vehicle, said child shall be restrained either by a child passenger restraint system approved by the Missouri Department of Public Safety or by the vehicle's seat belt.

(c) This Ordinance shall not apply to motor vehicles registered in another state or to a temporary substitute vehicle. The term temporary substitute vehicle as used herein shall mean any vehicle operated in the City of Rolla, Missouri, with temporary license plates issued by the State of Missouri.

(d) This Ordinance shall not apply to any public carrier for hire.

(e) Any person who violates this Ordinance may be punished by a fine of not more than twenty-five and no/100 ($25.00) dollars and court costs. (Ord. 2422, §§1-5)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-62. Seat belts required for passenger cars.
(a) As used in the Ordinance, the term "passenger car" means every motor vehicle designed for carrying ten persons or less and used for the transportation of persons; except that, the term "passenger car" shall not include motorcycles, motorized bicycles, motor tricycles and trucks with a licensed gross weight of 12,000 pounds or more.

(b) Each driver, except persons employed by the United States Postal Service while performing duties for that federal agency which require the operator to service postal boxes from their vehicles, or which require frequent entry into and exit from their vehicles, and front seat passenger of a passenger car manufactured after January 1, 1968, operated on a street or highway in the City of Rolla, Missouri, and persons less than eighteen years of age operating or riding in a truck, as defined in Section 301.010, RSMo, on a street or highway in the City of Rolla, shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt that meets federal National Highway, Transportation and Safety Act requirements; except that a child less than four years of age shall be protected as required in Section 210.104 RSMo. (Each driver of a motor vehicle transporting a child four years of age or more, but less than sixteen years of age, in the front seat of the motor vehicle shall secure the child in a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt.) No person shall be stopped, inspected, or detained solely to determine compliance with the subsection. The provisions of this Section shall not be applicable to persons who have a medical reason for failing to have a seat belt fastened about his or her body, nor shall the provisions of this section be applicable to persons while operating or riding a motor vehicle being used in agricultural work-related activities. Noncompliance with this subsection shall not constitute probable cause for violation of any other provision of law.

(c) Each driver of a motor vehicle transporting a child four years of age or more, but less than sixteen years of age, shall secure the child in a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt.

(d) Each person violating the provisions of this Section and who is found guilty thereof shall be subject to a fine not to exceed ten dollars. All other provisions of law and court rules to the contrary notwithstanding, as stated in Section 307.178 RSMo, no court costs may be imposed if court costs have been assessed on any other charge arising out of the same occurrence. (Ord. 2559, §§1-3; Ord. 3223, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-63. Tinting of windows and windshields in automobiles.
(a) Any person may operate a motor vehicle with front sidewing vents or windows located immediately to the left and right of the driver that have a sun screening device, in conjunction with safety glazing material, that has a light transmission of thirty-five percent or more plus or minus three percent and a luminous reflectance of thirty-five percent or less plus or minus three percent. Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, any sun screening device applied to front sidewing vents or windows located immediately to the left and right of the driver in excess of the requirements of this section shall be prohibited without a permit pursuant to a physician's prescription as described below. Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, all sun screening devices applied to the windshield of a motor vehicle are prohibited.

(b) This section shall not prohibit labels, stickers, decalcomania, or informational signs on motor vehicles or the application of tinted or solar screening material to recreational vehicles as defined in section 700.010, Revised Statutes of Missouri, provided that such material does not interfere with the driver's normal view of the road. This section shall not prohibit factory-installed tinted glass, the equivalent replacement thereof or tinting material applied to the upper portion of the motor vehicle's windshield which is normally tinted by the manufacturer of motor vehicle safety glass.

(c) This section shall not apply to vehicles licensed with a historical license plate nor those vehicles operated under permit issued by the Missouri Department of Public Safety for the use of sunscreening devices which otherwise would conflict herewith.

(d) Any person who violates the provision of this section shall be subject to punishment as provided in Section 1-7 of the Rolla City Code. (Ord. 3616, §§1-4)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 27-64.  Prohibiting the Operation of any Vehicle Which Results in Excessive Loud, Unusual or Explosive Noise.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to use or operate or cause to be used or operated within the City of Rolla, Missouri any mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the braking or deceleration of any vehicle which results in the excessive, loud, unusual or explosive noise from such vehicle.

Any person convicted of a violation of this ordinance shall be punished for a first conviction thereof by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding ten (10) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; for a second such conviction within one (1) year after the first conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding twenty (20) days or both such fine and imprisonment; upon the third and subsequent conviction within one (1) year after the first conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine or not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months or both such fine and imprisonment.

That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and approval.

(Ord. 4046)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 27-65 Reserved.
(Return to Contents)


Article V - Regulation of Speed
No vehicle shall be moved or propelled along, over or upon any street at a  greater rate of speed than is reasonable, having regard to the traffic and use of such street or so as to endanger the life or limb of any person or the safety of any property, and shall in any event, while upon any such street, not be moved or propelled at a greater rate of speed than twenty-five miles per hour, except on the following streets or portions of streets and the speed limit shall not be greater than provided by the following:  (Ord. 3903, §2)

      Tenth Street.  Between Fairgrounds Road and Bishop Avenue (U.S. 63), thirty miles per hour; between Elm Street and Olive Street, thirty miles per hour; between Olive Street and Iowa Street, twenty miles per hour; between Iowa Street and Holloway Street, thirty miles per hour; between Holloway Street and Forum Drive, thirty five miles per hour.

      Twelfth Street.  Between Pine Street and Rolla Street, twenty miles per hour.

      Eighteenth Street.   Between Farrar Drive and Forum Drive, thirty miles per hour.

      Bardsley Road.  Between Twelfth and Eighteenth Streets, thirty miles per hour.

      Bridge School Road.  On Bridge School Road from Kingshighway to 2,500' south of Kingshighway, thirty miles per hour; from 2,500’ south of Kingshighwya to west city limits, thirty-five miles per hour.

      Fairgrounds Road.  Between Kingshighway (U.S. Business Route 66) and Tenth street, thirty miles per hour.

      Forum Drive.  Between Soest Road and Old St. James Road, thirty miles per hour.

      Highway CC. (Lions Club Drive West) from US Highway 63 (Bishop Avenue) to west city limits, 45 miles per hour.

      Highway 72.  Between the intersection with H-J Drive and Walker Avenue, forty miles per hour; between intersection with Bishop Avenue (U.S. Highway 63) and a point located approximately1,250 feet east of Route O, a.k.a. Lecoma Road, thirty-five miles per hour; between such point located approximately 1,250 feet  east of Route O, a.k.a. Lecoma Road and the south right of way line of Lions Club Drive,, 45 miles per hour; between the south right of way line of Lions Club Drive to southeast city limits, fifty five miles per hour.

      Holmes Lane.  Between Soest Road and Salem Avenue, twenty miles per hour.

      Interstate I-44.  Within city limits, seventy miles per hour except between a point at the 183.1 mile to a point at the 186.9 mile when the speed limit is 60 miles per hour.

      Kingshighway (U.S. Business Route 66).  Between intersection with Bishop Avenue (U.S. 63) and intersection with Sixth Street, 25 miles per hour. Between intersection with Bishop Avenue (U.S. 63) and Old Wire Outer Road, thirty-five miles per hour.

      Lions Club Drive. Between Bishop Avenue (U.S. Highway 63) and Highway 72, thirty-five miles per hour.

      Lovers Lane.  Between Soest Road and Tenth Street, thirty miles per hour.

      McCutchen Drive.  Between Tenth Street and Old St. James Road, thirty miles per hour.

      Martin Springs Drive (South Outer Road of I-44).  From Kingshighway to a point approximately 150 feet southwest of Blue’s Lake Parkway, thirty-five miles per hour; from a point approximately 150 feet southwest of Blue’s Lake Parkway to west city limits, 45 miles per hour.

      Old St. James Road.  Between Eighteenth Street and McCutchen Drive, thirty miles per hour; between McCutchen Drive and east city limits, thirty-five miles per hour. 

      Old Wire Outer Road. Between Kingshighway and Sally Road, thirty-five miles per hour; between Sally Road and west city limits, 55 miles per hour.

      Pine Street. Between Sixth Street and Twelfth Street, twenty miles per hour; between Twelfth Street and Bishop Avenue (U.S. 63), twenty-five miles per hour. 

      Pine Tree Road.  Between Soest Road and Richard Drive, thirty miles per hour; between Richard Drive and Highway 72, thirty-five miles per hour.

      Rolla Street.  Between Twelfth Street and Sixth Street, twenty miles per hour.

      Route BB (Tenth Street).  Between Forum Drive and Independence Road, thirty-five miles per hour; between Independence Road and east city limits, forty miles per hour.

      Route E (Nagogami Road/University Drive).  Between Bishop Avenue (U.S. Highway 63) and west city limits, thirty-five miles per hour.

      Route "O" (Lecoma Road).  From the south side of Sycamore Drive, north to the intersection of State Highway 72, thirty-five miles per hour. From the south side of Sycamore Drive, south to city limits, forty-five miles per hour.

      Route V.  Between Interstate 44 and the west city limits, forty miles per hour.

      Salem Avenue.  Between Fifth Street and Highway 72, thirty miles per hour. 

      Sally Road. Between Old Wire Road and the north city limits, thirty-five miles per hour.

      Soest Road.  Between Salem Avenue and east city limits thirty miles per hour. 

      Stoltz Road.  From BB Highway to the city limits line, thirty miles per hour.

      U.S. Highway 63 (Bishop Avenue).  Between north city limits and a point located 0.15 miles north of Interstate 44, forty-five miles per hour; between such point located 0.15 miles north of Interstate 44 to Tucker Lane, thirty five miles per hour; and between Tucker Lane and south city limits, forty-five miles per hour.

      Vichy Road.  Between Bishop Avenue (U.S. 63) and north city limits, thirty miles per hour.

      Westside Drive. In its entirety, thirty-five miles per hour.

      White Columns Drive.  Between Route E and north city limits, thirty miles per hour. 

      Winchester Drive.  From the intersection of Winchester Drive and Rolla Street to the intersection of Chestnut Drive and Winchester Drive to thirty miles per hour.  (Ord. 3903, §2; Ord. 4445, §1)

 
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-67. Maximum limits established on certain streets during school periods.
Tenth Street, from a point 180 feet west of the intersection of Tenth Street and Cedar Street easterly to the intersection of Tenth Street and Iowa Street, twenty miles per hour when signal is flashing.

Eleventh Street, from the intersection of Poole Avenue to the intersection of Spring Avenue, twenty miles per hour 7:30 a.m. – 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. – 3:30 p.m., school days only. (Ord. 4312)

Eighteenth Street, from a point 400 feet west of the intersection of Eighteenth Street and Spencer Street to a point 805 feet east of the intersection of Eighteenth Street and Spencer Street, twenty miles per hour, when signal is flashing.

Forum Drive, from a point 500 feet north of the intersection of Forum Drive and Soest Road south to the intersection of Forum Drive and Soest Road, twenty miles per hour when signal is flashing.

Lanning Lane, from a point 500 feet east of the intersection of US Highway 63 and Lanning Lane to a point 1500 feet east of the intersection of US Highway 63 and Lanning Lane, twenty miles per hour, when signal is flashing.

Pine Tree Road, from a point 990 feet south of the intersection of Pine Tree Road and Soest Road to the intersection of Pine Tree Road and Soest Road, twenty miles per hour when flashing.

Salem Avenue, from a point 400 feet west of Holmes Lane southeasterly to Elliott Drive, twenty miles per hour, when signal is flashing. 

St. Patrick’s Lane, from Vichy Road to Bishop Avenue, during school hours.  (Ord. 3903, §4)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 27-68. Speed in trailer parks.
No vehicle shall be moved or propelled at a speed greater than fifteen miles per hour over or upon any city maintained street situated within the boundaries of any established trailer park within the city. (Ord. 3903, §6)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-69. Speed in Rolla Cemetery.
No vehicle shall be moved or propelled at a speed greater than ten miles per hour along, over or upon any street situated within the boundaries of Rolla Cemetery. (Ord. 3286, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-70. Operation of motor vehicles in The Centre and SplashZone parking lots.
Operators of motor vehicles using the parking lots furnished for The Centre and SpashZone must adhere to the following rules:

(a) No motor vehicle shall be moved or propelled at a speed greater than fifteen miles per hour along, over or upon any access drive to or from the parking lots.

(b) All motor vehicles, and all other vehicles, including bicycles, carts and wagons, driven, operated or propelled on, over and along the access drive to The Centre, shall be driven, operated or propelled in one direction only, counter clockwise beginning at the first "Y" in the drive as approaching east from Holloway Street until the same "Y" as exiting west from the parking lot towards Holloway Street.

(c) It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicles to park or remain standing in the drop off drive directly in front of The Centre longer than is necessary to load or unload passengers or cargo.

(d) The driver of a motor vehicle shall cause his vehicle to come to a full and complete stop before exiting The Centre and SplashZone parking lots on to Holloway Street, and he shall then proceed cautiously, yielding the right of way to any pedestrian within any crosswalk adjacent to the intersection and to any vehicle either in the intersection or approaching so closely thereto, when not required to stop, as to constitute an immediate hazard. (Ord. 3520, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 27-71 to 27-73. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)


Article VI - Stopping, Standing & Parking
Sec. 27-74. Leaving vehicles unattended.
No vehicle shall be left standing in any street with the machinery in motion, unless some person be left in charge of such automobile. (Ord. 862, §8.)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 27-75. Registered owner of a motor vehicle responsible for parking violations in the absence of the driver of the motor vehicle.
(a) The operation or use of a motor vehicle in violation of the provisions of §27?74 through §27?130, except §27?76, 77, 82, 89, 90 and 91, shall be prima facie evidence that said motor vehicle was at the time of such violation controlled, operated and used by the owner thereof.

(b) If any vehicle is found upon a street in violation of the sections to which this section applies, the owner or person in whose name such vehicle is registered in the records of any city, county or state shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation, if the driver thereof is not present. (Ord. 3388, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-76. Restriction on stopping of school bus to take on or discharge passengers.
No driver of a school bus shall take on or discharge passengers while the vehicle is upon the public streets or thoroughfares of the city, unless the vehicle so stopped is plainly visible for at least two hundred feet in each direction to drivers of other vehicles upon the public streets and thoroughfares of the city and then only for such time as is actually necessary to take on and discharge passengers. (Ord. 1206, §4.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-77. Vehicles to stop upon meeting or overtaking school bus stopped to receive or discharge school children.
The driver of a vehicle upon any public street or thoroughfare of the city, upon meeting or overtaking from either direction any school bus which has stopped on the public streets or thoroughfares for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school children and whose driver has in the manner prescribed by law given the signal to stop, shall stop the vehicle before reaching such school bus and shall not proceed until such school bus resumes motion, or until signaled by its driver to proceed. (Ord. 1206, §3.)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 27-78. Vehicles to be parked on right side of street; exception.
All vehicles, not in motion, shall be parked with their right sides parallel to the curb and as near the right-hand side of the street as practicable, except on streets where vehicles are obliged to move in one direction only and on streets where angle parking is permitted; provided, that this Section shall not apply to motor vehicles designed for and being used for the loading or unloading of goods and merchandise during the periods from 9:00 A.M. to 11:00 A.M. and from 2:00 P.M. to 4:00 P.M. on Pine Street between Sixth Street and Twelfth Street. (Ord. 862, §2; Ord. 1426, §1; Ord. 1453, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-79. Overtime parking - Summons to show date and time issued.
Any police officer of the city, issuing a summons for the offense of overtime parking of motor vehicles in the city, shall write upon the summons the date and time when such summons is issued. (Ord. 1157, §1.)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 27-80. Penalty for parking ordinance violation.
A violation of any ordinance of the city which regulates or prohibits parking, other than an ordinance which contains a specific penalty provision, shall be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars and not more than fifty dollars. As part of its general authority to establish a traffic violations bureau, the court shall have authority to establish specific fine amounts for frequent parking violations. No court costs shall be assessed if the full amount of the fine pursuant to such schedule is paid within thirty days of the violation. If the full fine is not paid within such period, then court costs shall be assessed as in other ordinance violation cases. (Ord. 1157, §2; Ord. 2560, §1; Ord. 2894, §2; Ord. 3163, §1; Ord. 3901, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-81. Parking to obstruct mailboxes.
It shall be unlawful for any owner/operator of a motor vehicle, trailer, or construction equipment, to park on private property or on a public roadway within five (5) feet of, or in such a way as to obstruct any mailbox or delivery device which is serviced by the United States Postal Service. (Ord. 4324, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-82. Stopping at railroad crossings.
The driver or operator of any motor vehicle shall cause his vehicle to come to a full and complete stop when a train is approaching and the signals are active. (Ord. 1129, §1; Ord. 2628, §1; Ord. 3538, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-83. Parking, etc., between property line and curb.
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a motor vehicle on that part of any public street lying between the property lot lines and the curb. (Ord. 900, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-84. Parking trucks, trailers, etc., on streets; removal of vehicles parked in violation of Section; towing or storage fee.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle, to which is attached and upon which there is displayed a dealer's license plate, upon the public streets within the city for a longer period of time than eight hours in any twenty-four hour period; provided, that this subsection shall apply to motor vehicles parked in front of the owner's real property or place of abode or in front of the driver's real property or place of abode, if the driver be regularly employed by the owner of such vehicle. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any motor vehicle registered in his name, and to which is attached a dealer's license plate, to be unlawfully parked as provided in this subsection; provided, that this subsection shall not apply to motor vehicles parked in front of the owner's real property or place of abode or in front of the driver's real property or place of abode, if the driver be regularly employed by the owner of such vehicle.

(b) Police officers are hereby authorized to have removed from any street or highway to a service station, garage or other place of safety any motor vehicle, truck, tractor-driven trailer, trailer not connected with a truck, house trailer, bus, equipment, tools, machinery or vehicles used in excavation or construction of any kind which are parked or left unattended in violation of this Section. A report showing the location of the stored vehicle, trailer or equipment shall be filed by the police officer who authorized its removal with the chief of police, who shall notify the owner of the location of the vehicle, trailer or equipment.

(c) The owner of any vehicle, trailer, or equipment removed from any street or highway under the provision of subsection (b) of this Section, or the holder of a security interest in the vehicle, trailer or equipment, which interest is in default, may reclaim it from the service station or garage upon proof of ownership, or valid security interest which is in default, and full payment of all charges for the towing and storage of the vehicle.

(d) No service station or garage towing and storing a motor vehicle, trailer or equipment under the provision of subsections (b) and (c) of this Section shall charge a fee in excess of ten dollars for towing the vehicle and one dollar per day for each day the vehicle, trailer or equipment shall be stored. (Ord. 850A, §1; Ord. 1492, §1; Ord. 2774, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-85. Parking and/or storage of oversized trucks, trailers, or other vehicles on city streets.
(a) Parking trucks, tractors, commercial trailers, buses, car haulers, box trailers or stock trailers on city streets. Parking of these type trailers, either attached or unattached, is prohibited on any street within the City of Rolla, Missouri, provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply to trailers in the act of loading or unloading from such trailers. No person shall park a truck, tractor, or trailer having a licensed capacity of more than 18,000 pounds or any bus on any street within the City of Rolla, Missouri, except for the purpose of loading and unloading such vehicle; however, that this prohibition shall not apply to those vehicles commonly known as pickup trucks licensed for 18,000 pounds or more which are parked without full cargo or construction vehicles engaged in the current act of construction or motor homes which are able to be parked on private property or church owned buses which are able to be parked on private property.

(b) Obstructing traffic signals and signs. No person shall park a truck, tractor, trailer or other vehicle, including recreational vehicles, on any street (residential or otherwise) within the City of Rolla, Missouri, in such a location and in such a manner as to obstruct the visibility of any traffic control or of any other vehicular traffic.

(c) Repairing or reconditioning. No person shall use any street within the City of Rolla, Missouri, for the purpose of repairing or reconditioning any truck, trailer, or any common carrier or any part thereof, except when such repairs shall be necessary by an emergency.

(d) Parking boats, trailers or recreational vehicles. No unattached boat, trailer or recreational vehicle shall be parked on any street in the City of Rolla, Missouri, however, that this prohibition shall not apply to those vehicles commonly known as recreational vehicles (RV's or motor homes) which are in use by someone other than the owner of the property directly abutting the street where such vehicle is parked. This provision is for visitors using their RV's for lodging while visiting. Although this provision is for no more than 72 consecutive hours except where permitted.

(e) Violations and penalties. Any violation of this Section shall be punished pursuant to the general penalty provisions of Section 1-7 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, and Section 27-80, 27-81 and any other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict therewith are hereby repealed. (Ord. 2251, §§2, 3; Ord. 2263, §§2, 3; Ord. 2294, §1; Ord. 3636, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-86. Parking of vehicles transporting flammable liquids, gases, corrosives or explosives; loading or unloading; penalties.
(a) Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to the sections of this Ordinance:

Combustible liquid - A liquid having a flash point at or above 100o F (37.8o C).

Corrosive material and substance - Slow oxidation by chemical reaction of a corrosive material.

Flammable gas - Any ignitable gas or vapor.

Flammable liquid - A liquid having a flash point below 100o F (37.8o C) and having a vapor pressure not exceeding 50 pounds per square inch (absolute) at 100o F (37.8o C) and shall be known as Class I liquid.

(b) Parking prohibited: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle, truck, railroad car, or other conveyance placarded or signed as transporting combustible or flammable liquid, flammable gas, corrosive materials or substances, or explosives for any purpose other than loading or unloading such conveyance except in areas of the City of Rolla which are zoned M-2, Heavy Manufacturing District.

(c) Loading or unloading: The loading or unloading of combustible or flammable liquids, flammable gases, corrosive materials and substances, or explosives shall be supervised and witnessed by a person of lawful age.

(d) Spillage: Persons parking any vehicle or conveyance on any public right-of-way for the purpose of loading or unloading shall take care to prevent spillage or loss of materials being loaded or unloaded. In the event that spillage occurs, person or persons responsible for such loading and unloading shall remove all such material or goods spilled and be liable for the cost to restore the public right-of-way to its original condition. Failure to comply with this Section shall be an offense punishable under this Ordinance and each day that said failure continues shall be deemed a separate offense.

(e) Clean-up costs: Persons spilling any combustible or flammable liquid, flammable gas, corrosive material or substance, or explosive shall be responsible to reimburse the City of Rolla for reasonable clean-up costs and environmental damage. Such payment shall be made within thirty (30) days of receipt of statement of charges. Unless any extension of time is granted by the city in writing, each day in excess of 30 days following receipt of statement of charges wherein payment to the City of Rolla is not rendered shall constitute a separate offense punishable under this Ordinance.

(f) Penalties: A violation of any section of this Ordinance shall be a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with Section 1-7, Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 2206, §§1 to 6.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-87. Permit for parking construction equipment, tools, etc., on streets.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to park and leave unattended upon the public streets, alleys or thoroughfares of the city, any equipment, tools, machinery or vehicles used in excavation or construction of any kind, without first having obtained a permit from the chief of police of the city, for the parking of such equipment, tools, machinery or vehicles.

(b) Permits authorized by subsection (a) hereof shall state the exact location of such equipment, tools, machinery or vehicles, and shall be issued for a period of not more than thirty days.

(c) No permit shall be issued by the chief of police until he has ascertained that such parked and unattended equipment, tools, machinery or vehicles will be properly lighted during the hours of darkness. (Ord. 1334, §§1 to 3)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-88. No Turns – Enumerated generally.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any sign.

Salem Avenue, no left turn from eastbound Salem Avenue to Holmes Lane, between the hours of 7:45 a.m. to 8:15 a.m. and 2:45 p.m. to 3:45 p.m.

Holmes Lane, no left turn from southbound Holmes Lane to Salem Avenue, between the hours of 7:45 a.m. to 8:15 a.m. and 2:45 p.m. to 3:45 p.m. (Ord. 4446, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-89. Stop intersections - Enumerated generally.
The driver of a vehicle shall cause his vehicle to come to a full and complete stop before entering the intersections named below, and he shall then proceed cautiously, yielding the right of way to any pedestrian within any crosswalk adjacent to the intersection and to any vehicle either in the intersection or approaching so closely thereto, when not required to stop, as to constitute an immediate hazard.  At those intersections labeled "Yield," the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way to any vehicle in either the intersection or approaching so closely thereto, when not required to stop, as to constitute an immediate hazard. (Ord. 4197, §1)

First Street, at Rolla Street, at Elm Street, at Oak Street, at Olive Street, at Walnut Street.

Second Street, at Bishop Avenue (Highway 63), at Rolla Street, at Elm Street, at Oak Street, at Olive Street, at Walnut Street.

Fourth Street, at Main Street, at Elm Street, at Oak Street, at Olive Street, at Walnut Street, at Holloway Street.

Fifth Street, at Kingshighway, at Main Street, at Rolla Street, at Elm Street, at Oak Street, at Olive Street, at Walnut Street, at Maple Street (east side), at Maple Street (west side) (Yield), at Holloway Street, at Woodland Drive.

Sixth Street, at Bishop Avenue (Highway 63), at Kingshighway (west side), at Main Street, at Rolla Street, at Olive Street, at Walnut Street (east side), at Walnut street (west side) (Yield), at Salem Avenue, at Iowa Street (Yield), at Holloway Street.

Seventh Street, at Bishop Avenue (Highway 63), at State Street, at Park Street, at Main Street, at Rolla Street, at Olive Street, at Maple Street, at Iowa Street, at Holloway Street, at Murry Lane, at Bulldog Way.

Eighth Street, at Fairgrounds Road, at Bishop Avenue (Highway 63), at Park Street, at Main Street, at Rolla Street, at Olive Street, at Cedar Street.

Ninth Street, at Fairgrounds Road, at Bishop Avenue (Highway 63), at State Street, at Main Street, at Rolla Street, at Oak Street, at Holloway Street, at Murry Lane, at Angus Valley Drive.

Tenth Street, at Fairgrounds Road (west side).

Eleventh Street, at Bishop Avenue (Highway 63), at State Street, at Rolla Street, at Elm Street, at Oak Street, at Olive Street, at Iowa Street, at Holloway Street.

Twelfth Street, at Fourteenth Street, at Powell Avenue (Yield), at Poole Avenue, at Spring Avenue, at Bishop Avenue (Highway 63), Bardsley Road, at Holloway Street.

Thirteenth Street, at Powell Avenue (Yield), at Poole Avenue, at Spring Avenue, at Bishop Avenue (Highway 63), at Pine Street, at Elm Street, at Oak Street, at Bardsley Road, at Iowa Street, at Holloway Street.

Fourteenth Street, at Twelfth Street, at Poole Avenue, at Pine Street, at Bardsley Road, at Holloway Street.

Fifteenth Street, at Pine Street, at Elm Street.

Sixteenth Street, at Pine Street, at Elm Street, at Oak Street.

Seventeenth Street, at Pine Street, at Elm Street, at Cedar Street, at Walnut Street (Yield).

Eighteenth Street, at Pine Street, at Cedar Street, at Walnut Street (northeast side), at Forum Drive, eastbound at roundabout (Yield).

Nineteenth Street, at Olive Street, at Cedar Street, at Walnut Street, at Sharp Road (Yield).

Adrian Avenue, at Strobach Street, at Black Street (Yield), at Lynwood Drive (Yield), at Adrian Avenue spur near Black Street and Lynwood Drive (Yield) (southbound traffic on west spur yields to east Spur).

Aintree Road, at Soest Road.

Aldi Drive, at Bishop Avenue (Highway 63).

Allyson Court, at Holt Avenue.

Amber Place, at Dover Lane.

Angus Valley Drive, at Tenth Street, at Highland Drive.

Ann Drive, at Ninth Street (Yield), at Tenth Street.

Ann Lee Drive, at Bishop Avenue.

Arkansas Avenue, at Bardsley Road, at Holloway Street, at Spencer Street, at Farrar Drive.

Asher Street, at Tenth Street, at Eleventh Street.

Ashley Drive, at Scottsvale Drive.

Ashwood Drive, at Bittersweet Lane, at Lovers Lane.

Autumn Place, at Dover Lane.

Avon Court, at Winchester Drive.

Bardsley Road, at Twelfth Street, at Eighteenth Street, at Bardsley Street spur near Eighteenth Street (Yield) (southbound traffic on east spur yields to traffic on west spur).

Barnitz Avenue, at Line Avenue (Yield).

Basswood Drive, at Basswood Drive (northeast of the intersection of Basswood Drive and Cottonwood Drive), at Bishop Avenue (Highway 63).

Becca Drive, at Rolla Street.

Beech Street, at Fourth Street, at Fifth Street (south side).

Belmont Court, at Brookridge Drive (Yield).

Belmont Drive, at Brookridge Drive (Yield), at Coventry Lane (Yield).

Belotta Court, at Belotta Drive (Yield)
 
Belotta Drive, at Rolla Street, at Lions Club Drive.
Bill Street, at Hutchinson Drive (Yield), at Summit Avenue (Yield).

Bittersweet Lane, at Soest Road, at Dover Lane (east side of Dover Lane) (Yield).

Black Street, at Bishop Avenue (Highway 63), at Rucker Avenue.

Bluebird Lane, at Vista Drive (Yield).

Blue’s Lake Parkway, at Martin Springs Drive, at Bridge School Road.

Boxelder Drive, at Redwood Drive, at Maplewood Drive.

Brady Drive, at Rolla Street.

Bray Avenue, at Eighth Street, at Ninth Street.

Briarwood Drive, at Brookridge Drive (Yield).

Bridge School Road, at Kingshighway.

Brighton Court, at Winchester Drive.

Bristol Drive, at Palmer Court, at Country Ridge Road.

Britt Lane, at Casey Lane (west of Ella Court), at Casey Lane (east of Kadison Court).

Broadway Street, at Forum Drive, at Woodlawn Drive, at Eastwood Drive.

Brook Drive, at Camelot Court.

Brookridge Drive, at Soest Road, at Coventry Lane (Yield).

Brookside Lane, at Sycamore Drive.

Bulldog Way, at Seventh Street.

Burgher Drive, at Whitney Lane, at South Murry Lane (Yield).

California Drive, at Forum Drive, at McCutchen Drive.

Cambridge Drive, at Southview Drive, at Winchester Drive.

Canterbury Court, at Pine Tree Road.

Carmel Court, at California Drive (Yield).

Carol Street, at Tory Avenue.

Casey Lane, at Highway O.

Cedar Hill Court, at Sycamore Drive (Yield).

Cedar Grove Road, at Parkwood Drive.

Cedar Street, at Highway 72, at Phelps Avenue (Yield), at Rhodes Avenue (Yield), at First Street, at Second Street, at Third Street, at Fourth Street (south side), at Fifth Street (north side), at Sixth Street, at Seventh Street, at Eighth Street, at Tenth Street, at Eleventh Street (Yield), at Sixteenth Street, at Eighteenth Street, at Bishop Avenue (Highway 63).

Center Drive, at Hy Point Boulevard, at North Outer Road, a.k.a. Old Route 66 (east of Highway V).

Chapman Drive, at White Columns Drive.

Chelsea Lane, at Dana Renee Drive.

Chestnut Drive, at Sycamore Drive (Yield).

Cheswick Court, at Sherwood Drive.

Chris Court, at Forum Drive.

Christy Drive, at Rolla Street.

Clemens Avenue, at Edith Street (Yield), at Adrian Avenue (Yield).

Cobblestone Drive, at Ironhorse Road.

Collegiate Boulevard, at White Columns Drive.

Columbia Avenue, at Sally Road.

Commerce Drive, at Hy Point Boulevard (Yield).

Commercial Drive, at Highway O, at Highway 72.

Condo Drive, at Timber Creek Road, at Tenth Street.

Cooper Street, at Eagleson Drive.

Coplin Court, at Roseglade Road.

Cottage Court, at Brookside Lane.

Cottonwood Drive, at Basswood Drive, at Bishop Avenue (Highway 63).

Country Hills Court, at Old St. James Road.

Country Lane, at Oak Knoll Road.

Country Ridge Road, at Osage Drive.

Countryside Drive, at Carriage Lane.

County Road 2076, at Highway V.

Coventry Lane, at Aintree Road (Yield).

Cresent Ridge, at Countryside Drive.

Crestview Drive, at Fort Wyman Road.

Crinoidal Court, at White Columns Drive.

Curtis Drive, at Scottsvale Drive, at Richard Drive.

Cypress Drive, at Sycamore Drive (near Eagle Wing Drive), at Sycamore Drive (Yield) (near Mimosa Drive).

Dana Renee Drive, at Rolla Street, at Thomas Drive.

Danata Street, at Nagogami Road (Highway E).

Del Mar Court, at Forum Drive.

Devonshire Lane, at Winchester Drive (west of Stratford Lane), at Winchester Drive (east of Stratford Lane).

Dogwood Lane, at Pine Tree Road, at Redbud Lane.

Donald Drive, at Commercial Drive (Yield).

Dover Lane, at Whitney Lane (Yield).

Duane Avenue, at Twelfth Street (Yield).

Durwood Boulevard, at Highway V.

Eagleson Drive, at Vichy Road, at Cooper Street

Eagle Wing Drive, at Cypress Drive.

Eastwood Drive, at Forum Drive, at McCutchen Drive, at Eastwood Drive cul-de-sac (Yield)(west of Broadway), at Eastwood Drive cul-de-sac (Yield) (east of Broadway).

Ella Court, at Britt Lane, at Casey Lane.

Elliot Drive, at Salem Avenue.

Elm Street, at Highway 72, at Third Street, at Sixth Street, at Seventh Street, at Eighth Street, at Ninth Street, (north side), at Tenth Street (north side), at Eleventh Street, at Twelfth Street (north side has two per one way street

), at Fourteenth Street, at Eighteenth Street, (north side) at Bishop Avenue (Highway 63).

Elmwood Drive, at Highway 72.

Emily Drive, at Nagogami Road(Highway E).

Enterprise Drive, at Highway V.

Fairburn Drive, at Vienna Road (north side), at Vienna Road (south side).

Fairgrounds Road, at Bryant Road, at Kingshighway.

Farrar Drive, at Eighteenth Street, at Old St. James Road.

Faulkner Avenue, at Williams Road, at Highway 72, at Black Street, at Second Street.

Forest Drive, at Woodland Drive (south side) (Yield), at Woodland Drive south spur (Yield), at Woodland Drive north spur (Yield).

Forest Place, at Osage Drive.

Fort Wyman Road, at Rolla Street.

Forum Drive, at Old St. James Road, at Eighteenth Street, northbound at roundabout (Yield), at Eighteenth Street, southbound at roundabout (Yield).

Fox Creek Road, at Soest Road (north side), at Whitney Lane.

Frost Drive, at Highway 72.

Gale Drive, at Fairgrounds Road.

Gano Drive, at Highway 72.

Gene Drive, at Salem Avenue.

Germann Court, at Oak Knoll Road (Yield).

Grandsir Avenue, at Highland Drive, at Murry Lane.

Granite Drive, at Sandstone Street (Yield), at Coventry Lane (Yield).

Grant Circle, at Independence Road (Yield).

Great Oaks Drive, at Woodland Drive, (Yield).

Green Acres Drive, at Highway 72 (east and west side), at Green Acres Drive (west side) 300 feet south of Highway 72.

Greenbriar Drive, at Tenth Street.

Greentree Road, at Soest Road, at Whitney Lane, at Tenth Street (south side).

Gulf Avenue, at Iowa Street, at Holloway Street, at Farrar Drive.

Halifax Drive, at Newcastle Drive (near Newcastle Court), at Newcastle Drive (southeast of Hampton (Court).

Hampton Court, at Halifax Drive (Yield).

Hartville Road, at Bishop Avenue (Highway 63).

Harvard Avenue, at Columbia Avenue.

Harvey Court, at Harvey Lane (Yield).

Harvey Lane, at McCutchen Drive, at Old St. James Road.

Hauck Drive, at Forum Drive, at Tenth Street.

Hawthorne Drive, at Woodland Drive (Yield).

Heller Street, at Fourteenth Street, at Gulf Avenue, at Arkansas Avenue, at Missouri Avenue.

Hess Avenue, at Adrian Avenue (Yield).

High Street, at Tenth Street, at Eleventh Street (Yield), at Twelfth Street, at Thirteenth Street, at Fourteenth Street (Yield).

Highland Drive, at Grandsir Avenue (west side), at Angus Valley Drive, at Forum Drive, at Greentree Road.

Hillview Drive, at Broadway (Yield), at McCutchen Drive.

H-J Drive, at Kingshighway.

Holloway Street, at Salem Avenue, at Eighteenth Street.

Holmes Road, at Salem Avenue, at Soest Road.

Holt Avenue, at Tory Avenue.

Homelife Plaza, at Forum Drive.

Honeysuckle Lane, at Soest Road.

Houston Road, at Bishop Avenue (Highway 63), at Rolla Street.

Huntleigh Drive, at Highway O, at Inverness Lane.

Hutchinson Drive, at Pete Avenue.

Hyer Court, at Vista Drive (Yield).

Hy Point Boulevard, at Hy Point North (south and west side), at Highway V.

Hy Point North, at Highway V.

Hy Point Terrace, at Hy Point North, at County Road 2076.

Independence Road, at Liberty Drive (Yield), at Tenth Street.

Industrial Park Drive, at Old St. James Road.

Innovation Drive, at Tenth Street

Innsbrook Drive, at Wakefield Drive (Yield).

International Village Drive, at White Columns Drive.

Iowa Street, at Fifth Street (Yield), at Seventh Street, at Tenth Street, Twelfth Street, at Fourteenth Street, at Arkansas Avenue, at Missouri Avenue.

Irene Lane, at Seventh Street (Yield).

Iris Court, at Highway 72.

Ironhorse Road, at Carriage Lane, at Countryside Drive.

Jackson Circle, at Independence Road (Yield).

Johnson Street, at Highway 72, at Richard Drive (Yield).

Joyce Avenue, at Eleventh Street (Yield).

Juliene Street, at Kingshighway.

Kadison Court, at Britt Lane, at Casey Lane.

Keeton Road, at Bishop Avenue (Highway 63).

Keeney Court, at Laird Avenue (Yield).

Kensington Parkway, at Lovers Lane.

Kent Lane, at Bishop Avenue (Highway 63), at Parkwood Drive.

King Drive, at Highway 72.

La Chateau Place, at Southview Drive.

La Guille Court, at Mark Twain Drive, at Soest Road.

La Jolla Court, at Tory Avenue.

Laird Avenue, at Johnson Street (Yield).

Lakeview Drive, at Twelfth Street

Lancelot Drive, at Camelot Court.

Lanning Lane, at Rolla Street (west side).

Lariat Lane, at Marti Drive, at Rolla Street.

Laurel Drive, at Chestnut Drive.

Lauren Court, at Holt Avenue.

Lee Circle, at Independence Road (Yield).

Leonard Avenue, at Salem Avenue.

Leroy Street, at Fourteenth Street, at Gulf Avenue, at Arkansas Avenue, at Missouri Avenue.

Lester Drive, at Adrian Avenue (west side) (Yield), at Adrian Avenue (east side).

Liberty Drive, at McCutchen Drive.

Lincoln Lane, at Liberty Drive (Yield), at Washington Avenue (Yield).

Line Avenue, at Osage Drive.

Lions Club Drive, at Bishop Avenue (Highway 63), at Rolla Street, at Highway O, at Highway 72.

Little Oaks Road, at Bishop Avenue (Highway 63), at Rolla Street.

Lizzy Lane, at Danata Street, at Nagogami Road (Highway E).

Long View Lane, at Osage Drive.

Lovers Lane, at Soest Road, at Tenth Street (south side).

Main Street, at First Street, at Second Street, at Fourth Street, (north side) at Sixth Street, at Eighth Street, at Tenth Street, at Eleventh Street.

Malibu Court, at California Drive (Yield).

Mallard Square, at Turkey Run Road (east and west side).

Maple Street, at Fifth Street, at Seventh Street, at Tenth Street, at Eleventh Street, at Twelfth Street, at Thirteenth Street, at Fourteenth Street.

Maplewood Drive, at Cottonwood Drive, at Redwood Drive.

Mark Twain Drive, at Holmes Road.

Marti Drive, at Laurel Drive, at Oak Knoll Road (Yield).

Martin Street, at Fourteenth Street, at Gulf Avenue, at Arkansas Avenue, at Missouri Avenue.

Maxwell Street, at Eighteenth Street, at Old St. James Road.

McCutchen Drive, at Tenth Street, at Old St. James Road, at Rolla Recycling center Parking lot exit (north side of Old St. James Road and approx. 250 feet west of McCutchen Drive).

McFarland Drive, at Highway 72 (east and west side), at Chestnut Drive (Yield) (east and north side).

Meadow Court, at Brookridge Drive (Yield).

Meadowbrook Drive, at Brook Drive, at Vichy Road.

Mercy Parkway, at Bridge School Road, at Martin Springs Drive.

Meriweather Road, at White Columns Road.

Mimosa Drive, at Sycamore Drive (Yield).

Miner Circle, at State Street.

Missouri Avenue, at Bardsley Road, at Holloway Street, at Spencer Street, at Farrar Drive.

Monterey Court, at California Drive (Yield).

Morrell Avenue, at Adrian Avenue (Yield), at Ridgeview Road, at Lynwood Drive.

Mossman Lane, at Olive Street.

Murry Lane, at Angus Valley Drive, at Tenth Street.

Nancy Lane, at Johnson Street (Yield), at Laird Avenue (Yield).

Newcastle Court, at Newcastle Drive.

Newcastle Drive, at Winchester Drive.

Newman Road, at Elm Street, at Olive Street.

Nippert Drive, at Poe Drive (Yield).

Norwich Drive, at Southview Drive, at Winchester Drive.

Oak Knoll Road, at Southview Drive (Yield).

Oak Street, at Highway 72, at Third Street, at Sixth Street, at Twelfth Street, at Fourteenth Street, at Sixteenth Street, at Seventeenth Street, at Eighteenth Street, at Bishop Avenue (Highway 63).

Oaklane Drive, at Bishop Avenue (Highway 63), at Houston Road.

Oaktree Lane, at Ashwood Drive, at Soest Road.

October Place, at Bittersweet Lane.

Old English Road, at Fox Creek Road (Yield), at Whitney Lane.

Old St. James Road, at Eighteenth Street (north side).

Olive Street, at Highway 72, at Third Street, at Sixth Street, at Eighth Street, at Twelfth Street (south side), Sixteenth Street, at Seventeenth, at Eighteenth Street, at Bishop Avenue (Highway 63).

Orchard Drive, at Fifth Street (Yield), at Holloway Street (Yield).

Osage Drive, at Highway 72, at Lions Club Drive.

Overland Drive, at Huntleigh Drive, at Inverness Lane.

Oxford Drive, at Southview Drive, at Winchester Drive.

Ozark Street, at Gulf Avenue, at Arkansas Avenue, at Missouri Avenue.

Palmer Court, at Country Ridge Road.

Park Street, at Second Street, at Fourth Street, at Fifth Street, at Post Office exit, at Eighth Street, (south side has two per one way street), at Ninth Street, (south side has two per one way street).

Parkside Avenue, at Old St. James Road.

Parkwood Drive, at Basswood Drive.

Pauline Lane, at Seventh Street (Yield).

Peach Tree Lane, at Pine Tree Road, at Redbud Lane.

Pebble Stone Lane, at Lions Club Drive, at Rolla Street.

Pecan Grove, at Fort Wyman Road.

Penny Lane, at Lester Drive (Yield).

Perrot Boulevard, at Highway V.

Pershing Drive, at Hillview Drive (Yield), at McCutchen Drive.

Pershing Place, at Independence Road, at McCutchen Drive.

Pete Avenue, at Highway 72, at Southview Drive.

Pheasant Hill, at Cypress Drive (Yield), at Sycamore Drive (Yield).

Phelps Avenue, at Oak Street (Yield), at Olive Street, at Walnut Street.

Pilgrim Place, at Bittersweet Lane.

Pine Street, at First Street (Yield), at Second Street, at Third Street, at Fourth Street.

Poe Drive, at Rolla Gardens Drive.

Poole Avenue, at Tenth Street, at Eleventh Street, at Fourteenth Street.

Powell Avenue, at Eleventh Street, at Fourteenth Street.

Ramsey Place Road, at Lions Club Drive, at Silverleaf Lane.

Redbud Lane, at Richard Drive, at Pine Tree Road.

Redwood Drive, at Lions Club Drive, at Basswood Drive.

Republic Drive, at Commercial Drive (Yield).

Rhodes Avenue, at Oak Street (Yield), at Olive Street, at Walnut Street.

Richard Drive, at Pine Tree Road, at Redbud Lane.

Ridgeview Road, at Morrell Avenue, at Bishop Avenue (Highway 63) (north side) (Yield).

Robyn Leann Drive, at Chelsea Lane.

Rolla Gardens Drive, at Highway 72 (west of Rose Court), at Highway 72 (east of Iris Court).

Rolla Street, at Third Street, at Sixth Street, (north side has two per one-way street), at Eighth Street (north side has two per one-way street), at Sixteenth, (north side).

Rose Court, at Highway 72.

Roseglade Road, at Vichy Road, at Vienna Road.

Rucker Avenue, at Highway 72, at Second Street.

Sally Road, at Old Wire Outer Road.

San Fernando Court, at California Drive (Yield).

Sandstone Street, at Brookridge Drive (Yield), at Coventry Lane (Yield).

Savannah Court, at Vienna Road.

Scenic Drive, at Broadway, at Truman Avenue (Yield).

Scottsvale Drive, at Pine Tree Road.

Shady Acres Court, at Fort Wyman Road.

Shady Lane, at Rolla Street.

Sherman Avenue, at Independence Road.

Sheron Avenue, at Highway 72.

Sherwood Drive, at Scottsvale Drive.

Short Street, at Ann Lee Drive.

Skyline, at Woodcrest Drive.

Soest Road, at Salem Avenue.

Sooter Lane, at Rolla Street.

South Murry Lane, at Soest Road, at Whitney Lane.

Southbrook Drive, at Highway 72 (east and west side).

Southview Drive, at Lions Club Drive, at Oak Knoll Road (just southwest of Country Lane), at Oak Knoll Road, at Lariat Lane, at Winchester Drive, at Highway 72.

Spencer Street, at Fourteenth Street, at Gulf Avenue, at Missouri Avenue, at Eighteenth Street.

Spilman Avenue, at Strobach Street, at Ridgeview Road (south side), at Black Street.

Spring Avenue, at Tenth Street, at Eleventh Street, at Thirteenth Street.

State Street, at Second Street, at Sixth Street (north side has two per one-way street), at Eighth Street (north side has two per one-way street), at Eleventh Street.

Steeplechase Road, at Soest Road (south side), at Coventry Lane (Yield).

Stephendale Court, at Highway 72.

Stoltz Road, at Tenth Street.

Stratford Lane, at Winchester Drive, at Devonshire Lane.

Strobach Street, at Bishop Avenue (U.S.(Highway 63) (west side), at Adrian Avenue.

St. Patrick’s Lane, at Bishop Avenue (Highway 63), at the intersection of St. Patricks Lane and the north entrance to V.H. McNutt Hall parking, at Vichy Road.

Summit Avenue, at Salem Avenue, at Highway 72, at Hutchinson Drive (Yield).

Sunshine, at Vichy Road

Sycamore Drive, at Lions Club Drive, at Highway O.

Sydney Court, at McFarland Drive (Yield).

Timberlane Court, at Silverleaf Lane (south side) (Stop), (north side) (Yield).

Tipton Court, at Sherwood Drive.

Tory Avenue, at Farrar Drive, at Forum Drive.

Traci Dawn Drive, at Chelsea Lane.

Truman Avenue, at Forum Drive, at McCutchen Drive, at Pershing Place (west side) (Yield).

Turkey Run, at Sycamore Drive (west of Cypress Drive) (Yield), at Sycamore Drive (east of Mallard Square), at Cypress Drive.

Valli-Hi Avenue, at Vichy Road, at Valli-Hi turn around.

Viburnum Lane, at Pine Tree Road, at Redbud Lane.

Victoria Lane, at Rolla Street.

Vienna Road, at Vichy Road.

Vista Drive, at Nagogami Road (Highway E).

Wakefield Drive, at Greenbriar Drive (Yield), at Whitney Lane (Yield).

Walker Avenue, at Black Street, at Kingshighway, at Strobach Street, at Highway 72 (northbound), at Highway 72 (southbound).

Walnut Street, at Highway 72, at Fifth Street (north bound south side only), at Sixth Street (north side), at Seventh Street, at Eighteenth Street, at Eighteenth Street (where it meets with Walnut Street again).

Washington Avenue, at Independence Road (Yield).

Waterford Court, at Pine Tree Road.

Wellington Drive, at Tenth Street.

Westside Drive, at Sally Road.

White Columns, at north city limits (street in Woodcrest Trailer Park), at Nagogami Road (Highway E), (at roundabout) (Yield).

Whitecliff Drive, at Belmont Drive (Yield), at Coventry Lane (Yield).

Whitney Lane, at Highland Drive, at Greentree Road, at Greenbriar Drive (Yield).

Williams Road, at Bishop Avenue (Highway 63), at Rolla Street.

Wilson Circle, at Independence Road (Yield).

Winchester Drive, at Highway O, at Chestnut Drive, at Rolla Street (east side).

Woodcrest Drive, at Vichy Road.

Woodland Drive, at Holloway Street, at Salem Avenue.

Woodlawn Court, at Forum Drive (west side).

Woodlawn Drive, at Forum Drive (east side), at McCutchen Drive.

Yale Avenue, at Harvard Avenue.

(Ord. 4197, §1; Ord. 4434, §§1-2, Ord. 4444, §§1-2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-90. Same - Intersection of Bishop Avenue (Highway 63) and Kingshighway.
The highway intersection in the southwest sector of the city, at which Bishop Avenue (Highway 63) and Kingshighway intersect, such intersection, for the purpose of traffic control, is hereby stated to contain the following designated streets, roads and highways:

Bishop Avenue (Highway 63).

Kingshighway.

Lane "A", located in the northeast quadrant of the intersection area and connecting Bishop Avenue (highway 63) and Kingshighway.

Lane "B", located in the southeast quadrant of the intersection area and connecting Bishop Avenue (Highway 63) and Kingshighway.

Lane "C", located in the southwest quadrant of the intersection area and connecting Bishop Avenue (Highway 63) and Kingshighway.

Lane "D", located in the northwest quadrant of the intersection area and connecting Bishop Avenue (Highway 63) and Kingshighway.

The driver or operator of any vehicle approaching the intersection of Bishop Avenue (Highway 63) and Kingshighway from any direction shall observe the electric stop, go and left-turn signals and shall proceed into such intersection only when the green light (go signal) or left-turn light or signal is shown in the direction in which such vehicle is traveling.

The driver or operator of any vehicle, while driving in Lane "A", Lane "B", Lane "C", or Lane "D", and approaching either Bishop Avenue (Highway 63) or Kingshighway, shall yield right of way to all vehicles approaching on either Bishop Avenue (Highway 63) or Kingshighway. (Ord. 1641, §1.)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-91. Same - Intersection of Bishop Avenue (Highway 63), Ridgeview Road and Highway 72.
The highway intersection in the southwest sector of the city, at which intersection Bishop Avenue (Highway 63), Ridgeview Road and Highway 72 intersect, such intersection, for the purpose of traffic control, is hereby stated to contain the following designated streets, roads and highways.

Bishop Avenue (Highway 63).

Ridgeview Road.

Highway 72.

Lane "A", located in the northeast quadrant of the intersection area and connecting Bishop Avenue (Highway 63) and Highway 72.

Lane "B", located in the southeast quadrant of the intersection area and connecting Bishop Avenue (Highway 63) and Highway 72.

The driver or operator of any vehicle approaching the intersection of Bishop Avenue (Highway 63), Ridgeview Road and Highway 72 from any direction shall observe the electric stop, go and left-turn signals and shall proceed into such intersection only when the green light (go signal) or left-turn light or signal is shown in the direction in which such vehicle is traveling.

The driver or operator of any vehicle, while driving in Lane "A", and approaching Bishop Avenue (Highway 63) from Highway 72, shall yield right of way to all vehicles approaching on Bishop Avenue (Highway 63).

The driver or operator of any vehicle, while driving in Lane "B", and approaching Highway 72 from Bishop Avenue (Highway 63), shall yield right of way to all vehicles approaching on Highway 72. (Ord. 1642, § 4.)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-92.  Parking prohibited - On certain streets or parts of streets.

It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any motor vehicle registered in his/her name to be unlawfully parked as set out in this Section: (Ord. 1769, §1)

Second Street, on the north side, from a point two hundred twenty feet east of Park Street to a point two hundred fifty-five feet east of Park Street.

Third Street, on the north side, from a point fifty feet east of the intersection of Third Street and Rolla Street to the intersection of Third Street and Rolla Street.  (Ord. 2266, §1.)

Fifth Street, on the south side, between Salem Avenue and Orchard Drive.  (Ord. 2397, §5.)

Sixth Street, on the north side, between Rolla Street and State Street.

Sixth Street,on the south side, between Park Street and Rolla Street.

Sixth Street, on the south side, from a point sixty-five feet west of the intersection of Sixth Street and Pine Street to the intersection of Sixth Street and Pine Street.  (Ord. 1279, §1; Ord. 1769, §1.)  

Sixth Street, on either side, between Pine Street and the center of the Railroad tracks.

Sixth Street, on the south side, between Olive Street and Oak Street.  (Ord. 1657, §1; Ord. 1769, §1.) 

Sixth Street, on the north side, from a point forty-five feet east of the intersection of Sixth Street and Olive Street to the intersection of Sixth Street and Olive Street.  (Ord. 1650, §1; Ord. 1769, §1.)

Sixth Street, on the north side, between Olive Street and Cedar Street.

Sixth Street, on the north side, from a point thirty feet east of the intersection of Sixth Street and Holloway Street to the intersection of Sixth Street and Holloway Street.

Seventh Street, on the north side, from a point fifty feet east of the intersection of Seventh Street and State Street to the intersection of Seventh Street and State Street.  (Ord. 2156, §1.) 

Seventh Street, on the south side, between State Street and Park Street.  (Ord. 2156, §1.) 

Seventh Street, on the north side, from a point thirty-five feet west of the intersection of Seventh Street and Main Street to the intersection of Seventh Street and Main Street.  (Ord. 2156, §1.) 

Seventh Street, on the south side, from a point fifty feet west of the intersection of Seventh Street and Main Street to the intersection of Seventh Street and Main Street.  (Ord. 2156, §1.) 

Seventh Street, on the north side, from a point seventy feet west of the intersection of Seventh Street and Oak Street to a point ninety feet west of the intersection of Seventh Street and Oak Street.  (Ord. 2156, §1.) 

Seventh Street, on the north side, from a point fifty feet east of the center of the Railroad tracks to a point ninety-five feet east of the center of the Railroad tracks.  (Ord. 2156, §1.) 

Seventh Street, on the north side, from a point two hundred thirty-five feet west of the intersection of Seventh Street and Olive Street to the intersection of Seventh Street and Olive Street.  (Ord. 2156, §1.)  

Seventh Street, on the south side, from a point eighty feet east of the intersection of Seventh Street and Elm Street to the intersection of Seventh Street and Elm Street.  (Ord. 2156, §1.) 

Seventh Street, on the north side, between Olive Street and Maple Street.

Seventh Street, on the south side, from a point sixty-five feet west of the intersection of Seventh Street and Cedar Street to the intersection of Seventh Street and Cedar Street.

Seventh Street, on the south side, between Walnut Street and Iowa Street.

Eighth Street, on the north side, from a point one hundred forty-five feet east of the intersection of Eighth Street and Bishop Avenue (U.S. Highway 63) to the intersection of Eighth Street and Bishop Avenue (U.S. Highway 63).  (Ord. 1638, §1; Ord. 1769, §1.)

Eighth Street, on the north side, from a point fifty-five feet west of the intersection of Eighth Street and State Street to the intersection of Eighth Street and State Street.  (Ord. 1930, §1.)

Eighth Street, on the south side, from a point two hundred forty feet east of the intersection of Eighth Street and Bishop Avenue (U.S. Highway 63) to the intersection of Eighth Street and Bishop Avenue (U.S. Highway 63).

Eighth Street, on the north side, from a point fifty feet east of the intersection of Eighth Street and State Street to the intersection of Eighth Street and State Street.  (Ord. 1930, §1.)

Eighth Street, on the south side, from a point fifty feet east of the intersection of Eighth Street and Park Street to the intersection of Eighth Street and Park Street.  (Ord. 1930, §1.)

Eighth Street, on the south side, from a point forty feet west of the intersection of Eighth Street and Main Street to the intersection of Eighth Street and Main Street.  (Ord. 1930, §1.)

Eighth Street, on the north side, from a point seventy feet east of the center of the Railroad   tracks to a point one hundred feet east of the center of the Railroad tracks.  (Ord. 2156, §1.) 

Ninth Street, on the north side, between State Street and Main Street

Ninth Street, on either side, between Elm Street and Oak Street

Tenth Street, on either side, between Bishop Avenue (U.S. Highway 63) to the Eastern border of the Rolla City Limits.

Tenth Street, on the south side, between Fairgrounds Road and Bishop Avenue (U.S. Highway 63).

Tenth Street, on the north side, from the intersection of Fairgrounds Road to a point eighty feet east of the intersection of Asher Street.

Tenth Street, on the north side, between Spring Avenue and Bishop Avenue (U.S. Highway 63).

Tenth Street, on the north side, from a point one hundred seventy-five feet west of the intersection of Tenth Street and Poole Avenue to a point three hundred thirty feet west of the intersection of Tenth Street and Poole Avenue.

Eleventh Street, on the north side, from a point five hundred thirty-five feet west of the intersection of Eleventh Street and Joyce Street to the intersection of Eleventh Street and Joyce Street.

Eleventh Street, on the south side, from a point two hundred seventy feet west of the intersection of Eleventh Street and Asher Street to the intersection of Eleventh Street and Asher Street.

Eleventh Street, on the south side, from a point two-hundred sixty-five feet west of the intersection of Eleventh Street and Bishop Avenue (U.S. Highway 63) to the intersection of Eleventh Street and Bishop Avenue (U.S. Highway 63). (Ord. 4355, §1)

Eleventh Street, on the south side, from a point two hundred eighty-five feet west of the intersection of Eleventh Street and State Street to the intersection of Eleventh Street and State Street.

Eleventh Street, on the north side, from a point one hundred seventy-five feet east of the intersection of Eleventh Street and State Street to the intersection of Eleventh Street and State Street.

Eleventh Street, on the north side, from a point one hundred fifty feet east of the intersection of Eleventh Street and Poole Avenue to a point two hundred feet east of the intersection of Eleventh Street and Poole Avenue.

Eleventh Street, on the south side, between State Street and Rolla Street.

Eleventh Street, on the north side, from a point one hundred twenty-five feet east of the intersection of Eleventh Street and Spring Avenue to a point two hundred sixty feet east of the intersection of Eleventh Street and Spring Avenue. (Ord. 4355, §3)

Eleventh Street, on the south side, from a point sixty feet east of the intersection of Eleventh Street and Spring Avenue to the intersection of Eleventh Street and Spring Avenue. (Ord. 4355, §3)

Twelfth Street, on the north side, and on the south side, from a point eighty feet west of the intersection of Twelfth Street and Bishop Avenue (U.S. Highway 63) to the intersection of Twelfth Street and Bishop Avenue (U.S. Highway 63).

Twelfth Street, on the south side, from a point eighty-five feet east of the intersection of Twelfth Street and Oak Street to the intersection of Twelfth Street and Oak Street.

Twelfth Street, on the north side, from a point one hundred ninety-five feet east of the center of the Railroad tracks to the center of the Railroad tracks.

Thirteenth Street, on the north side, from the intersection of Bishop Avenue (U.S. Highway 63) to a point one hundred forty feet west of the intersection of Fourteenth Street and Bishop Avenue (U.S. Highway 63).

Thirteenth Street, on the north side, from a point fifty feet west the intersection of Thirteenth Street and Oak Street to west of the intersection of Thirteenth Street and Oak Street.

Thirteenth Street, on the north side, from a point eighty-five feet west of the intersection of Thirteenth Street and Oak Street to a point one hundred ten feet west of the intersection of Thirteenth Street and Oak Street.

Fourteenth Street, on the north side, between Poole Street and Twelfth Street.

Fourteenth Street, on the south side, from a point ninety-five feet west of the intersection of Fourteenth Street and Poole Street to the intersection of Fourteenth Street and Poole Street.

Fourteenth Street, on the north side, from the intersection of the Pine Street spur to the intersection of Fourteenth Street and Pine Street.

Fourteenth Street, on the south side, between Oak Street and the Schuman Park parking lot.

Fourteenth Street, on either side, between Holloway Street and Farrar Street.

Sixteenth Street, on the north side, between Rolla Street and Pine Street.  (Ord. 3635, §1)

Sixteenth Street, on the south side, from a point fifty feet east of the intersection of Sixteenth Street and Oak Street to the intersection of Sixteenth Street and Oak Street.

Eighteenth Street, on either side, between Vichy Road and Tower Road.  (Ord. 2397, §5.)

Eighteenth Street, on the south side, between Pine Street and Elm Street.

Eighteenth Street, on the north side, from a point forty feet east of the intersection of Eighteenth Street and Elm Street to the intersection of Eighteenth Street and Elm Street.

Eighteenth Street, on the north and southeast confluence of the intersection of Eighteenth Street and Walnut Street.

Eighteenth Street, on either side, between Walnut Street and the Forum Drive round-a-bout.

Eighteenth Street, on the north side, from a point ninety-five feet east of the intersection of Eighteenth Street and Oak Street to a point one hundred and thirty-five feet east of the intersection of Eighth Street and Oak Street.

Asher, on the west side, between Tenth Street and Eleventh Street.

Bardsley Road, on either side, from Twelfth Street to Eighteenth Street.

Becca Drive, on the cul-de-sac.  (Ord. 3206, §1)

Bishop Avenue (U.S. Highway 63), on either side, within the city limits.

Black Street, on the south side, between Bishop Avenue (U.S. Highway 63) and Faulkner Avenue.

Brady Drive, on the cul-de-sac.  (Ord. 3206, §1)

Cedar Street, on the east side, from a point forty feet north of the intersection of Cedar Street and Fifth Street to the intersection of Cedar Street and Fifth Street.

Cedar Street, on either side, from a point forty feet south of the intersection of Cedar Street and Sixth Street to the intersection of Cedar Street and Sixth Street.

Cedar Street, on the west side, from a point forty feet south the intersection of Cedar Street and Seventh Street to the intersection of Cedar Street and Seventh Street.

Cedar Street, on the west side, from a point sixty-five feet north of the intersection of Cedar Street and Seventh Street to the intersection of Cedar Street and Seventh Street.

Cedar Street, on the west side, from a point eighty feet south of the intersection of Cedar Street and Eighth Street to the intersection of Cedar Street and Eighth Street.

Cedar Street, on the east side, from  a point eighty feet south of the intersection of Cedar Street and Bulldog Run to the intersection of Cedar Street and Bulldog Run.

Cedar Street, on either side, from a point one hundred ten feet south of the intersection of Cedar Street and Tenth Street to the intersection of Cedar Street and Tenth Street.

Collegiate Boulevard, on either side.

Condo Drive, on either side, between Tenth Street and Timber Creek Road.

Edith Street, on the west side, between Strobach Street and Hess Avenue.  (Ord. 3722, §1.)

Elm Street, on the west side, between Highway 72 and First Street.  (Ord. 1182, §5; Ord. 1258, §1; Ord. 1769, §1.)

Elm Street, on the east side, from a point fifty feet south of the intersection of Elm Street and Seventh Street to the intersection of Elm Street and Seventh Street.

Elm Street, on the west side, between Ninth Street and Tenth Street.

Elm Street, on the east side, from a point fifty feet south of the intersection of Elm Street and Tenth Street to the intersection of Elm Street and Ninth Street.

Elm Street, on the west side, from a point eighty feet south of the intersection of Sixteenth Street to the intersection of Elm Street and Sixteenth Street.

Elm Street, on the east side, from a point fifty feet south of the intersection of Elm Street and Eighteenth Street to the intersection of Elm Street and Eighteenth Street.

Elm Street, on the west side, north of Bishop Avenue (U.S. Highway 63). 

Elm Street, on the east side, north of Bishop Avenue (U.S. Highway 63). (Ord. 4349, §1) 

Fairgrounds Road, on the east side, from a point one hundred twenty feet south of the intersection of Fairgrounds Road and Tenth Street to the intersection of Fairgrounds Road and Tenth Street.

Fairgrounds Road, on the east side, from a point seventy feet north of the intersection of Fairgrounds Road and Kingshighway to the intersection of Fairgrounds Road and Kingshighway.  (Ord. 2152, §1.)

Fairgrounds Road, on west side, from Ninth Street to Tenth Street.  (Ord. 3554, §1)

Fairgrounds Road, on the west side, from a point two hundred and fifty feet north of the intersection of Fairgrounds Road  and Kingshighway to the intersection of Fairgrounds Road and Kingshighway.

Farrar Drive, on the east side, between Fourteenth Street and Eighteenth Street.  (Ord. 2152, §1.)

Faulkner Avenue,on the east side, from a point one hundred feet north of the intersection of Faulkner Avenue and Route 72 to a point one hundred thirty feet north of the intersection of Faulkner Avenue and Route 72.

Forum Drive, on the east side, from a point one hundred forty-five feet north of the intersection of Forum Drive and California Drive to the intersection of Forum Drive and California Drive.  (Ord. 2491, §2.)

Forum Drive, on either side, between Soest Road and Tenth Street.

Forum Drive, on the west side, between Tenth Street and Homelife Plaza.

Forum Drive, on the east side, between Tenth Street and Truman Avenue.

Forum Drive, on the east side, from a point one hundred fifty feet south of the Eighteenth Street round-a-bout to the intersection of the Eighteenth Street Round-a-bout.

Forum Drive, on the west side, from a point seventy feet south of the Eighteenth Street round-a-bout to the intersection of the Eighteenth Street round-a-bout.

Gale Drive, on the north side.

Greentree Road, on either side, from a point three hundred feet south of the intersection of Greentree Road and Tenth Street to the intersection of Greentree Road and Tenth Street.

Greentree Road, on the east side, from a point three hundred feet south of Tenth Street to a point four hundred feet south of Tenth Street.  (Ord. 3663, §1)

Gulf Avenue, on the north side, between Ozark Street and Holloway Street.

Highway 72, on either side, from the intersection of Highway 72 and Bishop Avenue (U.S. Highway 63) to the intersection of Highway 72 and the southeast city limits.

Highway E (University Drive and Nagogami Road), on either side, between Bishop Avenue (Highway 63) and west city limits.  (Ord. 1769, §1.)

Holloway Street, on the east side, between the Tenth Street and Eighteenth Street.  (Ord. 2152, 1958, §1.)

Holloway Street, on the west side, from a point one hundred thirty feet north of the intersection of Holloway Street and Tenth Street to the intersection of Holloway Street and Tenth Street.

Holloway Street, on the west side, from Fourteenth Street to Eighteenth Street. (Ord. 4475)

Holloway Street, on both sides, between Ninth Street and Tenth Street. (Ord. 2266, §1)

Holmes Lane, on the east side, from a point one hundred forty feet north of the intersection of Holmes Lane and Salem Avenue to the intersection of Holmes Lane and Salem Avenue.

Hy Point Boulevard, on either side, between Highway V and Hy Point North.

Hy Point North, on the north side, between Hy Point Boulevard and Highway V.

Independence Drive, on the east side, between Independence Drive and Sherman Avenue.

Independence Drive, on the west side, from a point four hundred twenty-five feet north of the intersection of Independence Drive and Pershing Place to the intersection of Independence Drive and Pershing Place.

Johnson Street, on either side, from a point one hundred thirty feet north of the intersection of Johnson Street and Highway 72 to the intersection of Johnson Street and Highway 72.

Johnson Street, on the west side, from a point one hundred thirty feet north of the intersection of Johnson Street and Highway 72 to the intersection of Johnson Street and Highway 72.

Kingshighway, on either side, from the intersection of Kingshighway, Sixth Street, and State Street to the west city limits.  (Ord. 1182, §5; Ord. 1514, §1; Ord. 1584, §1; Ord. 1585, §1; Ord. 1769, §1; Ord. 1953, §1; Ord. 2052, §1.)

Lanning Lane, on the south side, from a point eight hundred eighty-five feet from the intersection of Lanning Lane and Bishop (U.S. Highway 63) to a point nine hundred thirty feet from the intersection of Lanning Lane and Bishop (U.S. Highway 63).

Lions Club Drive (Route CC), on either side, from the west line of the Rolla City Limits to the intersection of Bishop Avenue (U.S. Highway 63).

Lions Club Drive, on either side, from the intersection of Bishop Avenue (U.S. Highway 63) to the intersection of Highway 72, except nineteen hundred and sixty feet on the south side east of the intersection of Bishop Avenue (U.S. Highway 63).

Main Street, on the east side, between Fourth Street and Fifth Street.  (Ord. 1711, §1; Ord. 1769, §1.)

Main Street, on the west side, from a point one hundred fifty feet north of the intersection of Main Street and Fourth Street to the intersection of Main Street and Fourth Street.

Main Street, on the east side, from a point forty feet south of the intersection of Main Street and Seventh Street to the intersection of Main Street and Seventh Street.  (Ord. 1725, §1; Ord. 1853, §1.)

Main Street, on the east side, from a point forty feet north of the intersection of Main Street and Seventh Street to the intersection of Main Street and Seventh Street.  (Ord. 1725, §1; Ord. 1853, §1.)

Main Street, on the east side, from a point sixty feet south of the intersection of Main Street and Eighth Street to the intersection of Main Street and Eighth Street.

Main Street, on the west side, from a point one hundred twenty feet south of the intersection of Main Street and Eighth Street to the intersection of Main Street and Eighth Street.

Main Street, on the east side, from a point sixty feet north of the intersection of Main Street and Eighth Street to the intersection of Main Street and Eighth Street.

Main Street, on the west side, from a point sixty feet north of the intersection of Main Street and Eighth Street to the intersection of Main Street and Eighth Street.

Main Street, on the east side, from a point eighty-five feet north of the intersection of Main Street and Tenth Street to a point one hundred thirty feet north of the intersection of Main Street and Tenth Street.

Main Street, on the west side, from a point sixty feet north of the intersection of Main Street and Tenth Street to the intersection of Main Street and Tenth Street.

Maple Street, on the west side, between Seventh Street and the Rolla High School parking lot.

Maple Street, on the east side, from a point seventy-five feet north of the intersection of Maple Street and Seventh Street to the intersection of Maple Street and Seventh Street.

Martin Springs Drive (south outer road of Interstate Highway 44), on either side, between Kingshighway and the west city limits.  (Ord. 1769, §1.)

McCutchen Drive, on east side, between Tenth Street and Truman Avenue.

Ninth Street, on the north side, from the intersection of Ninth Street and Bishop Avenue (U.S. Highway 63) to the intersection of Ninth Street and State Street. (Ord. 4313)

Oak Street, on the west side, between Eighth Street and Ninth Street.

Oak Street, on the west side, from a point forty feet north of the intersection of Oak Street and Thirteenth Street to the intersection of Oak Street and Thirteenth Street.

Oak Street, on the east side, from a point forty feet north of the Schuman Park parking lot to the intersection of Oak Street and Fourteenth Street.

Old Wire Outer Road, (north outer road of Interstate Highway I-44), on either side, between Kingshighway and the west city limits.

Olive Street, on the west side, between Fifth Street and Sixth Street.

Olive Street, on the west side, from a point one hundred feet south of the intersection of Olive Street and Eighth Street to the intersection of Olive Street and Eighth Street.

Olive Street, on the east side, between Tenth Street and Eleventh Street.

Olive Street, on the east side, from the south intersection of Olive Street and Third Street to a point thirty-five feet south of the intersection of Olive Street and Third Street. (Ord. 4313)

Park Street, on the west side, from a point sixty feet south of the intersection of Park Street and Seventh Street to the intersection of Park Street and Seventh Street.  (Ord. 1930, §1.)

Park Street, on the east side, from a point seventy-five feet south of the intersection of Park Street and Seventh Street to the intersection of Park Street and Seventh Street.

Park Street, on the west side, between Seventh Street and Eighth Street.

Park Street, on the east side, from a point forty feet north of the intersection of Park Street and Seventh Street to the intersection of Park Street and Seventh Street.

Park Street, on the east side, from a point one hundred thirty-five feet south of the intersection of Park Street and Eighth Street to the intersection of Park Street and Eighth Street.

Pine Street, on the east side, from a point seventy feet north of the intersection of Pine Street and Eighth Street to the intersection of Pine Street and Eighth Street.

Pine Street, on either side, from a point thirty-five feet south of the intersection of Pine Street and Twelfth Street to the intersection of Pine Street and Twelfth Street.

Pine Street, on the west side, between Twelfth Street and Bishop Avenue (U.S. Highway 63).  (Ord. 1569, §1; Ord. 1769, §1.)

Pine Street, on the east side, between Twelfth Street and Thirteenth Street.  (Ord. 1266, §1; Ord. 1769, §1.)

Pine Street, on either side, from a point one hundred fifty feet south of the intersection of Pine Street and Fourteenth Street to the intersection of Pine Street and Fourteenth Street.

Pine Street, on the east side, between Fourteenth Street and the north side of the Pine Street spur.

Pine Street (spur), on the west side, from the intersection of the Pine Street spur and Fourteenth Street to the intersection of the Pine Street spur and Pine Street.

Pine Street (spur), on the east side, from a point thirty feet south of the intersection of the Pine Street spur and Pine Street to the intersection of the Pine Street spur and Pine Street.

Pine Street, on the east side, from a point sixty feet south of the intersection of Pine Street and Fifteenth Street to the intersection of Pine Street and Sixteenth Street.

Pine Street, on the east side, from a point forty feet south of the intersection of Pine Street and Seventeenth Street to the intersection of Pine Street and Seventeenth Street.

Pine Street, on the east side, from a point forty feet north of the intersection of Pine
Street and Seventeenth Street to the intersection of Pine Street and Seventeenth Street.

Pine Street, on the east side, from a point one hundred eighty-five feet south of the intersection of Pine Street and Eighteenth Street to the intersection of Pine Street and Bishop Avenue (Highway 63).

Pine Street, on the east side, from a point one hundred eighty-five feet south of the intersection of Pine Street and Eighteenth Street to a point eighty-feet south of the intersection of Pine Street and Eighteenth Street. (Ord. 4313)

Pine Tree Road, on either side, between Soest Road and Highway 72.  (Ord. 3295, §1)

Poole Avenue, on the west side, from a point eighty feet from the intersection of Poole Avenue and Fourteenth Street to the intersection of Poole Avenue and Fourteenth Street.

Poole Avenue, on the west side, from a point one hundred fifty feet north of the intersection of Poole Avenue and Thirteenth Street to the intersection of Poole Avenue and Thirteenth Street.

Poole Avenue, on the east side, from a point one hundred twenty feet south of the intersection of Poole Avenue and University Drive to the intersection of Poole Avenue and University Drive.

Poole Avenue, on the east side, from the intersection of Poole Avenue and Tenth Street to the intersection of Poole Avenue and University Drive. (Ord. 4313)

Ridgeview Road, on either side, between Bishop Avenue (Highway 63) and Walker Avenue.

Rolla Street, on the west side, from a point fifty-five feet south of the intersection of Rolla Street and Twelfth Street to the intersection of Rolla Street and Twelfth Street.

Rolla Street, on the east side, from a point fifty feet north of the intersection of Rolla Street and Eleventh Street to the intersection of Rolla Street and Eleventh Street.

Rolla Street, on the west side, between Eleventh Street and Twelfth Street.  (Ord. 1252, §1; Ord. 1769, §1.)

Rolla Street, on east side, from a point one hundred-five feet south of the intersection of Rolla Street and Eleventh Street to a point one hundred thirty feet south of the  intersection of Rolla Street and Eleventh Street.

Rolla Street, on west side, from a point one hundred sixty feet south of the center of the Railroad tracks to the center of the Railroad tracks.  (Ord. 3562, §1)

Rolla Street, on the east side, between Victoria Lane and Highway 72.

Rolla Street, on the west side, between Lanning Lane and Houston Road.

Rolla Street, on either side, between Lariat Lane and Lanning Lane.

Rolla Street, on the east side, between Highway 72 and Houston Road.  (Ord. 1591, §1; Ord. 1769, §1.)

Rucker Avenue, on either side, between Black Street and Second Street.  (Ord. 2507, §2.)

Salem Avenue, on the southwest side, from a point seventy feet southeast of the intersection of Salem Avenue and Fifth Street to the intersection of Salem Avenue and Fifth Street.

Salem Avenue, on the north side, from a point one hundred fifteen feet north of the intersection of Salem Avenue and Leonard Drive to the intersection of Salem Avenue and Leonard Drive.  (Ord. 3095, §1)

Salem Avenue, on the north side, from a point one hundred seventy feet southeast of the intersection of Salem Avenue and Holmes Lane to the intersection of Salem Avenue and Holmes Lane.

Salem Avenue, on the north side, from a point forty feet northwest of the intersection of Salem Avenue and Holmes Lane to the intersection of Salem Avenue and Holmes Lane.

Soest Road, on either side, from a point seven hundred thirty feet east of the intersection of Soest Road and Salem Avenue to the intersection of Soest Road and Pine Tree Road

Soest Road, on either side, from a point one hundred fifty feet west of the intersection of Soest Road and Aintree Road to the intersection of Soest Road and Pine Tree Road/Forum Drive.  (Ord. 2437, §5.)

Spilman Avenue, on the east side, between Strobach Street and Ridgeview Road.

Spring Avenue, on the west side, from a point sixty feet north of the intersection of Spring Avenue and Thirteenth Street to a point one hundred thirty-five feet north of Spring Avenue and Thirteenth Street.

Spring Avenue, on the east side, from a point forty feet south of the intersection of Spring Avenue and Eleventh Street to the intersection of Spring Avenue and Eleventh Street.

State Street, on the east side, from a point ninety feet north of the intersection of State Street and Seventh Street to the intersection of State Street and Seventh Street.

State Street, on the east side, between Ninth Street and Eleventh Street.

State Street, on the west side, from a point seventy feet south of the intersection of State Street and Tenth Street to the intersection of State Street and Tenth Street.

State Street, on the west side, from a one hundred twenty feet north of the intersection of State Street and Tenth Street to the intersection of State Street and Tenth Street.

State Street, on the east side, from a point one hundred ninety feet north of the intersection of State Street and Eleventh Street to a point two hundred forty-five feet north of the intersection of State Street and Eleventh Street.

State Street, on the east side, from a point eighty-eight feet north of the intersection of State Street and Sixth Street to the intersection of State Street and Sixth Street.

State Street, on the east side, from a point two hundred and forty-five feet north of the intersection of State Street and Eleventh Street to the intersection of State Street and Eleventh Street.

State Street, on the west side, from the intersection of State Street and Eleventh Street to the intersection of State Street and Miner Circle.

Strobach Avenue, on either side, between Spilman Avenue and Bishop Avenue (U.S. Highway 63).  (Ord. 1966, §1.)

Tower Road, on either side.

University Drive, on either side.

Vichy Road, on the west side, between St. Patrick Lane and the north city limits.

Vichy Road, on either side, between Eighteenth Street and Vienna Road.  (Ord. 1769, §1.)

Vichy Road, on the east side, from a point one hundred fifteen feet south of the intersection of Bishop Avenue (Highway 63)and Vichy Road to a point forty feet north of the intersection of Vichy Road and Vienna Road.

Vichy Road, on the east side, from a point two hundred thirty feet south of the intersection of Vichy Road and Roseglade Road to a point thirty feet north of the intersection of Vichy Road and Roseglade Road.
(Revised 11/16)

Vichy Road, on the east side, from a point two hundred feet south of the intersection of Vichy Road and Meadowbrook Drive to a point thirty feet north of the intersection of Vichy Road and Meadowbrook Drive.

Vichy Road, on the east side, from a point one hundred fifteen feet south of the intersection of Bishop Avenue (Highway 63) and Vichy Road to a point one hundred thirty feet north of the intersection of Vichy Road and Vienna Road. (Ord. 4325, §1)

Vichy Road, on the east side, from a point two hundred nine feet south of the intersection of Vichy Road and Roseglade Road to a point two hundred sixty feet north of the intersection of Vichy Road and Roseglade Road. (Ord. 4325, §1)

Vichy Road, on the east side, from a point two hundred feet south of the intersection of Vichy Road and Meadowbrook Drive to a point one hundred fifty feet north of the intersection of Vichy Road and Meadowbrook Drive. (Ord. 4325, §1)

Victoria Lane, on the cul-de-sac.  (Ord. 3212, §1)      

Vienna Road, on either side, between Vichy Road and Roseglade Road.

Vienna Road, on either side, from the intersection of Vienna Road and Vichy Road to the north city limits. (Ord. 4325, §1)

Walker Street, on either side, between Kingshighway and the center of the Railroad tracks.  (Ord. 2052, §1.)

Walnut Street, on the west side, between Highway 72 and Phelps Avenue.  (Ord. 1769, §1; Ord. 2266, §1.)

Walnut Street, on the east side, between Highway 72 and First Street.

Walnut Street, on the west side, from a point fifty feet south of the intersection of Walnut Street and Seventh Street to the intersection of Walnut Street and Seventh Street.

Walnut Street, on the east side, between Eighteenth Street and Bishop Avenue (Highway 63)   (Ord. 3756, §1)

Walnut Street, on the west side, from a point two hundred eighty-five feet south of the intersection of Walnut and Bishop Avenue (Highway 63) to the intersection of Walnut Street and Bishop Avenue (Highway 63).

Walnut Street, on the west side, between Eighteenth Street and Nineteenth Street.

White Columns Drive, on either side, from Nagogami Road (Highway E) to the north city limits.

Winchester Drive, on either side, between Rolla Street and Chestnut Drive.
(Ord. 4198, §1; Ord. 4289, §1, Ord. 4313, §1; Ord. 4349, §1; Ord. 4355, §§1-3; Ord. 4462, §1; Ord. 4475, §1)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 27-93.  Parking prohibited on certain streets at certain times.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle at or in the following designated areas at the time set forth:

Eleventh Street, on the south side, from a point one hundred six feet east of the intersection of Eleventh Street and Poole Avenue, to a point one hundred sixty-six feet east of said intersection of Eleventh Street and Poole Avenue, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., on school days only.
(Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1; Ord. 4313, §2)

St. Patrick’s Lane, on the north side, from a point twenty-five feet west of the intersection of St. Patrick’s Lane and Vichy Road, to a point seventy-five feet west of the intersection of St. Patrick’s Lane and Vichy Road and between a point one hundred twenty-seven feet west of the intersection of St. Patrick’s Lane and Vichy Road, to a point two hundred feet west of the intersection of St. Patrick’s Lane and Vichy Road, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on school days only; except for the parking of school buses. (Ord. 3942 §1; Ord. 3983 §1; Ord. 4313, §2)

Maple Street, on the east side, from the intersection of Maple Street and Fifth Street to the intersection of Maple Street and Seventh Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., on school days only.  (Ord. 3942 §1; Ord. 3983 §1; Ord. 4313, §2)

Maple Street, on both sides, from the north side of the intersection of Tenth Street and Maple Street, to the south side of the intersection of Eleventh Street and Maple Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday thru Friday. (Ord. 3942 §1; Ord. 3983 §1; Ord. 4313, §2)

Oak Street, on the east side, from the intersection of Oak Street and Fourteenth Street, to the intersection of Oak Street and Sixteenth Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday thru Friday. (Ord. 3942 §1; Ord. 3983 §1; Ord. 4313, §2)

Pine Street, on both sides, south of Sixth Street and north of the Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad right-of-way, no parking between the hours of 8:00 P.M. to 6:00 A.M. (Ord. 3983, §1; Ord. 4313, §2)

Lanning Lane, on the north side, from a point eight hundred eighty-five feet west of the intersection of Lanning Lane and Rolla Street to a point one thousand forty-five feet west of the intersection of Lanning Lane and Rolla Street, no parking between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. (Ord. 4313, §2)

Lanning Lane, on the south side, from the west intersection of Lanning Lane and Jimmy Street, a private drive, to a point three hundred sixty feet west of the intersection of Lanning Lane and Jimmy Street, no parking between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. (Ord. 4313, §2)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 27-94. Parking Prohibited – On certain municipal lots.
Parking lot in Buehler Park, no motor vehicles shall be parked on the west side of the municipal parking lot, situated west of Fairgrounds Road and bounded by Buehler Park in the city.

It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any motor vehicle registered in his/her name to be unlawfully parked as set out in this Section. (Ord. 3942, §1)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 27-95. Parking prohibited at all times within certain distance of street intersections.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on any public street within an area extending twenty-five feet from a street intersection, unless designated by yellow colored paint. (Ord. 3942, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-96. Parking prohibited on private parking lots.
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to park, cause to be parked, or to enter for the purpose of parking any motor vehicle or other wheeled vehicle on any private parking lot in the city as hereinafter defined.

Private parking lot as used in this Section means any real estate within the City of Rolla, Missouri designated as a private parking lot by the owner thereof and marked by signs conspicuously posted at the entrance to the parking lot, said signs to be of at least three (3) square feet in size and to contain the words "Private Parking Lot", or words of similar effect sufficient to give notice to the public of the use of the said real estate as a private parking facility. Unauthorized person as used in the section means any person not authorized by the owner of the lot either by private contract or by appropriate language on the posted sign referred to above such as "Parking limited to the customers of _________________" or words of similar effect.

Upon written complaint to the police department of the City of Rolla by the owner of the parking lot or by his agent or by an individual renting designated space in the private parking lot, the police department of the City of Rolla shall cause the violating vehicle to be ticketed.

Any person convicted of a violation of this Section shall be subject to a fine, as established under Section 27-80, plus any additional court costs that may apply. (Ord. 3942, §1)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-97. Ten-minute parking – From 8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M.
Between the hours of 8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M. except on Sundays, Saturdays, and legal holidays, no motor vehicle shall be parked for a period of time longer than ten minutes on the following streets or parts of streets.

Eighth Street, on the north side, from a point sixty-seven feet west of the intersection of Eight Street and Pine Street, to a point one hundred and twenty-seven feet west of the intersection of Eight Street and Pine Street.

Eighth Street, on the north side, from a point thirty feet west of the intersection of Eight Street and Olive Street, to a point fifty feet west of the intersection of Eight Street and Olive Street.

Eighth Street, on the south side, from a point thirty-eight feet east of the intersection of Eighth Street and Pine Street, to a point one hundred and twenty-seven feet east of the intersection of Eight Street and Pine Street.

Eighth Street, on the south side, from a point thirty-eight feet east of the intersection of Eight Street and State Street, to a point one hundred and thirty-eight feet east of the intersection of Eight Street and State Street.

Eleventh Street, on the south side, from a point one hundred and five feet west of the intersection of Eleventh Street and Pine Street, to a point one hundred and twenty-three feet west of the intersection of Eleventh Street and Pine Street.

Elm Street, on the east side, from a point thirty-nine feet south of the intersection of Elm Street and Eleventh Street, to a point eighty-four feet south of the intersection of Elm Street and Eleventh Street.

Ninth Street, on the north side, from a point sixty-one feet west of the intersection of Ninth Street and Elm Street, to a point one hundred and six feet west of the intersection of Ninth Street and Elm Street.

Ninth Street, on the south side, from a point fifty-seven feet east of the intersection of Ninth Street and Pine Street, to a point ninety-nine feet east of the intersection of Ninth Street and Pine Street.

Ninth Street, on the south side, from a point one hundred seventy-two feet east of the intersection of Ninth Street and Pine Street, to a point one hundred ninety-two feet east of the intersection of Ninth Street and Pine Street.

Pine Street, on the east side, from a point thirty-five feet south of the intersection of Pine Street and Eight Street, to a point seventy-six feet south of the intersection of Pine Street and Eighth Street.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any motor vehicle registered in his/her name to be unlawfully parked as set out in this Section. (Ord. 3942, §1)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 27-98.  Thirty minute parking – From 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., except on Sundays and legal holidays, no motor vehicle shall be parked for a period of time longer than thirty minutes on the following streets or parts of streets:

Eleventh Street, on the north side, from a point fifty-three feet east of the intersection of Eleventh Street and Elm Street, to a point one hundred and sixty-nine feet east of the intersection of Eleventh Street and Elm Street. (Ord. 3942)

Eleventh Street, on the south side, from a point fourteen feet east of the intersection of Eleventh Street and Rolla Street, to a point fifty-three feet east of the intersection of Eleventh Street and Rolla Street. (Ord. 3942)

Elm Street, on the east side, from a point sixty feet north of the intersection of Elm Street and Eleventh Street, to a point two hundred and twenty-two feet north of the intersection of Elm Street and Eleventh Street. (Ord. 3942)

Park Street, on the east side, from a point thirty feet north of the intersection of Park Street and Sixth Street, to a point one hundred fifty feet north of the intersection of Park Street and Sixth Street. (Ord. 3942)

Pine Street, on the west side, from a point thirty-three feet south from the intersection of Pine Street and Eight Street, to a point seventy-four feet south of the intersection of Pine Street and Eighth Street. (Ord. 3942)

Pine Street, on the east side, from a point thirty-six feet south of the intersection of Pine Street and Eleventh Street, to a point fifty-six feet south of the intersection of Pine Street and Eleventh Street. (Ord. 3942)

Rolla Street, on the east side, from a point twenty feet south of the intersection of Rolla Street and Eleventh Street, to a point two hundred and forty-five feet south of the intersection of Rolla Street and Eleventh Street. (Ord. 3942)

State Street, on the east side, from a point thirty feet south of the intersection of State Street and Eight Street, to a point one hundred fifty-two feet south of the intersection of State Street and Eight Street. (Ord. 3942)

Rolla Street, on the west side, from a point eighty-five feet north of the intersection of Rolla Street and Tenth Street, to a point one hundred and thirty feet north of the intersection of Rolla Street and Tenth Street. (Ord. 4289)

Rolla Street, on the east side, from a point fifty feet north of the intersection of Rolla Street and Eleventh Street, to a point one hundred and eighty-five feet north of the intersection of Rolla Street and Eleventh Street. (Ord. 4305)

It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any motor vehicle registered in his/her name to be unlawfully parked as set out in this Section. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 4289, §2, Ord. 4305, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-99. Thirty minute parking from 8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M. Monday through Friday.
Between the hours of 8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M., except on Sundays and legal holidays, no motor vehicle shall be parked for a period of time longer than thirty minutes on the following streets or parts of streets:

Main Street, on the west side, from a point eighty-four feet south of the intersection of Main Street and 11th Street, to a point one hundred and eighty feet south of the intersection of Main Street and 11th Street.

Main Street, on the east side, from a point seventy feet south of the intersection of Main Street and Eighth Street, to a point one hundred and seventy-two feet south of the intersection of Main Street and Eight Street.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any motor vehicle registered in his/her name to be unlawfully parked as set out in this Section. (Ord. 3942, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-100. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-101.  One-hour parking – From 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except on Sundays and legal holidays, no motor vehicle shall be parked for a period of time longer than one hour along the following streets:

Seventh Street, on the south side, from a point one hundred and forty-six feet east of the intersection of Seventh Street and Pine Street to a point one hundred and eighty-six feet east of the intersection of Seventh Street and Pine Street. (Ord. 3983)
Main Street, on the west side, from a point sixty feet south of the intersection of Main Street and Seventh Street to a point two hundred and fifteen feet south of the intersection of Main Street and Seventh Street. (Ord. 3983)
Ninth Street, on the south, from a point eighteen feet west of the intersection of Ninth Street and Rolla Street to a point forty feet west of the intersection of Ninth Street and Rolla Street. (Ord. 3983)
Sixth Street, on the north side, from a point forty-five feet west of the intersection of Olive Street and Sixth Street to a point two hundred and thirty-five feet west of the intersection of Olive Street and 6th Street. (Ord. 3983)
Cedar Street, on the east side, from a point forty feet south of the intersection of Cedar Street and Seventh Street to a point ninety feet south of the intersection of Cedar Street and Seventh Street. (Ord. 4210)

It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any motor vehicle registered in his/her name to be unlawfully parked as set out in this Section. (Ord. 3983, §1; Ord. 4210, §1)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 27-102. One-hour parking – On public parking lot of Rolla Public Library.
No motor vehicle shall be parked for a period of time longer than one hour, in and upon the public parking lot of the Rolla Public Library.

It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any motor vehicle registered in his/her name to be unlawfully parked as set out in this Section. (Ord. 3942, §1)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 27-103. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 27-104. Two-hour parking - From 8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M. on certain municipal parking lots.
Parking lot in Buehler Park, no motor vehicles shall be parked for a period of time longer than 2 hours, on the south side of the municipal parking lot situated west of Fairgrounds Road and bounded by Buehler Park in the city.

Parking lot by Schuman Park, no motor vehicle shall be parked for a period of time longer than 2 hours, on the municipal parking lot situated at the intersection of Fourteenth Street and Oak Street and bounded by Schuman Park in the city.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any motor vehicle registered in his/her name to be unlawfully parked as set out in this Section. (Ord. 3942, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-105.  Two-hour parking – From 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. – On certain streets or parts of streets.
Between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except on Sundays, Saturdays and legal holidays, no motor vehicle shall be parked for a period of time longer than two hours, on the following streets or parts of streets:

Sixth Street, on the north side, from a point twenty-three feet west of the intersection of Sixth Street and Elm Street, to a point eighty-one feet west of the intersection of Sixth Street and Elm Street.
(Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

Seventh Street, on the north side, from a point thirty-nine feet east of the intersection of Seventh Street and Bishop Avenue to a point two hundred and seventy-six feet east of the intersection of Seventh Street and Bishop Avenue. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)
Seventh Street, on the south side, from a point seventy feet east of the intersection of Seventh Street and Elm Street, to a point two hundred and sixty feet east of the intersection of Seventh Street and Elm Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

Seventh Street, on the north side, from a point ninety-four feet west of the intersection of Seventh Street and Olive Street, to a point one hundred and seventeen feet west of the intersection of Seventh Street and Olive Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

Seventh Street ,on the south side, from a point forty-eight feet west of the intersection of Seventh Street and Cedar Street, to a point one hundred and seventy-two feet east of the intersection of Seventh Street and Cedar Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

Eighth Street, on the north side, from a distance of fifty feet east of the intersection of Eighth Street and State Street, to a point ninety-five feet east of the intersection of Eighth Street and State Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

Olive Street, on the east side, from a point thirty-three feet south of the intersection of Olive Street and Seventh Street, a point seventy-eight feet south of the intersection of Olive Street and Seventh Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any motor vehicle registered in his/her name to be unlawfully parked as set out in this Section. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

 
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-106. Public Parking Lot Permits.
The Public Works Director is authorized to designate to holders of valid parking permits the assignment of a parking space on select city owned parking lots.

Requirements

To purchase a permit, the applicant must provide the following information:
Current vehicle registration and license number of the vehicle
Driver’s license
Home address
Day time telephone number
To purchase or renew an annual parking permit, all outstanding parking fines must be paid in full.
If the vehicle is changed at any time during the year, it is the permit holder’s responsibility to attend to the transfer of the parking sticker by contacting the City of Rolla. If this does not occur and the vehicle is towed, it shall be at the permit holder’s expense.

Billing/Replacement

All parking permits must be paid for through the City of Rolla Finance Department by cash, check, credit card, or debit card.
Permits will be issued by the City of Rolla Public Works Department on a first come, first served basis.  Every effort will be made to accommodate the permit holder’s choice of parking spaces when feasible.
Permits will be issued in six month and twelve month increments.
A six-month permit may be obtained for $120.  There are no refunds for this purchase.
A twelve-month permit may be obtained at a discounted rate of $200.  There are no refunds for this purchase.

Renewing/Cancelling/Transferring:

Permits must be renewed 30 days in advance.  If the permit holder chooses to terminate the permit, all applicable parking stickers must be removed and destroyed.
Individual permit holders who are terminating may not transfer their permit to another person without the expressed consent of the City of Rolla.
Permit fees more than 30 days past the permit period are considered delinquent and may result in the parking permit being issued to another user.

Space assignment:

The City reserves the right of assignment of permitted spaces.
Assignments will be made to the first eligible applicant on the appropriate waiting list.

Parking sticker placement:

The permit coincides with a pre-numbered parking space in a specified parking lot.  The permit is nontransferable and does not entitle the permit holder to park in any other permitted facility.
The permit holder shall receive one parking sticker per permit cycle.
The parking sticker shall be attached in a conspicuous location on the rear driver’s side of the vehicle, should be unobstructed, and should be observable to a traffic officer in a vehicle.  The parking sticker must match the allotted parking space.

General:

Failure to comply with the regulations may result in the issuance of citations, fees, fines, vehicle immobilization, towing of vehicle, collections, and/or further legal action.
Any person convicted of a violation of this Section shall be subject to a fine, as established under Section 27-80, plus any additional court costs that may apply (Ord. 3942, §1)
Backing in to a parking space is prohibited and will result in a ticket.
All improperly parked vehicles will be ticketed.
Parking permits shall not be sold or leased.
Improper use of the permit will be grounds for revocation of the permit.  Vehicles displaying an expired or revoked permit will be subject to issuance of a citation.
The City of Rolla shall not be held responsible for vandalism, thefts, or problems with vehicles parked on the lot.
Replacement parking stickers shall be available for a $5.00 fee.
Up to two vehicles may be registered to each parking permit provided both vehicles are registered to the same permit applicant.
(Ord. 4115)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 27-107.  Ten-hour parking on certain municipal lots.
No motor vehicle shall be parked for a period of time longer than ten consecutive hours, excluding weekends, unless otherwise posted on the following municipal lots:

Parking lot between Eighth Street and Ninth Street, west of Oak Street. (Ord. 3983)

Parking lot between Ninth Street and Tenth Street, Elm Street and Oak Street, except for the four designated “Visitor Parking Spaces” at the southwest corner of the parking lot. (Ord. 3983)

Parking lot between Seventh Street and Eighth Street, along the west side of Elm Street. No parking between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., excluding weekends, unless otherwise posted. (Ord. 3983)

Parking lot on the north side of Eighth Street and the west side of Rolla Street. No parking between the hours of 1 a.m. and 5 a.m. (Ord. 3983)

Parking lot on the east side of Park Street and the south side of Eighth Street and the west side of Main Street. No parking between the hours of 1 a.m. and 5 a.m. (Ord. 3983)

Parking lot being that portion of Cedar Street between Fourth Street and Fifth Street and also being lots 141, 142, 143 and 144, Block 5 of the James Addition to Rolla. (Ord. 3983)

It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any motor vehicle registered in his/her name to be unlawfully parked as set out in this Section. (Ord. 3983, §1; Ord. 4210, §1, Ord. 4305, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-108. Ten-hour parking on certain streets.
Seventh Street, on the north side, from a point one hundred and eighty-seven feet east of the center of the railroad tracks, to a point two hundred and seventy feet east of the center of the railroad tracts.

Second Street on the south side from the intersection of Second Street and Faulkner Avenue to a point 60 feet east of the intersection of Second Street and Park Street.

Second Street on the north side from the intersection of Second Street and Faulkner Avenue to the intersection of Second Street and Rolla Street.

Park Street on the east side from the intersection of Park Street and Second Street to the intersection of Park Street and First Street.

Park Street on the west side from the intersection of Park Street and Second Street to a point sixty feet (60’) south of the intersection of Park Street and Second Street.

State Street on the east side from the intersection of State Street and Second Street to a point sixty feet (60’) south of the intersection of State Street and Second Street.
      It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any motor vehicle registered in his/her name to be unlawfully parked as set out in this Section. (Ord. 3942, §1; Repealed by Ord. 4041, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-109. Parking prohibited on residential streets in excess of seventy-two hours.
Seventy-two hour parking limitations: It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon any street in the City of Rolla, Missouri for a period in excess of seventy-two consecutive hours.

Definitions: For the purpose of this Ordinance, the term “street” shall mean the entire width between the lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the uses of the public for purposes of vehicular travel; the term "vehicle" shall mean any vehicle in which title must be registered with the Department of Revenue of the State of Missouri.

Exceptions: This Ordinance shall not apply to vehicles which are parked upon a street that directly abuts property owned by the registered owner of said vehicle, nor shall it apply to vehicles registered to persons residing on the property directly abutting the street where such vehicle is parked.

Any person convicted of a violation of this Ordinance shall be subject to a fine, as established under Section 27-80, plus any additional court costs that may apply.  (Ord. 3942, §1; Repealed by Ord. 4041, §1)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-110. Police parking only 7:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
Eleventh Street, on the south side, from a point thirty feet east of the intersection of Eleventh Street and Pine Street, to a point one hundred and fifteen feet east of the intersection of Eleventh Street and Pine Street.

Eleventh Street, on the south side, from a point thirty feet west of the intersection of Eleventh Street and Elm Street, to a point one hundred and fifteen feet west of the intersection of Eleventh Street and Elm Street.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any motor vehicle registered in his/her name to be unlawfully parked as set out in this Section. (Ord. 3942, §1)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 27-111. Parking prohibited from 7:00 A.M. to 9:00 A.M. and 3:00 P.M. to 5:00 P.M.
Eleventh Street, on the south side, from the intersection of Asher Street to the intersection of Joyce Avenue, from 7:00 A.M. to 9:00 A.M. and 3:00 P.M. to 5:00 P.M.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any motor vehicle registered in his/her name to be unlawfully parked as set out in this Section. (Ord. 3942, §1)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 27-112. Angle parking – On streets or parts of streets.
Bryant Drive, on the west side, from a point seventy-five feet south of Kingshighway, to a point three hundred and five feet south of Kingshighway.

Fourth Street, on the north side, from a point thirty-two feet west of Main Street, to a point seventy-six feet west of Main Street.

Fourth Street, on the north side, from a point one hundred and forty-three feet west of Main Street, to a point two hundred and twenty-two feet west of Main Street.

Park Street, on the east side, from a point forty-two feet north of the intersection of Park Street and Fourth Street, to a point ninety-six feet north of the intersection of Park Street and Fourth Street.

Park Street, on the east side, from a point twenty feet south of the intersection of Park Street and Fifth Street, to a point eighty-seven feet south of the intersection of Park Street and Fifth Street. . (Ord. 3942, §1)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 27-113. Parking on right of way of Railway Company – Prohibited in certain areas; exception.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked a motor vehicle upon that portion of right-of-way and property owned by the Railway Company, lying west of the main tract of the Railway Company and between Seventh Street and Tenth Street, in the city, except as provided in this Section.

Parking of vehicles for the purpose of transacting business or the loading and unloading of freight, shall not be deemed a violation of this Section.

It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any motor vehicle registered in his/her name to be unlawfully parked as set out in this Section. (Ord. 3942, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-114.  Manner of parking on certain streets.
All motor vehicles, and all other vehicles, including bicycles, motorcycles, carts and wagons, shall be parked adjacent to and parallel to the curb on each side of the street, with such vehicle facing in a designated direction, on such designated streets as follows:

Elm Street, between the intersection of Elm Street and Twelfth Street and the intersection of Elm Street and Fourteenth Street, in a southerly direction only and between the intersection of Ninth Street and Tenth Street, in a southerly direction only. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3974, §1)

Fourth Street, between the intersection of Rolla Street and Pine Street, in an easterly direction only. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3974, §1)

Park Street, between the intersection of Park Street and Sixth Street and the intersection of Park Street and Ninth Street, in a northerly direction only. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3974, §1)

Pine Street, between the intersection of Pine Street and Sixth Street and the intersection of Pine Street and Twelfth Street, in a northerly direction only. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3974, §1)

Rolla Street, between the intersection of Rolla Street and Sixth Street and the intersection of Rolla Street and Twelfth Street, in a southerly direction only. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3974, §1)

State Street, between the intersection of State Street and Sixth Street and the intersection of State Street and Ninth Street, in a southerly direction only. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3974, §1)

Twelfth Street, between the intersection of Rolla Street and Pine Street, in an westerly direction only. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3974, §1)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 27-115. Parking prohibited along a curb with yellow markings.
No person shall park a vehicle along a curb which has been painted yellow by authorized city personnel, such yellow markings hereby being declared to designate no parking zones. (Ord. 3942, §1)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 27-116. Parking within marked boundaries.
Where a parking space has been painted or marked by authorized city personnel, a vehicle parked in such space shall be parked fully within the limits of the marked boundaries of such space. (Ord. 3942, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec 27-117. Parking prohibited on the Police parking lot located at Eleventh and Elm.
Police Station Parking Lot, that no vehicle shall be parked on the municipal parking lot at Eleventh and Elm, except for police business only. (Ord. 3942, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Article VII - Restricted Parking In the Downtown Business District

Sec. 27-118.  Two-hour parking – From 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on certain streets or parts of streets.

Between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except on Sundays and legal holidays, no motor vehicles for a period of time more than two hours shall be parked on the following streets or parts of streets:

      (1)     Sixth Street, on the north side, from a point thirty-five feet west of the intersection of Sixth Street and Pine Street, to a point fifty-nine feet west of the intersection of Sixth Street and Pine Street.
      (2)     Seventh Street, on the south side, from a point fifty-five feet east of the intersection of Seventh Street and Rolla Street, to a point ninety-seven feet east of the intersection of Seventh Street and Rolla Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (3)     Seventh Street, on the south side, from a point twenty-eight feet west of the intersection of Seventh Street and Pine Street, to a point ninety-six feet west of the intersection of Seventh Street and Pine Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (4)     Seventh Street, on the south side, from a point thirty-two feet east of the intersection of Seventh Street and Pine Street, to a point one hundred and forty-six feet east of the intersection of Seventh Street and Pine Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (5)     Seventh Street, on the north side, from a point fifty-three feet east of the intersection of Seventh Street and Rolla Street, to a point seventy-eight feet east of the intersection of Seventh Street and Rolla Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (6)     Seventh Street, on the north side, from a point twenty-eight feet west of the intersection of Seventh Street and Pine Street, to a point one hundred and ten feet west of the intersection of Seventh Street and Pine Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

(7)     Seventh Street, on the north side, from a point twenty-nine feet east of the intersection of Seventh Street and Pine Street, to a point one hundred and thirty-two feet east of the intersection of Seventh Street and Pine Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (8)     Eighth Street, on the north side, from a point twenty-five feet east of the intersection of Eighth Street and Park Street, to a point ninety-seven feet east of the intersection of Eighth Street and Park Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (9)     Eighth Street, on the south side, from a point forty-nine feet east of the intersection of Eighth Street and Park Street, to a point forty-two feet west of the intersection of Eighth Street and Main Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (10)   Eighth Street, on the south side, from a point twenty-five feet east of the intersection of Eighth Street and Main Street, to a point eighty-five feet east of the intersection of Eighth Street and Main Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1; Ord. 4463, §2)

      (11)   Eighth Street, on the south side, from a point twenty-nine feet west of the intersection of Eighth Street and Rolla Street, to a point eighty feet west of the intersection of Eighth Street and Rolla Street. (Ord. 3942, §1)

      (12)   Eighth Street, on the north side, from a point thirty-five feet east of the intersection of Eighth Street and Rolla Street, to a point fifty-seven feet east of the intersection of Eighth Street and Rolla Street. (Ord. 3942, §1)

      (13)   Eighth Street, on the south side, from a point thirty feet east of the intersection of Eighth Street and Rolla Street, to a point seventy nine feet east of the intersection of Eighth Street and Rolla Street. (Ord. 3942, §1)

      (14)   Eighth Street, on the south side, from a point thirty-three feet west of the intersection of Eighth Street and Pine Street, to a point one hundred and seventeen feet west of the intersection of Eighth Street and Pine Street. (Ord. 3942, §1)

      (15)   Eighth Street, on the north side, from a point seventy-seven feet east of the intersection of Eighth Street and Pine Street, to a point two hundred and forty-four feet east of the intersection of Eighth Street and Pine Street. (Ord. 3942, §1)

      (16)   Eight Street, on the north side, from a point forty feet west of the intersection of Eighth Street and Oak Street, to a point one hundred and twenty-four feet west of the intersection of Eighth Street and Oak Street. (Ord. 3942, §1)

      (17)   Ninth Street, on the north side, from a point seventeen feet east of the intersection of Ninth Street and Rolla Street, to a point seventy-seven feet east of the intersection of Ninth Street and Rolla Street. (Ord. 3942, §1)

      (18)   Ninth Street, on the north side, from a point twenty-eight feet west of the intersection of Ninth Street and Pine Street, to a point one hundred and fifty-four feet west of the intersection of Ninth Street and Pine Street. (Ord. 3942, §1)

      (19)   Ninth Street, on the north side, from a point fifty-two feet east of the intersection of Ninth Street and Pine Street, to a point seventy-four feet east of the intersection of Ninth Street and Pine Street. (Ord. 3983, §1)

      (20) Ninth Street, on the south side, from a point twenty feet east of the intersection of Ninth Street and Rolla Street, to a point eighty-three feet east of the intersection of Ninth Street and Rolla Street.
(Ord. 3942, §1)

      (21)   Ninth Street, on the south side, from a point forty-two feet west of the intersection of Ninth Street and Pine Street, to a point one hundred thirty-one feet west of the intersection of Ninth Street and Pine Street. (Ord. 3942, §1)

      (22)   Ninth Street, on the south side, from a point thirty-eight feet east of the intersection of Ninth Street and Pine Street, to a point fifty-seven feet east of the intersection of Ninth Street and Pine Street.
(Ord. 3942, §1)

      (23)   Eleventh Street, on the north side, from a point thirty feet east of intersection of Eleventh Street and Rolla Street, to a point seventy-four feet east of intersection of Eleventh Street and Rolla Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (24)   Eleventh Street, on the south side, from a point thirty-four feet west of the intersection of Eleventh Street and Pine Street, to a point fifty-eight feet west of the intersection of Eleventh Street and Pine Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (25) Eleventh Street, on the north side, from a point twenty-five feet east of the intersection of Eleventh Street and Pine Street, to a point twenty-eight feet west of the intersection of Eleventh Street and Elm Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (26)   Reserved. (Deleted by Ord. 4464, §1)

      (27)   Main Street, on west side, from a point thirty-three feet north of the intersection of Main Street and Seventh Street, to a point one hundred and twenty-three feet north of the intersection of Main Street and Seventh Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (28)   Main Street, on west side, from a point sixty-one feet north of the intersection of Main Street and Eighth Street, to a point one hundred and twenty feet north of the intersection of Main Street and Eighth Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (29)   Main Street, on west side, from a point thirty-four feet south of the intersection of Main Street and Ninth Street, to a point one hundred and nine feet south of the intersection of Main Street and Ninth Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (30)   Main Street, on the east side, from a point forty-two feet north of the intersection of Main Street and Eighth Street, to a point one hundred and five feet north of the intersection of Main Street and Eighth Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (31)   Main Street, on east side, from a point thirty-five feet south of the intersection of Main Street and Ninth Street, to a point one hundred and five feet south of the intersection of Main Street and Ninth Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (32)   Rolla Street, on the west side, from a point thirty-five feet north of the intersection of Rolla Street and Sixth Street, to a point seventy-three feet north of the intersection of Rolla Street and Sixth Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (33)   Rolla Street, on the west side, from a point thirty feet south of the intersection of Rolla Street and Seventh Street, to a point one hundred and ten feet south of the intersection of Rolla Street and Seventh Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (34)   Rolla Street, on the east side, from a point twenty-six feet north of the intersection of Rolla Street and Sixth Street, to a point twenty-two feet south of the intersection of Rolla Street and Seventh Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (35)   Rolla Street, on the west side, from a point fifty-seven feet north of the intersection of Rolla Street and Seventh Street, to a point one hundred and sixteen feet north of the intersection of Rolla Street and Seventh Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (36)   Rolla Street, on the west side, from a point twenty-three feet south of the intersection of Rolla Street and Eighth Street, to a point eighty-three feet south of the intersection of Rolla Street and Eighth Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (37)   Rolla Street, on the east side, from a point seventy-five feet north of the intersection of Rolla Street and Seventh Street, to a point one hundred and fourteen feet north of the intersection of Rolla Street and Seventh Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (38)   Rolla Street, on the east side, from a point twenty-eight feet south of the intersection of Rolla Street and Eighth Street, to a point ninety feet south of the intersection of Rolla Street and Eighth Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (39)   Rolla Street, on the west side, from a point twenty-seven feet north of the intersection of Rolla Street and Eighth Street, to a point one hundred and twenty-seven feet north of the intersection of Rolla Street and Eighth Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (40)   Rolla Street, on the west side, from a point thirty-two feet south of the intersection of Rolla Street and Ninth Street, to a point fifty-three feet south of the intersection of Rolla Street and Ninth Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (41)   Rolla Street, on the east side, from a point twenty-five feet north of the intersection of Rolla Street and Eighth Street, to a point one hundred and six feet north of the intersection of Rolla Street and Eighth Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (42)   Rolla Street, on the east side, from a point thirty feet south of the intersection of Rolla Street and Ninth Street, to a point one hundred feet south of the intersection of Rolla Street and Eighth Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (43)   Rolla Street, on the west side, from a point thirty feet north of the intersection of Rolla Street and Ninth Street, to a point one hundred and twenty feet north of the intersection of Rolla Street and Ninth Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (44)   Rolla Street, on the west side, from a point fifty feet south of the intersection of Rolla Street and Tenth Street, to a point seventy-five feet south of the intersection of Rolla Street and Tenth Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (45)   Rolla Street, on the east side, from a point twenty-seven feet south of the intersection of Rolla Street and Tenth Street, to a point two hundred and seven feet south of the intersection of Rolla Street and Tenth Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (46)   Rolla Street, on the west side, from a point eighty-five feet north of the intersection of Rolla Street and Tenth Street, to intersection of Rolla Street and Tenth Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1; Ord. 4289, §3)

      (47)   Rolla Street, on the west side, from a point seventy-five feet south of the intersection of Rolla Street and Eleventh Street, the intersection of Rolla Street and Eleventh Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1, Ord. 4289, §3)

      (48)   Pine Street, on the west side, from a point twenty-five feet north of the intersection of Pine Street and Sixth Street, to a point eighty-six feet north of the intersection of Pine Street and Sixth Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (49)   Pine Street, on the west side, from a point thirty-three feet south of the intersection of Pine Street and Seventh Street, to a point ninety-five feet south of the intersection of Pine Street and Seventh Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (50)   Pine Street, on the east side, from a point twenty feet north of the intersection of Pine Street and Sixth Street, to a point thirty-five feet south of the intersection of Pine Street and Seventh Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (51)   Pine Street, on the west side, from a point twenty-nine feet north of the intersection of Pine Street and Seventh Street, to a point one hundred and seventy-four feet north of the intersection of Pine Street and Seventh Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (52)   Pine Street, on the east side, from a point twenty-six feet north of the intersection of Pine Street and Seventh Street, to a point two hundred and thirteen feet north of the intersection of Pine Street and Seventh Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (53)   Pine Street, on the west side, from a point forty-seven feet north of the intersection of Pine Street and Eighth Street, to a point one hundred and twelve feet north of the intersection of Pine Street and Eighth Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (54)   Pine Street, on the west side, from a point thirty-two feet south of the intersection of Pine Street and Ninth Street, to a point one hundred and eleven feet south of the intersection of Pine Street and Ninth Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (55)   Pine Street, on the east side, from a point twenty-five feet north of the intersection of Pine Street and Eighth Street, to a point seventy-six feet north of the intersection of Pine Street and Eighth Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (56)   Pine Street, on the east side, from a point thirty-five feet south of the intersection of Pine Street and Ninth Street, to a point one hundred twenty-three feet south of the intersection of Pine Street and Ninth Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (57)   Pine Street, on the west side, from a point thirty-one feet north of the intersection of Pine Street and Ninth Street, to a point thirty-one feet south of the intersection of Pine Street and Tenth Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (58)   Pine Street, on the east side, from a point sixty-three feet north of the intersection of Pine Street and Ninth Street, to a point eighty-two feet north of the intersection of Pine Street and Ninth Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (59)   Pine Street, on the east side, from a point thirty feet south of the intersection of Pine Street and Tenth Street, to a point ninety-nine feet south of the intersection of Pine Street and Tenth Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (60)   Pine Street, on the west side, from a point twenty-two feet north of the intersection of Pine Street and Tenth Street, to a point forty-two feet north of the intersection of Pine Street and Tenth street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (61)   Pine Street, on the west side, from a point thirty-three feet south of the intersection of Pine Street and Eleventh Street, to a point one hundred and eighty-eight feet south of the intersection of Pine Street and Eleventh Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (62)   Pine Street, on the east side, from a point thirty-nine feet north of the intersection of Pine Street and Tenth Street, to a point eighty-one feet north of the intersection of Pine Street and Tenth Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (63)   Pine Street, on the east side, from a point fifty-six feet south of the intersection of Pine Street and Eleventh Street, to a point one hundred and forty-seven feet north of the intersection of Pine Street and Eleventh Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (64)   Pine Street, on the west side, from a point thirty-five feet south of the intersection of Pine Street and Twelfth Street, to a point thirty feet north of the intersection of Pine Street and Eleventh Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (65)   Pine Street, on the east side, from a point seventy-two feet north of the intersection of Pine Street and Eleventh Street, to a point one hundred and thirty-one feet north of the intersection of Pine Street and Eleventh Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (66)   Pine Street, on the east side, from a point thirty feet south of the intersection of Pine Street and Twelfth Street, to a point one hundred and seventeen feet south of the intersection of Pine Street and Twelfth Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (67)   Elm Street, on the east side, from a point thirty-five feet south of the intersection of Elm Street and Tenth Street, to a point fifty-two feet south of the intersection of Elm Street and Tenth Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (68)   Elm Street, on the west side, from a point thirty-four feet north of the intersection of Elm Street and Tenth Street, to a point seventy-four feet north of the intersection of Elm Street and Tenth Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      (69)   Elm Street, on the west side, from a point one hundred and forty-three feet north of the intersection of Elm Street and Tenth Street, to a point one hundred and seventy-five feet north of the intersection of Elm Street and Tenth Street. (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1)

      It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any motor vehicle registered in his/her name to be unlawfully parked as set out in this Section.  (Ord. 3942, §1; Ord. 3983, §1; Ord. 4464, §1)

 
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 27-119. Unlawful parking generally.
Parking spaces as described in Section 27-118 may be used by a vehicle during the legal parking limit provided by this Code or other ordinances of the city. A vehicle shall be considered as unlawfully parked if it remains in a space beyond the legal parking limit.

All vehicles parked on any public street in the city shall be parked parallel to and not more than eighteen inches from the curb on all streets having curbs except where angle parking spaces have been officially delineated by paint markings, and on all other streets such vehicles shall be parked parallel to and as close to the right hand side of such street as practicable; provided, however, that this Section does not apply to motor vehicles designed for and being used for the unloading of goods and merchandise during the periods from 9:00 A.M. to 12:00 P.M. and from 1:00 P.M. to 4:00 P.M. on Pine Street between Sixth Street and Twelfth Street. (Ord. 2146, §2; Ord. 2663, §1; Ord. 2733, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-120. Responsibility of vehicle owner for unlawful parking.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any vehicle registered in his name to be unlawfully parked as set out in Section 27-119. (Ord. 2146, §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-121. Traffic officers to issue complaints.
It shall be the duty of traffic officers so instructed to take the state vehicle tag numbers of all persons violating the provision of this Article and make complaints therefore in the municipal or police court of the city. (Ord. 2146, §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 27-122 to 27-126. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article VIII - Handicapped Parking
Sec. 27-127. Prohibition against parking in handicapped parking spaces.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle in a parking space designated herein for physically disabled persons, who does not display on said vehicle a distinguishing license plate or placard issued by the Director of Revenue of the State of Missouri. (Ord. 2467, §1.)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 27-128. City engineer to designate parking spaces.
The city engineer is empowered to designate parking spaces on city streets for the exclusive use of vehicles displaying distinguishing license plate or placard authorized by Section 301.071 RSMo or 301.142 RSMo. Whenever a parking space has been so designated, it shall be indicated by blue paint on the curb or edge of the paved portion of the street adjacent to the space. In addition to blue paint, the space shall be indicated by a sign upon which shall be inscribed the international symbol of accessibility and the words "handicapped parking" in white letters on a blue background. The city engineer shall keep in his office a registry listing the locations of such designated parking spaces and such listing shall constitute the official designation of such parking spaces by the City of Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 2467, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-129. City engineer to designate parking spaces on privately owned parking lots.
The city engineer shall have the authority to designate handicapped parking spaces on off-street parking facilities that are privately owned at the request of the person or the corporation in lawful possession thereof. Vehicles, not displaying license plates or placards as provided in Sections 301.071 or 301.142 RSMo shall, at the complaint of the person in lawful possession of such parking facility or his designee to the police department, be subject to towing at the owner's expense, provided, that there is posted immediately adjacent to such designated parking space, and readily visible from such space a sign on which is inscribed the international symbol of accessibility in white on a blue background and may include any appropriate wording to indicate that the space is reserved for exclusive use of vehicles which display the distinguishing license plate or card. Towed vehicles may be reclaimed by contacting the Rolla Police Department and paying the costs of towing and removal. The city engineer shall keep in his office a registry listing the locations of such designated parking spaces and such listing shall constitute the official designation of such parking spaces on privately owned parking facilities in the City of Rolla, Missouri.

Any person convicted of a violation of this Ordinance shall be subject to a fine of fifty ($50.00) dollars. (Ord. 2467, §1; Ord. 2607, §1; Ord. 2619, §1.)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-130. Prohibition against parking in handicapped parking spaces in a privately owned parking facility.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle in a parking space designated for handicapped parking in a privately owned parking facility that has complied with the provisions of this Article. (Ord. 2467, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 27-131 to 27-154. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article IX - Impoundment & Disposition of Motor Vehicles
Sec. 27-155. Definitions
Vehicle - A machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include, without limitation: automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, tractors, or any part or portion thereof. (Ord. 2192, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-156. Authority of police to remove vehicles.
The police department is hereby authorized to remove or to have removed any vehicle from the streets or other public places to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the police department or otherwise maintained by the city under the following conditions:

When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct or causeway or in any tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic.

When a vehicle upon a street or highway is so disabled to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person in charge of the vehicle is, by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal.

When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic, or so as to obstruct the use of any trafficway or alleyway adjoining said street; any time a vehicle is parked in a prohibited area that is so designated by signs or other official markings; and any time a vehicle is parked upon a street without having valid license plates properly displayed thereon.

Whenever an operator of a vehicle is arrested or detained by a law enforcement officer, and such arrest or detention would leave such vehicle unattended.

Whenever a motor vehicle is parked upon any property owned or maintained or operated by the city for the parking of motor vehicles for a longer period of time than is lawfully permitted for a vehicle to remain parked thereon without regard to parking charges.

Whenever a motor vehicle is found unattended upon any property owned or controlled by the city not devoted to the parking of motor vehicles.

Whenever a motor vehicle upon any street or highway is left unattended in such a manner that the vehicle is inoperable, (not resting upon the tires, or, without its engine, transmission, or any essential part of the engine or transmission); and after a notice having been placed on the vehicle for a period of at least 24 hours that the vehicle would be subject to being impounded if not removed within such 24 hour period. (Ord. 2036, §2; Ord. 2192, §1.)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-157. Leaving wrecked, non operating vehicles on city streets.
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any partially dismantled, or non operating or wrecked vehicle on any street or highway within the city. (Ord. 2192, §1.)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 27-158. Period of impoundment; option to return.
Any such vehicle shall be impounded until claimed or disposed of; provided, that the police department shall have the option, when such vehicle is registered to a resident of the city, to cause the same to be returned to the residence of the registered owner and the cost of the towing of such vehicle shall be assessed and paid by the registered owner thereof. (Ord. 2036, §2; Ord. 2636, §1; Ord. 2751, §1.)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 27-159. Owner to apply for vehicle; pay costs.
Any vehicle so impounded shall be held until the owner or his authorized agent applies for same and pays the costs of removing and storing said vehicles. (Ord. 2036, §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-160. Satisfaction of traffic tickets.
In addition to said tow-in and storage costs, before any such vehicle is released, the person applying for same shall satisfy any outstanding traffic tickets issued in connection with the operation of such vehicle, including any ticket issued in connection with the towing, either by payment to the municipal court or by posting bond for appearance in municipal court. (Ord. 2036, §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 27-161 to 27-170. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article X - Parades
Sec. 27-171. Parades - Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for one or more persons to walk upon the streets of the City of Rolla or operate a motor vehicle upon the streets of the City of Rolla in a procession commonly referred to as a "parade" without first obtaining a permit from the chief of police as provided in this Ordinance. (Ord. 2182, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-172. Parade permits - Application.
Persons desiring to conduct a parade upon the streets of the City of Rolla shall first make application at least fourteen (14) days prior to the event date to the chief of police by completing a form prescribed by the chief of police which shall set forth the following: the name of the persons of organization seeking to conduct such a parade; the proposed date and time for the beginning and ending of the parade; the proposed route to be followed by the parade procession; the expected number of participants in the parade; an acknowledgement and acceptance of the Parade Rules as provided by the chief of police and such further information as the chief of police might require. (Ord. 2182, §2; Ord. 2766, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-173. Parade permits - Duties of chief of police.
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to provide all persons desiring to conduct a parade within the City of Rolla with a copy of the Parade Rules as approved by the city council and to furnish such applicants with an application form as described above. (Ord. 2182, §3.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-174. Parade rules.
Consumption or display of alcoholic beverages are prohibited.

No parade vehicles may be operated at excessive speeds or be operated so as to break traction.

No parade vehicles may be operated any closer than five feet from a parked car or curb.

Persons participating in a parade may not distribute gifts, merchandise, literature, hand-outs, candy or other materials from moving vehicles or parade floats during the parade. Participants may assign walkers to hand or toss items to spectators along the parade route. Walkers shall only distribute gifts, merchandise, literature, hand-outs, candy or other materials as far off the road as possible to avoid children and other spectators from running into the streets and so long as such activity does not draw spectators into the streets. (Ord. 4033, §1)

No parade participant shall appear in a state of nudity.

No parade participant shall conduct themselves in such a way so as to threaten, curse or offend any other person.

Parade participants shall be responsible for cleanup after the termination of the parade activities.
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 27-175. Issuance of permit; special requirements; appeals for denial of permit.
Upon the filing of a completed application form, the chief of police shall issue a Parade Permit setting forth the date, time and location of the proposed parade to the applicants. In addition, the chief of police shall have the authority to, if in his judgment the circumstances warrant, make special requirements of such applicants before issuing the permit which may include: a different parade route; a different time for the parade; a different day for the parade; the furnishing of security personnel to assist the police department in supervising the parade; and a money deposit to cover the costs of property damage or clean-up.

In the event such application for a permit is denied by the chief of police, then the applicant or applicants may appeal to the city council for such permit, and such appeal shall be heard and determined within a reasonable time thereafter, and the decision of the city council thereon shall be final. (Ord. 2182, §4.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-176. Penalty provisions.
Any person violating the provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of an offense and be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed three (3) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2182, §5.)

(Return to Contents)

Article XI - Fire Lanes
Sec. 27-190. Designation.
The Fire Chief or authorized representatives shall approve, require, and designate public and/or private fire lanes as deemed necessary for the efficient and effective operation of fire vehicles, personnel, and apparatus. Only those fire lanes approved by the Fire Chief or authorized representative will be enforced. A fire lane shall be posted with signs at least every forty (40) linear feet. Said fire lane shall be deemed to encompass that area within a twenty foot (20') radius of any fire lane sign or markings posted pursuant to this section. Posted signs will comply with the "Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices" and at a minimum contain the following language: "FIRE LANE NO PARKING". Markings shall include a painted red striped area measuring eight feet (8') from the curb/pavement edge and extending twenty feet (20') either side of a posted sign. Upon application to and approval by the Fire Chief or authorized representative, a private property owner may be granted fire lane designation for such property. Installation of approved signage on private property will be the responsibility of the permit applicant/property owner. If an applicant/property owner is required by the City to post a fire lane, upon request, the signs will be provided by the City at cost or the applicant/property owner can obtain an approved sign from a vendor. When an area is posted as a fire lane as provided herein, it shall be presumed that said area is designated as a fire lane by or with the authority of the Fire Chief. (Ord. 3607, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-191. Parking prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to have an unattended vehicle standing, stopped, or parked in or otherwise blocking or obstructing any portion of a designated fire lane at any time. Signs and markings shall be posted and placed to identify such fire lanes and to serve notice that standing, stopping, and/or parking is prohibited therein. Such illegally parked vehicles will be subject to fines and/or towing at the expense of the owner. All designated fire lane signs shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times and replaced when necessary to ensure adequate visibility. This maintenance shall be the responsibility of the permit applicant/property owner. (Ord. 3607, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-192. Penalty.
Any violation of this Article shall be considered a simple misdemeanor or Municipal infraction as provided for in this Chapter. (Sec. 27-80) (Ord. 1157, §2; Ord. 2560; §1; Ord. 2894, §2; Ord. 3163, §1; Ord. 3607, §3)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-193. Enforcement.
It will be the responsibility of the Police Department to enforce the provisions of this Article as they apply to both public and private properties. The Rolla City Police Department is hereby authorized to ticket, tow, or cause to be towed, pursuant to the Code of Rolla, as amended, any vehicle that has been parked or placed upon the public or private street in violation of the parking laws of this City and/or State. This shall serve as appropriate notice of such authorization to the Rolla City Police Department under the Code of Rolla, as amended. By applying for a fire lane designation, any applicant private property owner and its employees and assigns hereby agree to release, indemnify, and hold harmless the City, its officers, employees, and agents from any damage or liability resulting from any ticketing or towing authorized under this Article. (Ord. 3607, §4)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 27-194. Presumption of liability.
The fact that a vehicle that is illegally parked is registered in the name of a person will be considered prima facie proof that such person was in control of the vehicle at the time of such parking. (Sections 27-74 through 27-130 except 27-76, 77, 82, 89, 90, 91). (Ord. 3607, §5)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 27-195 to 27-199. Reserved.

Chapter 28 - Nuisances
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter


Chapter Contents:
Article I - In General
§ 28-1. Maintenance, etc., of nuisances prohibited.
§ 28-2. Nuisances enumerated.
§ 28-3. Notice to owner to abate or remove nuisances.
§ 28-4. Authority of police, etc., to enter premises, etc., for purpose of removing or abating nuisances.
§ 28-5 City may abate nuisances when owner fails to do so - Duties of city council.
§ 28-6. Same - Cost to be lien against property.
§§ 28-7 - 28-10. Reserved.
Article II - Weeds and Other Rank Vegetation
§ 28-11. High weeds, etc., declared menace to public health, safety and welfare.
§ 28-12. City council or designated officer to determine when weeds, etc., constitute public nuisance.
§ 28-13. Weeds, etc., over ten inches in height declared nuisance per se.
§ 28-14. Permitting growth of high weeds, etc., prohibited.
§ 28-15. Duty of owner, etc., to abate weeds, etc.
§ 28-16. Notice to owner to abate weeds, etc.
§ 28-17. Owner of land liable for cost of cutting weeds.
§§ 28-18 to 28-22.. Reserved.
Article I - In General
Sec. 28-1. Maintenance, etc., of nuisances prohibited.
No person shall cause, maintain or permit, on premises owned or controlled by him, a nuisance, as defined by the laws of this State or by this Chapter.

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 28-2. Nuisances enumerated.
The following things are hereby declared to be nuisances; provided, that such listing shall not be deemed exclusive:

Carcasses of animals remaining exposed more than six hours after death.

Ashes, slops, filth, excrement, stones, straw, soot, rubbish, manure, offal, stagnant water, all sorts of decaying animal matter, decaying fruit or vegetables or other vegetable matter, broken kitchenware, wrecked or parts of worn out automobiles or other machines, scrap iron or other metals, tin cans, old bottles, broken glass, discarded wearing apparel, dead animals, or any other offensive or disagreeable substance or thing, old dilapidated barns, sheds or other buildings left, deposited or caused or permitted to remain, left or deposited in such quantity or in such condition as to be offensive to the sight or smell or a menace to health, safety, peace or comfort or of such a nature as to be or become harbors or breeding places for mosquitoes, ants, flies, rats, mice or other insects, animals or vermin, whether left or deposited upon private premises owned, occupied or controlled by persons causing or permitting the same or upon any public street, sidewalk, alley, parkway, public enclosure or vacant lot; all water, steam and condensation drained from, emitted from or thrown upon a sidewalk, parkway, alley or street from any place occupied by a commercial or business structure or any appurtenances thereto belonging. Also, the creation of dust by the operation of motor vehicles, racing cars, rides, or other motor driven contrivances where the dust is carried beyond the borders of the property whereon the above enumerated vehicles may be operated in such quantities as to interfere with reasonable enjoyment of any property in the neighborhood.

Factories, slaughterhouses and all places of business causing an offensive odor to a greater extent than is reasonably necessary in the prosecution or carrying on of such business.

Garbage deposited otherwise than in suitable containers for removal by the city.

Green or unsalted hides kept in an exposed or open place.

Hog pens.

Shrubs, hedges and limbs of trees projecting over a sidewalk or street at a height of less than ten (10) feet.

Privies in an overflowing, leaking or filthy condition.

Ponds and pools of unclean water.

The rendering, heating or steaming of any animal or vegetable product or substance in such a manner as to cause disagreeable odors off the premises.

Stables, stalls, sheds, pens or yards in which any horses or cattle have been kept which are in an unclean condition.

All substances or things which cause an odor disagreeable to the surrounding neighborhood.

No person shall permit any junked or abandoned vehicle to be stored or parked on any premise occupied by or owned by the person, except inside an enclosed building or garage. A vehicle shall be considered junked or abandoned if it is not in operable condition for a consecutive period of 30 days. Vehicles that are being restored by the owner shall not fall within said definition provided said restoration is in progress on a continuous basis and the owner establishes a date for completion of such work. After the completion date, if such vehicle is not operable, it shall be deemed junked and subject the owner to the requirements of this Section. (Ord. 1385, §1; Ord. 2060, §1; Ord. 2545, §1)

It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of a structure or property to utilize the exterior premises of such property for the open storage of any junk vehicle parts, appliances, furniture (excluding garden or patio furniture intended for outdoor use and barbeque grills), building demolition rubbish, boxed or bagged household waste, or any other similar items. For the purpose of this section, open storage shall be defined to include all storage on the premises which is not inside an enclosed building. This includes storage on porches, storage under open carports or breezeways, storage in open garages not equipped with a door, storage inside yards or similar areas visible from the public right-of-way. (Ord. 3968, §1)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 28-3. Notice to owner to abate or remove nuisances.
Whenever the city council, or its designated officer, shall ascertain or have knowledge that a nuisance exists in or upon any house or premises in the city, such council or its designated officer, shall, by written notice, notify the person occupying or having possession or the right to possession of such house or premises to abate or remove such nuisance within the time to be specified in such notice, provided, that if such house or premises is not occupied and the owners having the right of possession are nonresidents, the council, or its designated officer, shall notify the nonresident owners by posting a notice of such request to abate or remove such nuisance within a time to be specified in such notice upon such house or premises and by sending a copy of such notice by mail to the last known address of the nonresident owners. Receipt or acknowledgement of notification is not required.

No person notified as provided in this Section shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the same within the time specified in such notice. For every day thereafter that such person shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the same and for every day thereafter that such person shall fail, neglect or refuse to abate or remove such nuisance, he shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense and shall be proceeded against as in the first instance. (Ord. 1385, §1; Ord. 2728, §1; Ord. 2758, §2; Ord. 3527, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 28-4. Authority of police, etc., to enter premises, etc., for purpose of removing or abating nuisances.
Police officers and other employees of the city authorized by the city council or the chief of police are hereby authorized and required to go, in the daytime, in and upon any house, building, lot or premises, whether public or private, for the purpose of removing or abating any nuisance, when abatement of a nuisance is ordered under the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 1385, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 28-5. City may abate nuisances when owner fails to do so - Duties of City Council.
If the person notified as provided in this Section shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the same within the time specified in such notice, the codes administrator or designated officer shall abate such nuisance provided the cost of such not exceed $1,000.00. If the estimated cost of abatement of the nuisance is in excess of the amount thus established, the codes administrator or designated officer shall report the same to the council of the city. Thereupon the council shall call and have a full and adequate hearing upon the matter, giving the affected parties at least fourteen days written notice of the hearing. At such hearing, any party may be represented by counsel, and all parties shall have an opportunity to be heard.

After the hearing, if the evidence supports a finding based upon competent and substantial evidence that a nuisance exists, that the person having an interest was notified, and that the person failed to abate the nuisance, the city council shall issue an order based upon its findings of fact to the codes administrator or its designated officer to proceed to abate the nuisance. (Ord. 1385, §1; Ord. 2728, §2; Ord 3527, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 28-6. Same - Cost to be lien against property.
If the codes administrator or its designated official as provided in Section 28-5 whereby the nuisance is abated by the city, the costs of the abatement and a reasonable charge for administering the provisions of Sections 28-1 to 28-6 not less than one hundred dollars, shall be certified to the city clerk who shall cause a special tax bill therefore against the property to be prepared and collected by the Finance Director. The tax bill from the date of its issuance shall be deemed a personal debt against the owner and and shall also be a lien on the property until paid. If the certified cost is not paid, the tax bill shall be considered delinquent, and the collection of the delinquent bill shall be governed by the laws governing delinquent and back taxes. (Ord. 2728, §3; Ord. 3527, §1; Ord. 3986, §3)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 28-7 to 28-10. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)


Article II - Weeds and Other Rank Vegetation
Sec. 28-11. High weeds, etc., declared menace to public health, safety and welfare.
The presence of high weeds, brush and profusely growing (rank) vegetation taller than ten (10) inches in height, excluding shade trees, ornamental shrubs, fruit trees, domesticated berry bushes and vines, cultivated flowers and gardens, cover crops and domestic grains and plantings on lots and pieces of land within the City, that constitute a menace to the public safety, health and welfare by reasons that such conditions may:

Cause a fire hazard.

Furnish cover for prowlers and illegal activities.

Create shelters and breeding places for rodents, disease carrying insects, poisonous snakes, and other vermin.

Result in the aggravation of allergies.

Obstruct visibility at street intersections.
(Ord. 3782, §1; Ord. 4105 §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 28-12. City council or designated officer to determine when weeds, etc., constitute public nuisance.
The growth of weeds, brush or rank vegetation shall constitute a public nuisance when, in the opinion of the City Council, or its designated officer, any such growth on a lot or piece of land may substantially endanger the health, safety or welfare of the public, having considered the hazards enumerated in Section 28-2, with the following exceptions:

All lots or parcels zoned "R-R" (rural residential district).

All undeveloped lots, parcels or right-of-way owned by the City of Rolla and dedicated for park and open space use, as bird sanctuaries, riparian corridors, detention basins, or as dedicated but undeveloped public right-of-way.
(Ord. 1385, §1; Ord. 3782, §2; Ord. 4105 §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 28-13. Weeds, etc., over ten inches in height declared nuisance per se.
The growth of weeds, brush or other rank vegetation in excess of ten (10) inches in height is declared to be a public nuisance, per se, detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the public. (Ord. 3527, §1; Ord. 4105 §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 28-14. Permitting growth of high weeds, etc., prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any property owner, lessee, or agent in control of any lot or piece of land where development has occurred on at least three (3) abutting sides (including developed streets), to allow weeds, brush, or rank vegetation to attain a height greater than ten (10) inches on such land, or lot. It shall be unlawful for any property owner, lessee, or agent in control of any lot or piece of land adjoining a developed street to allow weeds, brush, or rank vegetation to attain a height greater than ten (10) inches within ten (10) feet of any curb or street edge and five (5) feet from any other abutting developed parcel or lot. In addition to the street frontage maintenance requirement of ten (10) feet, undeveloped subdivisions that have been cleared or “brush hogged” shall be maintained in that condition until further development occurs.  (Ord. 2860, §2; Ord. 3527, §1; Ord. 3782, §3; Ord. 4105 §1)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 28-15. Duty of owner, etc., to abate weeds, etc.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or agent in control of a lot or piece of land to permit such a growth of weeds, brush or rank vegetation as would constitute a nuisance under the terms of this Article.  It shall be such owner's, lessee's or agent's duty to abate such nuisance, if it exists.  A failure to abate shall be unlawful. The requirement to abate the nuisance shall be satisfied when such lot or piece of land determined by the City Council or its designated officer to be in violation of this Article shall have been cut to a distance of a minimum of ten (10) feet from the front curb or street edge and a minimum of five (5) feet from all other boundaries of the lot or piece of land.  (Ord. 3782, §4; Ord. 4105 §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 28-16. Notice to owner to abate weeds, etc.
Whenever the city council, or its designated officer, is informed and believes that a nuisance, per se, exists under Section 28-13, or whenever the council or its designated officer, shall be of the opinion that a nuisance exists as provided by Section 28-12, the council, or such designated officer, shall cause to be posted a notice containing an order to abate the nuisance on the land where such nuisance exists, and shall cause a copy of such notice to be sent to the last known address of the owner. Receipt or acknowledgement of notification is not required. If the nuisance is not abated within the period of time determined by the council, or its designated officer, from the date the notice is posted or sent, then the council, or its designated officer, shall cause such nuisance to be abated by whatever reasonable means are necessary.  (Ord. 1385, §1; Ord. 3527, §1; Ord. 4105 §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 28-17. Owner of land liable for cost of cutting weeds.
If the Codes Administrator or its designated official as provided in Section 28-16 whereby the cutting and removing weeds, brush and other rank vegetation is abated by the city, the costs of the abatement and a reasonable charge for administering the provisions of Sections 28-11 to 28-17 not less than fifty dollars, shall be certified to the City Clerk who shall cause a special tax bill therefore against the property to be prepared and collected by the Finance Director. The tax bill from the date of its issuance shall be deemed a personal debt against the owner and shall also be a lien on the property until paid. If the certified cost is not paid, the tax bill shall be considered delinquent, and the collection of the delinquent bill shall be governed by the laws governing delinquent and back taxes.

(Ord. 1385, §1; Ord. 3527, §1; Ord. 3782, §5, 3986, §4; Ord. 4105 §1)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 28-18 to 28-22. Reserved.

Chapter 29 - Explicit Sexual Materials Display, Sexually Oriented Business
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter


Chapter Contents:
Article I - In General
§ 28-1. Purpose and findings.
§ 28-2. Definitions.
§ 28-3. Displaying of explicit sexual materials generally.
§ 28-4. License required for sexually oriented business.
§ 28-5 License required for managers, servers and entertainers.
§ 28-6. License application; owners, servers, entertainers or managers.
§ 28-7. Application processing.
§ 28-8. Standards of conduct.
§ 28-9. Ventilation and sanitation requirements.
§ 28-10. Performances; closed rooms or booths prohibited, when.
§ 28-11icense – posting, revocation, when.
§ 28-12 Signs required.
§§ 28-13 - 28-14. Reserved.
 

ARTICLE I IN GENERAL
Sec. 29-1. Purpose and Findings.
(a) Purpose: It is the purpose of this Chapter to regulate the display of explicit sexual material and sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of Rolla, Missouri, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the City. The provisions of this Chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including explicit sexual materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this Chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to explicit sexual materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent or effect of this Chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene or offensive material of a sexual nature.

(b) Findings: Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses on communities as outlined in numerous studies/reports generally available for consideration, and on findings incorporated in a series of cases as found and included herein by reference to the IML Model Ordinance on Sexually Oriented Business Regulation, the City Council finds that:

(1) Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the operators of the establishments. Further, there is no mechanism to make the owners of these establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their premises.

(2) Employees of certain sexually oriented businesses engage in higher incidences of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other establishments and that by offering or providing such locations may thereby create unhealthy conditions, unless properly regulated.

(3) At least fifty (50) communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses including but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infections (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non A, Non B amebiasis, salmonella infections and shigella infections. According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts.

(4) The number of cases of syphilis and other sexually transmitted diseases has been on the rise or remain at high levels in the United States.

(5) The findings noted above raise substantial governmental concerns by establishing that sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics that should be reasonably regulated in order to protect the public interest and to address substantial governmental concerns.

(6) A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will place an incentive on the operators to see that the sexually oriented business is managed in a way consistent with the health, safety, and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the general public. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein.

(7) Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult theaters.

(8) Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep information regarding current employees and past employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from working in such establishments.

(9) The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day to day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases.

(10) In the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases, it is desirable to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees who may engage in conduct that this Chapter is designed to prevent, or who are likely to be witnesses to such conduct.

(11) The fact that an applicant for an adult use license as been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this Chapter.

(12) The barring of such individuals from the management of adult uses serves as a deterrent to, and prevents conduct that leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases.

(13) The general welfare, health, morals, and safety of the citizens of Rolla, Missouri will be promoted by the enactment of this Chapter.

(Ord. 1072; Ord. 3029; Ord. 3565)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 29-2. Definitions.
Words and phrases contained in this Chapter shall be deemed to have certain meanings, as follows:

(a) Explicit sexual material means:

(1) Any picture, photograph, or other pictorial representation, that depicts actual or simulated "specified sexual activities"; or

(2) Any portion of a book, magazine, newspaper or other printed or written material; or any video tape, DVD, or any other recorded medium whose content is made up in whole or in dominant part of depictions or descriptions of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".

(b) Sexually oriented business means any business enterprise that:

(1) Has as a regular and substantial business purpose the sale, display or rental of goods that are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities," or that emphasize matters depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or

(2) Has one of the following as a regular and substantial business purposes: the providing of entertainment where the emphasis is on performances, live or otherwise, that depict, portray, exhibit or display "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities"; or the providing of services that provide "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" ancillary to other pursuits, or allow participation in "specified sexual activities" ancillary to other pursuits,

(3) The definition of “Sexually oriented business” also includes, but is not limited to, any and all of the following as defined herein:

(i) "Adult retail establishments" means an establishment that has as a regular and substantial business purpose, offers for sale or rent, any one or more of the following: instruments, devices, gifts, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities" or clothing that graphically depicts "specified anatomical areas" or any materials, such as printed materials, photographs, slides, films, videotapes or DVD, sold or rented in an adult bookstore, adult news rack, or adult news stand that are characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".

(ii) "Adult entertainment business" means any establishment to which the general public, patrons or members are invited or admitted and wherein an entertainer provides "adult entertainment", as defined herein. These establishments include, but are not limited to, adult theater, adult entertainment cabaret, adult entertainment studio, adult encounter parlors, and body painting studios.

(iii) "Adult motion picture theater" means an establishment containing a room that seats facing a screen or projection areas, where a regular and substantial portion of its business is the exhibition to customers of films, videotapes, or other such devices that are intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customers and that are distinguished by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".

(iv) "Bath house" means an enterprise where a regular and substantial portion of its business is offering baths with other persons present who are nude or displaying "specified anatomical areas".

(v) "Adult motel" means an enterprise where a regular and substantial portion of its business is offering public accommodations for consideration for the purpose of viewing closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videotapes, slides or other photographic reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and rents room accommodations for less than six hours at a time.

(c) Adult entertainment means any live or recorded exhibition, performance, display or dance of any type, including but not limited to, talking, singing, reading, listening, posing, massaging, serving food or beverages, soliciting for the sale of food, beverages or entertainment, pantomiming, modeling, removal of clothing, or any service offered for amusement on a premises where such exhibition, performance, display or dance is intended to seek to arouse or excite the sexual desires of the entertainer, other entertainers or patrons, or if the entertainment involves a person who is nude or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the human genitals, pubic region, vulva, pubic hair, buttocks, female breast or breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola or nipple or the human male genitals in a discernibly erect state, even if completely and opaquely covered to include, but not limited to establishments commonly known as gentlemen's clubs, juice bars, and adult book stores, etc

(d) Employee means any and all persons, including managers, entertainers and independent contractors, who work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of an adult entertainment business.

(e) Entertainer means any person who provides adult entertainment within adult entertainment premises as defined in this section whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for entertainment.

(f) Knowingly means having knowledge of the character and content of any material described herein or failure on notice to exercise reasonable inspection, which would disclose the content and character of the same.

(g) Manager means any person who manages, directs, administers, or is in charge of the affairs and/or conduct of any portion of any activity involving adult entertainment occurring at any adult entertainment premises.

(h) Material means any book, magazine, or other printed or written material, or any picture, drawing, photograph, videotape, or other pictorial representation, figure, object or article.

(i) Operator means any person who manages, directs, administers, or is in charge of the affairs and/or conduct of any portion of any activity involving adult entertainment occurring at any adult entertainment premises.

(j) Person means any individual partnership, corporation, trust, incorporated or unincorporated association marital community joint venture, governmental entity, or other entity or group of persons however organized

(k) Public place means any area generally visible to public view and includes streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots, and automobiles whether moving or not.

(l) Sadomasochistic abuse means flagellation or torture by or upon a person who is nude or clad in under?garments or in revealing or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed.

(m) Server means any person who serves food or drink at an adult entertainment business.

(n) Specified anatomical areas means (1) uncovered or exposed human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair; or buttock; or female breast or breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola or nipple, or any combination of the foregoing; or (2) human male genitals in a discernible erect state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

(o) Specified sexual activities means sexual conduct, being actual or simulated, acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or physical contact, in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification, with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or the breast of a female, or any sadomasochistic abuse or acts including animals or any latent objects in an act or apparent sexual stimulation or gratification, as such terms are defined in the pornography and related offenses chapter of the Missouri Criminal Code.

(p) Substantial business purpose means 1) ten percent (10%) or more of the gross floor area is devoted to that purpose; or 2) ten percent (10%) or more of the retail floor space is devoted to that purpose; or 3) ten percent (10%) or more of the gross sales of the business are derived from that purpose

(q) Display means:

(1) To expose in whole or in part; or

(2) To permit an unfolding, viewing or examination.

(Ord. 2004; Ord. 3565, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 29-3. Displaying of explicit sexual materials generally
(a) Display. It is unlawful for a person knowingly to:

(1) Display any explicit sexual material or sadomasochistic abuse at news stands or any other business establishment frequented by minors under the age of eighteen (18) years or where said minors are or may be invited as a part of the general public; or

(2) Permit or authorize the display of any explicit sexual material or sadomasochistic abuse at news stands or any other business establishments frequented by minors under the age of eighteen (18) years or where said minors are or may be invited as a part of the general public; or

When requested by the police department of the City, to fail to promptly remove from display from property in his possession or under his control, any explicit sexual material or sadomasochistic abuse, at newsstands or other business establishments frequented by minors under the age of eighteen (18) years or where said minors are or may be invited as a part of the general public.

(b) Removal. Where it appears that this Chapter or any part of this Chapter is being or about to be violated, the mayor or city attorney of the City of Rolla, may commence and maintain, in the name of the City, an action in the circuit court to enjoin the display of any explicit sexual material. No provisions of this Section shall be construed to prohibit the prosecution for violation of the provisions of this Section in the municipal court.

(c) Penalty. Any person violating this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or be imprisoned in jail for not less than five (5) days or be punished by both such fine and imprisonment or be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be imprisoned in jail for not more than sixty (60) days or be so punished by both such fine and imprisonment.

(d) Employees. No employee of any business responsible for selling or renting sexually explicit material shall be less than 18 years of age.

(e) Restrictions. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed so as to prohibit or restrict any political subdivision or any department, agency, office or facility thereof, or any employee or agent thereof when engaged in the performance of his official duties, or any person in the conduct of a legitimate activity for bona?fide educational, scientific or medical purposes. (Ord. 3565, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 29-4. License required for sexually oriented business.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a sexually oriented business in the City unless the owner, operator or lessee thereof has obtained an adult entertainment business license from the City, or to operate such business after such license has been revoked or suspended by the City.

(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly work as an entertainer, server or manager at a sexually oriented business unless said business is licensed in the City.

(c) It shall be prima facia evidence that any sexually oriented business that fails to post the required adult entertainment business license in the manner prescribed herein shall be operating unlawfully. In addition it shall be prima facia evidence that any entertainer, employee or manager who performs any service or entertainment in a sexually oriented business in which an adult business license is not posted as specified herein, shall have knowledge that such business is not licensed.

(d) Any licensed sexually oriented business shall be deemed to have consented to a periodic inspection of the business premises by appropriate City officials. This inspection shall take place during hours when such sexually oriented business is open to the public, unless otherwise requested by the sexually oriented business, and shall not unreasonably interfere with the conduct of such business. (Ord. 3565, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 29-5. License required for managers, servers and entertainers.
It is unlawful for any person to work as an entertainer, server or manager at a sexually oriented business without first obtaining a license to do so from the City, or to work as an entertainer, server or manager at a sexually oriented business after such person's license to do so has been revoked or suspended.

The license year for all fees required under this chapter shall be from January 1 through December 31.

(a) The classification of licenses and fees for each shall be as follows:

Adult entertainment business license fee is $500.00 per year.

Adult entertainment manager's license fee is $50.00 per year.

Adult entertainer's license fee is $20.00 per year.

Adult entertainment server's license fee is $20.00 per year.

(b) Fees shall be paid by certified/cashier check or money order. The application is not complete until the fee is paid. Licenses are for specific locations as indicated on the license and are nontransferable. Any change in the type of sexually oriented business shall invalidate the adult business license. No more than one sexually oriented business may occupy a business premise at one time. (Ord. 3565, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 29-6. License application: owners, servers, entertainers or managers.
(a) A prospective licensee (owner, server, entertainer or manager) shall provide a notarized application to the Rolla Police Department and Collector of the City of Rolla with his or her name, address (mailing and residence), phone number, principal occupation, recent photograph (2" X 3" color), date of birth, place of birth, driver's license, social security number, signed permission for FBI check and similar information for all partners or stockholders in the venture, as well as a description of the proposed business.

(b) A statement from the applicant, that the applicant has not been convicted of, released from confinement for conviction of, or diverted from prosecution on:

(1) A felony criminal act within five years immediately preceding the application, or a misdemeanor criminal act within two years immediately preceding the application where such felony or misdemeanor criminal act involved sexual offenses, prostitution, sexual abuse of a child, pornography or related offenses as defined in the Missouri Criminal Code, or involved controlled substances or illegal drugs or narcotics offenses as defined in the Missouri Controlled Substances Act or other statutes or ordinances.

(2) Upon submission of each such application, the Police Department shall review the information contained therein and verify the qualifications of the applicant. The City Council shall, within 45 days, consider the application at a regular session. The applicant shall be present in person at the meeting when said application is considered by the City Council. If the application meets all the requirements as set forth in this Chapter, the City Council may issue a license for operation of the sexually oriented business. Those opposing such a license could present objections at this time. Granting the license requires a super majority vote.

(c) No person is eligible nor shall a license be issued to a sexually oriented business applicant if one or more of the following conditions exist:

(1) The applicant's premises is located within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of a school, church, hospital, City Park, or licensed childcare center or property zoned for residential use as measured in a straight line of property boundary.

(2) The applicant's premises is located within 1,000 feet of any other sexually oriented business for which there is a license issued.

(3) The applicant failed to supply all of the information requested on the application.

(4) The applicant gave material false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application.

(5) The applicant' s proposed business premises does not comply with or meet the requirement of the applicable health, zoning, building code, fire and property maintenance ordinances of the City of Rolla.

(6) The applicant has been convicted, released from incarceration for conviction, or diverted on any of the crimes set forth in said section.

(7) The applicant has had an adult entertainment license revoked or suspended in this City or any other City or County during the past five years.

(8) The facility shall be designed in such a fashion that all openings, entries and windows prevent view into such facilities from any pedestrian, sidewalk, walkway, street or other public area. No business activities shall take place outside the sexually oriented business visible from the exterior.

(9) The facility in which such a use is located shall be limited to one (1) wall mounted advertising sign no greater than one (1) square foot of sign per linear foot of wall length, not to exceed a total of fifty (50) square feet, said sign shall not flash, blink or move by mechanical means and shall not extend above the roof line of the building Further, no merchandise or pictures of products or entertainment on the premises shall be displayed in window areas or any area where such merchandise or pictures can be viewed from the sidewalk in front of the building. No flashing lights and/or lighting that leaves the impression of motion or movement shall be permitted.

(10) Lighting in the parking area must provide a minimum light level of 0.25 foot candles over the entire parking area, but in no point shall the light level exceed 3.0 foot?candles, nor shall any increase in light levels or visible glare be permitted at the lot line. The interior premises of sexually oriented businesses must be equipped with overhead lighting of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one foot candle as measured at the floor level, and such illumination must be maintained at all times that any customer or patron is present in or on the premises.

(11) No owner, operator, manager or other person in charge of the premises of a sexually oriented business premises shall:

(i) Knowingly permit alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverages to be brought upon or consumed on the premises, (unless otherwise permitted pursuant to Chapter 4, Alcoholic Beverages, of the City Code).

(ii) Knowingly allow or permit the sale, distribution, delivery or consumption of any controlled substance or illegal drug or narcotic on the premises.

(iii) Knowingly allow or permit any person under the age of 18 years of age to be in or upon the premises in any capacity as entertainer, server or customer.

(iv) Knowingly allow or permit any act of prostitution or patronizing prostitution on the premises, or

(v) Knowingly allow or permit a violation of this Chapter or any other City ordinance provision or state law.

(12) Hours of operation shall not exceed 10 A.M. to 1 A.M.

(Ord. 3565, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 29-7. Application processing.
(a) Upon receipt of a complete application for an adult entertainment business license, the Finance Department shall transmit one copy of the application to the Police Department for investigation of the application and one copy to the Codes Administrator.

(b) It shall be the duty of the Police Chief or a designee to investigate the application to determine whether the information contained therein is accurate and whether the applicant has qualified to be issued the license. The results of this investigation shall be forwarded to the Finance Department no later than ten (10) working days from the application date.

(c) It shall be the duty of the Codes Administrator to determine compliance with the requirements of this Chapter and the applicable health, zoning, building code, fire and property maintenance ordinances of the City. The Codes Administrator shall provide his report to the Finance Department within ten (10) working days from the application date.

(d) Upon receipt of these reports, the Finance Department shall either issue or deny the license, provided the license applications for sexually oriented businesses, entertainers, servers, and managers shall be approved or disapproved within forty?five (45) days from the filing date. If the license is disapproved, the applicant shall be notified in writing by certified mail to the applicant's last known address, and the notification shall state the basis for disapproval. (Ord. 3565, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 29-8. Standards of conduct
The following standards of conduct shall be used by all adult entertainment business licensees, their employees and all sexually oriented business managers, servers and entertainers and patrons of sexually oriented businesses while on or about the premises of the establishment:

(a) Any manager, server or entertainer issued a license by the City under the provisions of this Chapter shall, at all times while working in a sexually oriented business, have in their possession a valid Identification card issued by the City, bearing the permit number, the signature of the City Clerk, individual's name, age, weight, eye color, and height. Such card shall be laminated to prevent alteration.

(b) No manager, employee, server, entertainer or patron in a sexually oriented business, other than a licensed bath house, shall appear nude, unclothed, in less than opaque attire or in any fashion that exposes to view any "specified anatomical area”.

(c) No manager, employer, server, entertainer or patron of a sexually oriented business shall perform any "specified sexual activities", wear or use any device or covering exposing to view an image that simulates any "specified anatomical areas", use artificial devices or other objects to perform or depict any "specified sexual activities", or participate in any act of prostitution.

(d) No manager, employee, server, entertainer or patron of a sexually oriented business shall knowingly touch, fondle or caress any "specified anatomical area" of another person whether such "specified anatomical area" is clothed, unclothed, covered or exposed to view.

(e) A manager shall be on duty at all times on the premises when the sexually oriented business is open. The manager shall verify that any person who provides adult entertainment or works as a server possesses a current and valid adult entertainment license. It shall also be the manager's duty to insure that no person under the age of 18 enters the premises. (Ord. 3565, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 29-9. Ventilation and sanitation requirements.
The premises of all sexually oriented businesses shall be kept in a sanitary condition. Separate dressing rooms and restrooms for men and women shall at all times be maintained and kept in a sanitary condition. (Ord. 3565, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 29-10. Performances; closed rooms or booths prohibited, when.
(a) Performances shall always take place on a stage of at least 24 inches above the floor level of the audience. Entertainers shall be at least 10 feet from customers and shall not touch customers or be touched by customers. Customers shall not be permitted on the stage at any time. No entertainer shall be permitted to demand or collect any payment or gratuity from any employee or patron of the sexually oriented business.

(b) The premises of all sexually oriented businesses shall be physically arranged so that the entire interior portion of any booths, cubicles, room or stalls are visible from a common area. The use of video cameras to meet this requirement is not allowed. Visibility shall not be blocked or obscured by doors, curtains, drapes or any other obstruction. The manager shall be required to position himself/herself so as to be able to view the entire interior portion of the premises while on duty. (Ord. 3565, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 29-11. License ? posting, revocation, when.
(a) Every person, corporation, partnership, or association licensed under this Chapter as a sexually oriented business shall post such license in a conspicuous place and manner on the premises of the business.

(b) Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this Code, though he may have been previously issued a license as provided herein shall have his license revoked immediately forthwith. Prior to revocation said licensee shall have notice of said violations, and the matter of revocation shall be placed before the next regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council for hearing. Should the City Council find said violations did occur, and upon motion of the City Council after hearing, the revocation shall be issued from the City Clerk, all licenses previously issued surrendered, for a period of one (1) year unless the City Council may by motion direct a shorter time. (Ord. 3565, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 29-12. Signs required
All sexually oriented businesses shall have conspicuously displayed in the common area at the entrance to the premises a sign of which uppercase letters shall be at least two inches high and lowercase letters at least one inch high, which read as follows:

THIS SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS IS REGULATED AND

LICENSED BY THE CITY OF ROLLA, MISSOURI

ENTERTAINERS ARE:

Not permitted to engage in any type of sexual conduct or prostitution on the premises or to fondle caress or touch the breasts, pubic region, buttocks or genitals of any employee, patron, or other entertainer or to permit any employee, patron, or other entertainer to fondle, caress or touch the breasts, pubic region, buttocks or genitals of said entertainer.

Not permitted to be nude, unclothed, or in less than opaque attire, costume or clothing so as to expose to view any portion of the breasts below the top of the areola, or any portion of the pubic region, buttocks and or genitals.

Not permitted to demand or collect any payment or gratuity from any patron for entertainment.

Not permitted to perform, except on a stage of at least 24 inches above the floor level of the audience and to maintain at least a 10 foot separation from any patron at all times while performing.

PATRONS ARE:

Not permitted to be upon the stage at any time.

Not permitted to touch, caress or fondle the breasts, pubic region, buttocks or genitals of any employee, server or entertainer or engage in solicitation for prostitution.

(Ord. 3565, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 29-13 to 29-16. Reserved.

Chapter 30 - Offenses
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter


Chapter Contents:
Article I - In General
§ 30-1. Affrays in public.
§ 30-2. Assault and battery.
§ 30-3. City officials - Misusing public funds prohibited.
§ 30-4. Curfew - Persons under seventeen years of age.
§ 30-5 Disturbing the peace; disorderly conduct.
§ 30-6. Same - Religious services, etc.
§ 30-7. Fraud - Obtaining lodging, food, money, property, or other accommodations through fraudulent means prohibited.
§ 30-8. Same - Obtaining money or something of value by deception prohibited.
§ 30-9. Handbills - Distribution on vehicles prohibited.
§ 30-10. Iceboxes, refrigerators, etc. - Abandonment.
§ 30-11. Insufficient funds, checks or drafts - Utterance and use, prohibited.
§ 30-12. Intoxication in public; using profane, etc., language.
§ 30-13. Landmarks, Removal, defacing, etc., prohibited.
§ 30-13.1 Littering prohibited.
§ 30-14. Loitering on school grounds and buildings - Prohibited.
§ 30-15. Loitering, prowling, parking, etc., in and about private dwellings - Prohibited.
§ 30-16. Marijuana - Possession.
§ 30-17. Marijuana - Suspension of sentence in cases of marijuana possession.
§ 30-18. Minors - Contributing to the delinquency of minors; penalty provisions.
§ 30-19. Noise - Creating unreasonably loud, disturbing, etc., noise prohibited; exception; penalty for violation.
§ 30-20. Same - Prohibited acts enumerated; enumeration not exclusive.
§ 30-21. Officers - Impersonation prohibited.
§ 30-22. Same - Obstructing, resisting, assaulting, etc., prohibited.
§ 30-23. Peddling on posted private residential property - Prohibited.
§ 30-24. Posting - Handbills and placards on public buildings, etc. - Prohibited.
§ 30-25. Posting - Signs on public right of ways, utility poles and street sign poles - Prohibited; penalty provisions.
§ 30-26. Prostitution - Keeping disorderly, etc., house prohibited.
§ 30-27. Same - Being a resident of or frequenting disorderly houses.
§ 30-28. Same - Leasing premises for a brothel, etc.
§ 30-29. Public address system - Term of permit.
§ 30-30. Same - Rules and regulations.
§ 30-31. Public grounds - Digging, removing, etc., sand, earth, etc., prohibited.
§ 30-32. Public or private property - Injuring, destroying, prohibited; reward by the city.
§ 30-32.1 Smoking in public buildings owned and operated by the city - Prohibited.
§ 30-33. Stealing money or personal property.
§ 30-34. Street signs - Destruction, removal or possession.
§ 30-35. Telephones - Automatic dialing alarm devices connected to police lines; regulation and registration.
§ 30-36. Trespass on real estate.
§ 30-37. Vagrancy.
§ 30-38. Vehicles - Using to endanger, etc., others prohibited.
§ 30-39. Soliciting on public streets prohibited.
§ 30-40. Massage establishments, defined; operating requirements.
§ 30-41. License to be issued, when.
§ 30-42. Acts prohibited.
§ 30-43. Applicability to existing massagists.
§ 30-44. Massage establishment business license, requirements.
§ 30-45. Issuance of permit for a massage establishment.
§ 30-46. Sale of cigarettes and tobacco products to minors prohibited.
§ 30-47. Possession of Synthetic Cannabinoids.
§ 30-48. Hand and mechanical signals, violations, penalty.
§§ 30-49 to 30-50. Reserved.

ARTICLE I IN GENERAL
Sec. 30-1. Affrays in public.
If two or more persons shall, in any public place, voluntarily or by agreement engage in any fight, or use any blows or violence toward each other, in any angry or quarrelsome manner, or do each other any willful mischief, or if any person shall assault another and strike him, in any public place, to the terror or disturbance of others, the person or persons so offending shall be deemed guilty of an affray, and on conviction shall be punished as follows: by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by confinement in jail for a period of not less than ten (10) days or more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and confinement. (Ord. 1992, §1)



Sec. 30-2. Assault and battery.
(a) No person shall assault, or assault and beat, or strike another person within the city limits.

(b) Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this Section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed three months or by both such find and confinement. (Ord. 51, §1; Ord. 2623, §1)



Sec. 30-3. City officials - Misusing public funds prohibited.
No officer of the city, who may have the care of any funds or evidence of debt belonging to the city, shall use the same for his own purposes, or shall speculate therein in any manner. (Ord. 54, §1)



Sec. 30-4. Curfew of minors under the age of seventeen years; liability of parent for violation by minor.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of seventeen years to be in or upon any public street, highway, alley, road, park, playground, public grounds, public place or public building, place of amusement or entertainment, vacant lot or other unsupervised place in the City of Rolla, Missouri between the following hours of the day, on the following days of the week and months of the year:

Minors under the age of fourteen (14) years:
October 1 to May 1 of the following year:
Sunday through Thursday: between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 5:00 A.M. of the following day.
Friday and Saturday: between the hours of 11:00 P.M. and 5:00 A.M. of the following day.
May 2 to September 30:
Sunday through Saturday: between the hours of 11:00 P.M. and 5:00 A.M. of the following day.
Minors between the ages of fourteen (14) and sixteen (16) years inclusive:
October 1 to May 1 of the following year:
Sunday through Thursday: between the hours of 11:00 P.M. and 5:00 A.M. of the following day.
Friday and Saturday: between the hours of 12:00 A.M. and 5:00 A.M.
May 2 to September 30:
Sunday through Saturday: between the hours of 12:00 A.M. and 5:00 A.M.
unless such minor is attending to urgent business and can give a satisfactory reason for being in or upon the place hereinbefore mentioned, or as accompanied by a parent, guardian, adult relative or adult friend approved by a parent or guardian.

(b) When upon such lawful errand, it shall be deemed to be in violation of this Section for any such minor to loiter, linger or ride aimlessly upon the streets, highways, roads or on public places in the city and such minor must transact such business as speedily as possible.

(c) Any minor who shall violate the provisions of this Section, shall, for the first violation, be warned of the violation, and provided with a copy of this Section by the Chief of Police or any police officer or person authorized by the Chief of Police to serve such notice and directed to go home. On the second offense, proceedings may be taken in accordance with and pursuant to the juvenile laws of the state of Missouri.

(d) It shall be unlawful for the parent or guardian of a minor under the age of seventeen years to permit such minor to be in or upon any public streets, highways, alley, roads, park, playgrounds, public places or building, place of amusement and entertainment, vacant lot or any other unsupervised place in the City of Rolla at such time as would constitute a violation of the restrictions imposed in this Section, except where such violation is a first offense.

(e) Any parent or guardian of a minor child who is convicted of violating the provisions of this Section shall be subject to a minimum fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) plus court costs.

(f) For the purposes of this Section the term "adult" shall mean persons of the age of eighteen years and older. (Ord. 1991, §1.)



Sec. 30-5. Disturbing the peace; disorderly conduct.
A person commits the offense of peace disturbance if:

(a) He unreasonably and knowingly disturbs or alarms another person or persons by:

(i) loud noise; or
(ii) offensive language addressed in a face-to-face manner to a specific individual and uttered under circumstances which are likely to produce an immediate violent response from a reasonable recipient; or
(iii) threatening to commit a felonious act against any person under circumstances which are likely to cause a reasonable person to fear that such threat may be carried out; or
(iv) fighting; or
(v) creating a noxious and offensive odor.
(b) he is in a public place or on private property of another without consent and purposely causes inconvenience to another person or persons by unreasonably and physically obstructing:

(i) vehicular or pedestrian traffic; or
(ii) the free ingress or egress to or from a public or private place.
(c) Any person violating any provision of this section shall be punished in accordance with Section 1-7 of the General Ordinances of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 2216, §§2 to 7; Ord. 3149, §§2 & 3)



Sec. 30-6. Same - Religious services, etc.
(a) No person shall willfully, maliciously, or contemptuously disquiet or disturb any congregation or assembly of people met for religious worship by making noise or by rude or indecent behavior, or by profane discourse within their place of worship, or so near to the same as to disturb the order of solemnity of the meeting, or menace, threaten or assault any person being there.

(b) Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this Section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed three months or by both such fine and confinement. (Ord. 51, §5; Ord. 2623, §2.)



Sec. 30-7. Fraud - Obtaining lodging, food, money, property, or other accommodations through fraudulent means prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain lodging, food, money, property or other accommodations at any hotel, motel, rooming, boarding or eating house within the city with the intent to defraud the owner or keeper thereof. Proof that lodging, food, money, property, or other accommodations were obtained by false pretenses or false representations, or by false or fictitious show or pretense of any baggage or other property, or by failing or refusing to pay such lodging, food, money, property or other accommodations on demand, or that he gave in payment for such lodging, food, money, property or other accommodations a check or negotiable paper on which payment was refused, or that he left the hotel, motel, or boarding house without paying or offering to pay for such lodging, food, money, property or other accommodations, or that he surreptitiously removed or attempted to remove his baggage, or that he registered under a fictitious name, shall be prima facie proof of the intent to defraud mentioned in this Section; but this Section shall not apply where there has been an agreement in writing for delay in payment. (Ord. 2009, §1.)



Sec. 30-8. Same - Obtaining money or something of value by deception prohibited.
(a) No person shall attempt to cheat, swindle, or defraud anyone out of any money or thing of value, by means of any trick, scheme, device or deception, or by false pretenses, statements or representations, or by means or instrument or device commonly called the "confidence game", or have in his possession any device, instrument, trick or tool used or designed to be used in any game or scheme of any character intended or designed to cheat, swindle or defraud any person of any money or thing of value.

(b) Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this Section shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be confined in the city jail for a period of not less than five (5) days nor more than three (3) months, or by both such fine and confinement. In addition to the aforesaid penalties, the court may order the person so convicted to make restitution of the money or property so obtained. (Ord. 2010, §§1, 2.)



Sec. 30-9. Handbills - Distribution on vehicles prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver thereof, a handbill to any occupant of a vehicle willing to accept it. (Ord. 2466, §1.)



Sec. 30-10. Iceboxes, refrigerators, etc. - Abandonment.
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling or other structure under his control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container which has an airtight door or lid, snaplock or other locking device which may not be released from the inside, without first removing such door or lid, snaplock or other locking device from such icebox, refrigerator or container. (Ord. 943, §1.)



Sec. 30-11. Insufficient funds, checks or drafts - Utterance and use, prohibited.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to procure any article or thing of value or for the payment of any past due debt or other obligation of whatsoever form or nature or for any other purpose, to make, draw or utter or deliver, with the intent to defraud, any check, draft or order, for the payment of money, in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) or less, upon any bank or other depository, knowing at the time of such making, drawing, uttering or delivering, that the maker or drawer has not sufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other depository for the payment of such check, draft or order, in full, upon its presentation.

(b) A person convicted of violating the provisions of this Ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five ($25.00) dollars or more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars or by confinement in jail for a period not to exceed three (3) months, or by both such fine and confinement.

(c) For the purposes of this Ordinance, it shall be prima facie evidence of the maker or drawer's intent to defraud and of knowledge of insufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other depository, if such maker or drawer shall not have paid the drawee thereof the amount due thereon, together with all costs and protest fees, within ten (10) days after receiving notice that such check, draft or order has not been paid by the drawee. (Ord. 2026, §§ 1, 2, 3.)



Sec. 30-12. Intoxication in public; disturbance of the peace.
No person shall be in a state of intoxication in any street, alley or other public ground or place, or in any public building or business house, or shall be in a state of intoxication in any private house or private premises to the annoyance or disturbance of the peace of any person. (Ord. 2011, §1.)



Sec. 30-13. Landmarks, etc., - Removal, detaching, etc., prohibited.
No person shall intentionally remove, deface, injure or destroy any stake, monument or landmark in the city, established by legal survey. (Ord. 52, §9.)



Sec. 30-13.1. Littering prohibited.
(a) A person commits the crime of littering if he throws or places, or causes to be thrown or placed, any glass, glass bottles, wire, nails, tacks, hedge, cans, garbage, trash, refuse, or rubbish of any kind, nature or description on the right-of-way of any public road or on the banks of any stream, or on any land or water owned, operated or leased by the City of Rolla, any board, department, agency or commission thereof or on any private real property owned by another without his consent.

(b) The penalty for violation of this Ordinance is a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed three months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2717, §§1, 2.)



Sec. 30-14. Loitering on school grounds and buildings - Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter on the grounds of or within the buildings of any public or private kindergarten, grade or high school when such school is in session, and it shall be unlawful for any person so loitering to refuse to leave immediately such buildings or grounds upon request of the principal or other person in charge thereof. (Ord. 2016, § 1.)



Sec. 30-15. Loitering, prowling, peeking, etc., in and about private dwellings - Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or prowl in and about any dwelling occupied by a family or an individual in the city in the nighttime, or while so loitering and prowling around such dwelling look, peek or observe such dwelling, or the inside thereof of the occupant of such dwelling.

Dwelling, as used in this Section, means any house, room or apartment used for human habitation. (Ord. 631, §§ 1, 2.)



Sec. 30-16. Marijuana - Possession.
(a) It is unlawful for any person to have in his possession or under his control marijuana in a quantity of less than thirty-five grams.

(1) marijuana in a quantity of less than thirty-five grams, or
(2) drug paraphernalia.
(b) For the purposes of this Section, "marijuana" means all parts of the plant genus Cannabis in any species or form thereof, including, but not limited to Cannabis Sativa L., Cannabis Indica, Cannabis Americana, Cannabis, Ruderalis and Cannabis Gigantea, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. It does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake or the pound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination.

(c) For the purposes of this Section, "drug paraphernalia" means all equipment, products, substances and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance or an imitation controlled substance.

(d) Any person who violates the provisions of this Section is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as follows:

(1)By a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars;
(2) By imprisonment for a period not exceeding ninety days; or
(3) By both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1971, §3; Ord. 3582, §1)


Sec. 30-17. Marijuana - Suspension of sentence in cases of marijuana possession.
Whenever any person shall have been found guilty in the municipal court of violating any ordinance involving the possession of marijuana, the municipal court Judge may suspend sentencing pending the successful completion by the convicted person of a program of drug abuse rehabilitation and counseling, or may order such person to attend such program in lieu of or in addition to the penalty otherwise provided for the offense. (Ord. 1999, §1.)



Sec. 30-18. Minors - Contributing to the delinquency of minors; penalty provisions.
(a) It is unlawful for any person to encourage, aid or cause a child under the age of seventeen years to commit any act or engage in any conduct which would be injurious to the child's morals or health, and it is unlawful for any person to commit any act or omit the performance of any duty which contributes to, causes or tends to cause a child under the age of seventeen years to come within the provisions of subdivisions (1) or (2) of Section 211.031 Revised Statutes of Missouri.

(b) Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this Section shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by confinement in the city jail for a period of not less than ten (10) days nor more than three (3) months, or by both such fine and confinement.

(c) The court may impose conditions upon a person found guilty of violating the provisions of this Section and so long as such person complies to the satisfaction of the court, the sentence imposed may be suspended. (Ord. 2012, §§1 to 3.)



Sec. 30-19. Noise - Creating unreasonably loud, disturbing, etc., noise prohibited; exceptions; penalty for violation.
The creating of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise within the city is hereby prohibited. Noise of such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual or in disturbance of the public peace and welfare is prohibited.

There shall be excepted from the terms of this Section and Section 30-20 and the prohibitions therein contained shall not apply to or be enforced against:

(a) Any ambulance, any officer of the law while engaged in necessary public business or any vehicle of the city while engaged in necessary public business.

(b) Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets or highways by or on behalf of the city, the county or the state, during the nighttime when the public welfare and convenience renders it impracticable to perform such work during the day.

(c) The reasonable use of amplifiers in the course of public address which are noncommercial in character and when such use is outside the business district of this city. The term business district shall mean "business district" as defined in Section 30-20.

Any person violating the provisions of this Section and Section 30-20 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished according to Section 1-7 of this Code. (Ord. 1204, §§1, 3, 4; Ord. 2463, §1.)



Sec. 30-20. Same - Prohibited acts enumerated; enumeration not exclusive.
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises and constitute violations of the preceding section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:

(a) The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle for a prolonged, unnecessary and unreasonable period of time.

(b) It shall be unlawful to play or permit to be played any radio, phonograph, tape player, compact disc player, musical instrument or any similar device for producing or amplifying sound in a manner that disturbs the peace, quiet or comfort of the neighboring inhabitants

(1) Playing or permitting to be played any device described in subsection (b) between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. so that it is plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the building, structure or outdoor area in which the device is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
(2) Playing or permitting to be played any device described in subsection (b) between 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. so that it is plainly audible at a distance of one hundred (100) feet from the building, structure or outdoor area in which the device is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
(3) It shall also be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to play or permit to be played any sound producing or sound amplifying device in or on the vehicle so that is plainly audible at a distance of (50) feet from the vehicle.
(c) All items in section (b) of this Section shall not apply to any officially recognized group or organization operating from or in a structure or any outdoor area where an applicable permit has been obtained to do so from the Office of the Chief of Police.

(1) This permit shall only be valid between 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on a daily basis.
(d) Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in the vicinity, both in residential and business districts is prohibited.

(e) Keeping of any animal, bird or fowl which by causing frequent or long continued noise that shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity is prohibited.

(f) The use of the automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noises shall be prohibited.

(g) The unreasonable and unnecessary and prolonged blowing of any steam whistle shall be prohibited.

(h) To discharge into the open air the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or motor boat engine, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom, shall be prohibited.

(i) The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building in any residential district or section and the excavation of streets and highways in any residential district or section, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the city engineer, which permit shall be granted for a period not to exceed thirty days while the emergency continues. If the city engineer should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways within the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work.

(j) The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church, or court while the same are in session, which unreasonably interferes with the workings or sessions thereof or the creation or any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any hospital shall be prohibited.

(k) The creation of loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers.

(l) The use of any musical instrument, loudspeaker, or other noise-making device for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show or sale or display of merchandise or for any other purpose, in the business district or in the residential district between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. except for parades authorized by a permit from the chief of police, or, in the case of any other event held under permit granted by the chief of police. All conveyances carrying and operating such devices in a residential district in accordance herewith shall keep moving at a speed of at least eight miles per hour.

(m) The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on either moving or standing vehicles advertising, singing, or public speaking or other purposes in the business district of the city shall be prohibited except by permit.

The term "residential district" as used in this Section, shall mean any area not described as being with the business district. The business district, for the purpose of this Section and Section 30-19 shall be defined as follows: Bounded by Eleventh Street on the north, Main Street on the west, Olive Street on the east and Fifth Street on the South. (Ord. 1204, §2; Ord. 2639, §1; Ord. 3126, , §1; Ord. 3463, §1)



Sec. 30-21. Officers - Impersonation prohibited.
No person not authorized by the laws of the city shall assume or exercise any of the power conferred by this Code or other ordinance upon the city police, or shall by any means or in any manner represent himself as being or possessing the powers of a policeman. (Ord. 54, §2.)



Sec. 30-22. Same - Obstructing, resisting, assaulting, etc., prohibited.
No person shall knowingly and willfully obstruct, resist or oppose the police chief or any of his deputies, or any other city officer, in the service or execution, or in the attempt to serve or execute any writ, warrant or process of any kind, or in the discharge of any official duty.

(1) A person violates this Section if, knowing that a law enforcement officer is making an arrest, or attempting to lawfully detain or stop an individual or vehicle, or the person reasonably should know that a law enforcement officer is making an arrest or attempting to lawfully detain or lawfully stop an individual or vehicle, for the purpose of preventing the officer from effecting the arrest, stop or detention, the person:

(i) Resists the arrest, stop or detention of such person by using or threatening the use of violence or physical force or by fleeing from such officer; or
(ii) Interferes with the arrest, stop or detention of another person by using or threatening the use of violence, physical force or physical interference.
(2) This Section applies to arrests, stops or detentions with or without warrants and to arrests, stops or detentions for any crime, infraction or ordinance violation.

(3) A person is presumed to be fleeing a vehicle stop if that person continues to operate a motor vehicle after that person has seen or should have seen clearly visible emergency lights or has heard or should have heard an audible signal emanating from the law enforcement vehicle pursuing that person.

(4) It is no defense to a prosecution pursuant to subsection (1) of this Section that the law enforcement officer was acting unlawfully in making the arrest.

No person shall knowingly and willfully assault, beat or wound any officer while engaged in the service or execution or in the attempt to serve or execute any writ, warrant or process, or while in the discharge of any other official duty. (Ord. 55, §§1, 2; Ord. 3583, §1)



Sec. 30-23. Peddling on posted private residential property - Prohibited.
The practice of being in and upon posted private residential property in the City of Rolla, Missouri, by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants, and transient vendors of merchandise, not having been requested or invited so to do by the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of said private residences, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, or for the purpose of disposing of or peddling or hawking the same, is hereby declared to be a nuisance, is declared unlawful, and is hereby prohibited.

(a) "Posted" is hereby defined as the placement in a conspicuous place of a notice stating "No Soliciting", or similar language upon the premises of a private residence, which shall be prima facie evidence that the solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants, and transient vendors of merchandise have not been requested or invited to be in or upon private residential property.

(b) This Section shall not apply to the solicitation of orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise for charitable purposes.

(c) In the event that any phrase, clause or portion of this Section should be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the remainder of the section shall not be affected thereby, but shall remain in full force and effect.

(d) Any person convicted of perpetrating a nuisance, as defined in this Section shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned in the city jail for not less than ten (10) days nor more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1993, §§1 to 5.)



Sec. 30-24. Posting - Handbills and placards on public buildings, etc. - Prohibited.
No person shall stick, paste or post any bills or placards upon any public building or fence, or upon any private building, fence or other property, without the consent of the owner. (Ord. 52, §8.)



Sec. 30-25. Posting - Signs on public right of way, utility poles and street sign poles-prohibited; penalty provisions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or have placed upon any public right of way in the City of Rolla any sign, marker, other structure or edifice or unattended vehicle where the primary purpose is for advertisement upon any public right of way in the City of Rolla, Missouri; nor shall any person post any signs, bills or other plaque or advertisement upon any utility pole or public sign in the City of Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 4109 §1)

Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this Ordinance shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty-five and no/100 ($25.00) dollars nor more than two hundred and fifty dollars and no/100 ($250.00) dollars. (Ord. 2419 §§1, 2) (Ord. 4109 §1)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 30-26. Prostitution - Keeping disorderly, etc. house prohibited.
No person shall keep or maintain in the city, a house of ill fame or prostitution, or a house in which disorderly, licentious, obscene or indecent conduct or language is permitted or allowed. The fact of such language occurring in such house shall be prima facie evidence that the same is permitted or allowed. That fact of such language occurring in such house and any house above mentioned may be adjudged and declared a nuisance by the mayor. (Ord. 49, §7.)



Sec. 30-27. Same - Being a resident of or frequenting disorderly houses.
No person shall be an inmate or resident of a house of ill fame or prostitution in the city, or shall visit or frequent any such house for lewd, licentious, obscene or indecent purposes. The fact of any person being found in any such house in the nighttime between the hours of 9:00 P.M. and 5:00 A.M. shall be prima facie evidence of his visiting or frequenting the same for such purposes. (Ord. 49, §9.)



Sec. 30-28. Same - Leasing premises for a brothel, etc.
No person shall knowingly lease or let any house, hall, tenement or other place in the city, to any person to be used or kept as a brothel or house of ill fame or prostitution. (Ord. 49, §10.)



Sec. 30-29. Public address system - Term of permit.
Permits authorized by Section 30-20 shall not be issued for a period longer than three weeks. (Ord. 960, §3.)



Sec. 30-30. Same - Rules and regulations.
Every person to whom a permit, under Section 30-29 is issued, shall observe the following rules and regulations:

(a) The permittee shall not use or permit to be used a public address system between the hours of 7:00 P.M. and 8:00 A.M. without the special permission of the city council

(b) No public address system shall be operated within the distance of one block of any school during school hours and while such school is in session.

(c) Permittee shall not operate public address system at any one place, but must keep such device moving along the street and he shall not pass over or along any one street more than once an hour.

(d) Public address systems may be used in other manners than provided by this Section only when the city council shall have granted such right. (Ord. 906, §2.)



Sec. 30-31. Public grounds - Digging, removing, etc., sand, earth, etc., prohibited.
No person shall dig, remove or carry away any earth, sand, gravel or sod, from any public grounds within the city. (Ord. 52, §6.)



Sec. 30-32. Public or private property-Injuring, destroying, prohibited; reward by the city.
(a) Prohibited. No person shall willfully injure, damage, mark, deface or destroy any real or personal property belonging to the city or other governmental unit or agency, or to any private person, corporation or public utility.

(b) Reward. The City of Rolla will pay a reward of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to any person who furnishes information to city officials or proper law enforcement officers which directly leads to and results in the arrest and conviction of any person for a violation of any of the provisions of this Section. (Ord. 2025, §1.)



Sec. 30-32.1. Smoking in public buildings owned and operated by the city - Prohibited.
(a) No person shall smoke or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or match, or use any spark, flame or fire-producing device in any building owned or operated by the City of Rolla, Missouri. Smoking will not be allowed in enclosed areas used by the general public or serving as a place of work, including open office areas. Smoking shall be specifically prohibited in the following areas:

(1) All city owned buildings.
(2) Any portion of the Rolla Public Library.
(3) Any portion of the Rolla Municipal Utility Building.
(4) All open space that is accessed by the public.
(b) Placards or signs reading "Smoking Prohibited by Law" shall be posted in all city owned or operated buildings.

(c) The prohibition of smoking shall not apply to those areas that are so designated as smoking areas by placard or sign.

(d) Violation of this Ordinance shall be deemed as a misdemeanor offense. (Ord. 2669, §§1-4.)



Sec. 30-33. Stealing money or personal property.
A person commits the offense of stealing if he appropriates property or services of another with the purpose to deprive him thereof, either without his consent or by means of deceit or coercion. (Ord. 2208, §1.)



Sec. 30-34. Street signs - Destruction, removal or possession.
(a) Possession. No person may possess any sign, guide board, mile post, signal marker of the type erected by the city for the warning, instruction, or information of the public unless he can demonstrate that he obtained same in a legal manner. Possession of such a sign, guide board, mile post, signal or marker creates a rebuttable presumption of illegal possession. In this Section, "possession" means the presence of such a sign, guide board, miles post, signal or marker on premises owned or controlled by the person, including but not limited to a rented apartment, rented room, or dormitory room.

(b) Destruction or removal. No person shall injure, deface, or remove any sign, guide board, mile post, signal or marker of the type erected by the city.

(c) Penalties. A violation of this Ordinance shall be punished as per the general penalty provisions of Section 1-7 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri. In addition, the court may order that any violator of this Ordinance shall restore or replace any such damaged sign, guide board, mile post, signal or marker, or that he pay the cost thereof. (Ord. 2262, §§1 to 3.)



Sec. 30-35. Telephones - Automatic dialing alarm devices connected to emergency lines - Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect an automatic dialing alarm device to a 911 emergency telephone line after the effective date of this Ordinance. The term "automatic dialing alarm device" refers to an alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of the emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect. (Ord. 2372, § 1; Ord. 2520, §1.)



Sec. 30-36. Trespass on real estate.
No person shall, within the city limits of Rolla, willfully and without right enter upon the premises of another. (Ord. 2002, §1.)



Sec. 30-37. Vagrancy.
(Ord. 70, §1) (Repealed by Ord. 3877, §1)



Sec. 30-38. Vehicles - Using to endanger, etc., others prohibited.
No person shall run upon any street, alley, or common of the city, in common use, any vehicle, so as to interrupt or endanger persons in such street, alley or common. (Ord. 51, §2.)



Sec. 30-39. Soliciting on public streets prohibited.
There shall be no solicitation on any public street or highway in the City of Rolla. (Ord. 2885, §1)



Sec. 30-40. Massage establishments, defined; operating requirements.
(Ord. 3030, §1) (Repealed by Ord. 3658, §1)



Sec. 30-41. License to be issued, when.
(Ord. 3030, §1) (Repealed by Ord. 3658, §1)



Sec. 30-42. Acts prohibited.
(Ord. 3030, §1) (Repealed by Ord. 3658, §1)



Sec. 30-43. Applicability to existing massagists.
(Ord. 3030, §1) (Repealed by Ord. 3658, §1)



Sec. 30-44. Massage establishment business license, requirements.
(Ord. 3030, §1) (Repealed by Ord. 3658, §1)



Sec. 30-45. Issuance of permit for a massage establishment.
(Ord. 3030, §1) (Repealed by Ord. 3658, §1)



Sec. 30-46. Sale of cigarettes and tobacco products to minors prohibited.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person in the City of Rolla to sell or furnish cigarettes, cigarette wrappers, chewing tobacco, cigars, tobacco or other tobacco products to a minor. For purposes of this ordinance. a minor shall be deemed to be a person under eighteen (18) years of age.

(b) Except as otherwise provided under this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, smokeless tobacco or tobacco products that are suitable for dipping or chewing, through a vending machine. "Vending machine. as used in this section, means any mechanical, electric or electronic self?service device which, upon the insertion of money, tokens or other form of payment, dispenses tobacco products; except that vending machines located in facilities where no person younger than eighteen (18) years of age is present, or permitted to enter, at any time, are permitted. Each day a vending machine is in place contrary to this ordinance shall constitute a separate violation.

(c) Any person found guilty of violating this ordinance shall be penalized in accordance with Section 1?7 of the Rolla City Code. (Ord. 3250, §§1-3)



Sec. 30-47. Possession of Synthetic Cannabinoids.
(a) Definitions.

1. “Person” means an individual, corporation, partnership, wholesaler, retailer or any licensed or unlicensed business.
2. “Synthetic Cannabinoid” means any substance, however described or marketed, which includes any one or more of the following synthetic compounds:
i. Cannabicyclohexanol [CP 47,497 dimethyloctyl homologue, (C8)-CP 47,497], systematic (IUPAC) name: -[1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methylnonan-2-yl)phenol.
ii. HU-210, systematic (IUPAC) name: (6aR,10aR)- 9-(Hydroxymethyl)- 6,6-dimethyl- 3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)- 6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen- 1-ol.
iii. Dexanabinol (HU-211) (a synthetic cannabinoid derivative), systematic (IUPAC) name: (6aS, 10aS)-9-(Hydroxymethyl)- 6,6-dimethyl- 3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-ol.
iv. JWH-018, (1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole), systematic (IUPAC) name: Naphthalen-1-yl(1-pentylindol-3-yl)methanone.
v. JWH-073, systematic (IUPAC) name: naphthalene-1-yl-(1-butylindol-3-yl)methanone.
3. “IUPAC” means the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry or its successor.
(b) Possession or Control of Synthetic Cannabinoids Unlawful. It is unlawful for any person to have in his/her/its possession or under his/her/its control a synthetic cannabinoid in any form. For purposes of this Section, any offense involving the possession or control of more than thirty-five (35) grams of a synthetic cannabinoid as defined and described in Sections 195.202.017 and 195.202, RSMo, shall not be cognizable in the Rolla Municipal Court, but rather shall be referred to the County Prosecutor for review as a violation of Section 195.202.2, RSMo.

(c) Penalty, Any person who violating the provisions of this Section shall be punished:

i. By a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00); or
ii. By imprisonment for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days; or
iii. By both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 3987)

 


Sec. 30-48.  Hand and mechanical signals, violations, penalty.

No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of or turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety and then only after the giving of an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein.

An operator or driver when stopping, or when checking the speed of the operator's vehicle, if the movement of other vehicles may reasonably be affected by such checking of speed, shall extend such operator's arm at an angle below horizontal so that the same may be seen in the rear of the vehicle;

An operator or driver intending to turn the operator's vehicle to the right shall extend such operator's arm at an angle above horizontal so that the same may be seen in front of and in the rear of the vehicle, and shall slow down and approach the intersecting highway as near as practicable to the right side of the highway along which such operator is proceeding before turning;

An operator or driver intending to turn the operator's vehicle to the left shall extend such operator's arm in a horizontal position so that the same may be seen in the rear of the vehicle, and shall slow down and approach the intersecting highway so that the left side of the vehicle shall be as near as practicable to the center line of the highway along which the operator is proceeding before turning;

The signals herein required shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by a signal light or signal device in good mechanical condition of a type approved by the state highway patrol; however, when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded that a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear of such vehicle then such signals shall be given by such light or device.  A vehicle shall be considered as so constructed or loaded that a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab or load exceeds twenty-four inches, or when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or load thereon exceeds fourteen feet, which limit of fourteen feet shall apply to single vehicles or combinations of vehicles. 
The provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to any trailer which does not interfere with a clear view of the hand signals of the operator or of the signaling device upon the vehicle pulling such trailer; provided further that the provisions of this section as far as mechanical devices on vehicles so constructed that a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear of such vehicle as above provided shall only be applicable to new vehicles registered within this state after the first day of January, 1954. (Ord. 4357, §1)

Secs. 30-49 to 30-50. Reserved.

Chapter 31 - Parks and Recreation
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter


Chapter Contents
ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL
§ 31-1.       Firearms and fireworks - Possession in city parks prohibited.
§ 31-2.       Fishing regulations at Schuman Park Lake.
§ 31-3.       Loitering, etc., in public parks or playgrounds - Prohibited.
§ 31-4.       Swimming and boating in park impoundments - Prohibited.
§ 31-5.       All dedicated but, undeveloped park land uses; bird sanctuaries, maintenance.
§§ 31-6 to 31-7.  Reserved.
ARTICLE II.  CITY DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION
§ 31-8.       Abolishment of city park board.
§ 31-9.       Department established; position of parks and recreation director - Created.
§ 31-10.     Director of parks and recreation - Duties.
§§ 31-11 to 31-15.  Reserved.
ARTICLE III.  TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES IN CITY PARKS
§ 31-16.     Operation of motor vehicles in city parks.
§ 31-17.     Parking of motor vehicles in city parks.
§§ 31-18 to 31-22.  Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.  PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSIONS
DIVISION I. PARKS ADVISORY COMMISSION
§ 31-23.     Duties.
§ 31-24.     Members.
§ 31-25.     Officers.
§ 31-26.     Meetings.
§ 31-27.     Ordinances pertaining to the Parks and Recreation activities.
§ 31-28.     Limitations.
§§ 31-29 to 31-30.  Reserved.
DIVISION II. HEALTH & RECREATION CENTER BOARD
§ 31-31.     Duties.
§ 31-32.     Members.
§ 31-33.     Officers.
§ 31-34.     Meetings.
§ 31-35.     Reserved.
ARTICLE VI - CONDUCT REGULATIONS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 31-36.     Definitions.
§ 31-37.     Enforcement.
§§ 31-38 to 31-42.  Reserved.
DIVISION 2.  PROHIBITED ACTS RELATING TO RECREATION FACILITIES
§ 31-43.     General disfiguration and removal.
§ 31-44.     Restrooms and washrooms.
§§ 31-45 to 31-48.  Reserved.
DIVISION 3.  BEHAVIOR
§ 31-49.     Interference with users.
§ 31-50.     Loitering, disorderly conduct.
§§ 31-51 to 31-56.  Reserved.
DIVISION 4.  MERCHANDISING, ADVERTISING AND SIGNS
§ 31-57.     Advertising generally.
§ 31-58.     Vending and peddling.
§ 31-59.     Posting signs.
§§ 31-60 to 31-64.  Reserved.
DIVISION 5.  OPERATING POLICIES
§ 31-65.     Hours of operation.
§ 31-66.     Closed areas.
§ 31-67.     Lost and found articles.
§ 31-68.     Permit.
§§ 31-69 to 31-72.  Reserved.
(Return to Contents)

ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL
Sec. 31-1.  Firearms and fireworks - Possession in city parks prohibited.
No person except all duly authorized law enforcement personnel shall have in his possession any firearms while on the premises of any city park.  (Ord. 1438, §1; Ord. 2866, §2; Ord. 2892, §2; Ord. 4035, §1)

It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession or cause to discharge any fireworks without first obtaining the written permission from the Director of the parks and recreation department. "Fireworks" shall be defined as any firecracker, potash or sulphur tablet or pellet, or any device for exploding any tablet or pellet, or any torpedo, aerial salute or aerial reporting shell, or any display bomb shall or any other article commonly known as fireworks which give off a loud report or a display of smoke or light which can be seen outside the premises of the park.  (Ord. 2944, §1; Ord. 3190, §2; Ord. 4035, §1)

This ordinance shall be in full force and effect after July 8, 1997.  (Ord. 3190, §3; Ord. 4035, §1)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 31-2.  Fishing regulations at Schuman Park Lake.
That the following regulations shall apply to the taking of fish and frogs from Schuman Park Lake in the City of Rolla, Missouri:

Fishing is permitted from January 1st to December 31st.  Only poles or rods with attached lines may be used and not more than three (3) poles or rods may be used by one (1) person.  Seining or trapping live bait is prohibited. (Ord. 4035, §2)

Daily possession limits:  Black Bass, six (6); channel catfish, four (4); all other fish, statewide limits but not to exceed twenty (20) in the aggregate.  The Black Bass protected length limit, range or slot is 12-15 inches.  All Black Bass greater than or equal to twelve (12) inches and less than fifteen (15) inches shall be released unharmed immediately.  (Ord. 3118, §1; Ord. 4035, §2)

Bullfrogs and green frogs may be taken by pole and line, gig, longbow, hand or hand net during the bullfrog season.  (Ord. 2456, §1; Ord. 4035, §2)
CROSS REFERENCE: Flood control, Ch. 15; planning and zoning, Ch. 42; subdivisions, Ch. 42-Art. II.

STATE LAW REFERENCES: Parks in third class cities, RSMo. §§90.500 to 90.570.

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 31-3. Loitering, etc., in public parks or playgrounds - Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or loiter, idle, wander, stroll, play or remain in any city park or playground during the hours between 12:00 midnight and sunrise.  (Ord. 1142, §1; Ord. 4035, §3)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 31-4.  Swimming and boating in park impoundments - Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to swim or operate a boat in any city park's pond, lake or impoundment located within the City of Rolla, Missouri, without first obtaining the written permit from the Director of the parks and recreation department. (Ord. 4035, §4)

Any person who is found guilty of violating this Ordinance shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred and no/100 ($500.00) dollars or imprisonment in jail for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days or by both fine and imprisonment.  (Ord. 2377, §§1, 2; Ord. 4035, §4)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 31-5. All dedicated but, undeveloped park land uses; bird sanctuaries, maintenance.
All undeveloped city park land under control of the City of Rolla, Missouri, be and the same is hereby designated as Bird Sanctuaries, Park areas are to remain park land and open to the public at all times.  No mowing or maintenance shall be done in the designated areas.  Areas shall lose sanctuary status at such time that the City of Rolla, Missouri, is desirous of improving park areas for intensive public use.

Sanctuaries thus established shall be a joint activity of the Ozark Rivers Audubon Society and the Gardeners of the Ozark Hills, in cooperation with other recognized garden clubs and under the general guidance of the national Audubon Society and the National Council of State Garden Clubs, Inc.

Further, standard signs provided by the Audubon Society and the Gardeners of the Ozark Hills proclaiming the areas as "Bird Sanctuaries" shall be permitted to be erected by the Audubon Society and the Gardeners of the Ozark Hills at designated sites as an appeal and reminder to tourist and native alike.

It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob their nests.  Provided, however, if Starlings, Grackles or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality, so that, in the opinion of the proper health authorities, City of Rolla, to be a nuisance or menace to health, then said birds may be destroyed in such numbers and manner as is deemed advisable under supervision of the Chief of Police, City of Rolla, Missouri. Anyone violating the provisions of this Ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not more than twenty-five ($25.00) or imprisonment not to exceed five (5) days.  (Ord. 2907, §1; Ord. 4035, §5)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 31-6 to 31-7.  Reserved.
(Return to Contents)

ARTICLE II - CITY DEPARTMENT
Sec. 31-8.  Abolishment of city park board.
Ordinance no. 908 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, be and the same is hereby repealed, thus abolishing the city park board.  The present treasurer of said park board shall relinquish all funds of said board now within his possession or control to the city clerk of the City of Rolla, Missouri.  Such funds shall then be kept separate and apart from all other funds of the city, as per section 90.010 RSMo, 1978.  (Ord. 2286, §1; Ord. 4035, §8)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 31-9.  Department established; position of parks and recreation director - Created.
There is hereby created within the city the Department of Parks and Recreation, which shall be headed by a Director of Parks and Recreation.  (Ord. 2286, §2; Ord. 4035, §9)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 31-10.  Director of parks and recreation - Duties.
The duties of said Director of parks and recreation shall include, but not be limited to, the following: The planning of recreation programs; the development of park-related maintenance programs; the direct supervision of work supervisors; the management of all related programs; budget development and administration; care of the, health and recreation center and outdoor pool of the City of Rolla; control and management of the Rolla Cemetery; the promulgation of rules pertaining to the use of the cemetery, performance of such duties as may have been heretofore borne by the Rolla Cemetery Association Board.  (Ord. 2286, §3; Ord. 2790, §12; Ord. 4035, §10)

(Return to Contents)

Secs. 31-11 to 31-15.  Reserved.
(Return to Contents)

ARTICLE III - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES IN CITY PARKS
Sec. 31-16.  Operation of motor vehicles in city parks.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle in any city park except in and upon established streets and driveways in such city park.  (Ord. 1437, §1; Ord. 4035, §16)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 31-17.  Parking of motor vehicles in city parks.
No motor vehicle shall be parked for a period of time longer than twelve hours in any city park.  (Ord. 1685, §1; Ord. 4035, §17)

(Return to Contents)

Secs. 31-18 to 31-22.  Reserved.
(Return to Contents)

ARTICLE IV - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSIONS
DIVISION I. PARKS ADVISORY COMMISSION
Sec. 31-23.  Duties.
There is hereby established the Parks Advisory Commission of the City of Rolla (also known as the Parks Commission).
     
The duties of the Parks Commission shall include, but are not limited to, the following:

To ensure the economic viability of the Parks facilities by providing direct input to the management team on such matters as capital planning, program development, outdoor recreation programs, marketing and community relations.

Function as an interface between the Parks and Recreation Director, Parks Staff and the community.

Establish and maintain a good working relationship with governmental entities, residents and civic organization in our community which are, or which would like to be, active in Parks and Recreation.

Provide input into the City's Budget Plan for the Parks Fund including policies, cost of operations, fees, and charges.  The Commission shall review and comment on the draft Parks Fund budget prepared by the Parks Director no less than sixty (60) days prior to delivery to the Rolla City Council in August of each budget cycle.

To advise the City Administration and Parks staff on maximizing usage of park facilities while recovering all reasonable operation costs. Administration shall, not less often than annually and more often as the Council shall direct, report to the Council the number of users of outdoor facilities and programs, revenues generated from user fees and the schedule of fees for use thereof. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Council, by resolution, from changing the schedule of user fees.

The Commission shall provide at least annually input on the performance of the Director as it relates to the parks system.  The Commission shall assist the Director and City Administrator in preparing annual goals and objectives.  A Commission representative should be included in the hiring of the Director. (Ord. 3366, §1; Ord. 3489, §1; Ord. 4035, §23; Ord. 4258, §1)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 31-24. Members.
Parks Commission Members

The Parks Commission shall consist of five (5) voting members representing various park user groups (i.e. naturalist, youth sports, sports leagues, ecologist, and business community). The members shall serve for a term of (3) three years or until their successors are appointed and confirmed as set forth in this section. The first appointees upon formation shall be appointed for staggered terms, one (1) member being appointed for a one-year term, two (2) members being appointed for a two-year term, and two (2) members being appointed for a three-year term.  (Ord. 3762, §1; Ord. 4035, §24; Ord. 4258, §1)

The Mayor, City Administrator, and the Parks and Recreation Director may act as ex officio, non-voting members of the Parks Commission. Members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council. The Parks and Recreation Director shall transmit no less than quarterly to the Advisory Committee and City Council all pertinent information regarding park operations and minutes of Commission meetings.

Only the five (5) voting members of the Parks Commission shall cast votes. A quorum is defined as a majority of the voting membership.

The anniversary date for appointment or reappointment of expiring Parks Commission terms shall be April 1 of the appropriate year. An annual meeting of the Parks Commission shall be held in the month of April, and the officers of the Parks Commission shall be elected at that meeting.

The failure to supportthe Parks Commission through active participation at its meetings may be cause for removal. (Active participation is defined as attending all scheduled meetings with an allowance of two (2) meetings missed per year but only for extenuating circumstances). Members are encouraged to participate in special events throughout the park system. The Chairman shall contact those missing two (2) scheduled meetings. At the next meeting, the Chairman shall report to the Parks Commission and may recommend to the Mayor and City Council removal from the Parks Commission of such a member.

When a vacancy occurs, the Parks and Recreation Director shall notify the Mayor that a vacancy does exist. In case of a vacancy due to death, resignation or disqualification, the unexpired term shall be filled by an appointment by the Mayor with consent of the City Council. (Ord. 3366, §2; Ord. 3447, §2; Ord. 3593, §1; Ord. 4035, §24; Ord. 4258, §1)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 31-25.  Officers.
      The Parks Commission shall elect its own officers in accordance with the following guidelines:

Officers elected shall include:

Chairman: Duties are to preside at all meetings of the Commission. He or she shall be a member Ex-Officio of all Standing and Special Committees. In case a vacancy occurs in the office of the Chairman, the Vice-Chairman shall become Chairman and a new Vice-Chairman shall be elected.

Vice-Chairman: The Vice-Chairman shall fulfill the duties of the Chairman when the latter, for any reason, is unable to act in his/her capacity as Chairman.

Secretary: The Secretary shall prepare the records of all scheduled Parks Commission meetings. The secretary shall record attendance, service hours, and voting and election results. City personnel shall assist the secretary in this task as requested.

The Parks Commission may form subcommittees for designated periods of time to work on specific projects. Such subcommittees shall report their findings and recommendations to the Parks Commission, which shall make any final recommendation to the Parks and Recreation Director. Each said subcommittee shall be dissolved when work on the assigned project is determined to be completed by the Parks Commission. (Ord. 3366, §3; Ord. 3593, §1; Ord. 4035, §25; Ord. 4258, §1)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 31-26.  Meetings.
The regular meetings of the Parks Commission shall be held in the evening of the third Wednesday of first month of each quarter (January, April, July, and October) at a designated time and date, or special meetings on the call of the Chairman. The regular meeting place shall be at the Rolla Recreation Center. A notice and tentative agenda of all meetings must be posted on the Public Notice Bulletin Board at City Hall and at the Recreation Center. All meetings are open to the public. (Ord. 3366, §4; Ord. 3593, §1; Ord. 4035, §26; Ord. 4258, §1)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 31-27. Ordinances pertaining to the Parks and Recreation activities.
No ordinance pertaining to the Outdoor Aquatic Center or parks system shall be considered by the City Council without first referring same to the Parks Commission and receiving its recommendation with reference thereto; provided, however, that if no recommendation is received from the Commission within a period of thirty (30) days after the matter is referred to the Commission, then the City Council may take action without such recommendation. (Ord. 3593, §1; Ord. 4035, §27; Ord. 4258, §1)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 31-28.   Limitations.
The Parks Commission shall be a recommending body only and shall make its recommendations to the Parks and Recreation Director who in turn report recommendations to the City Council for the operation and maintenance of the park and outdoor recreational system consisting of parks and park amenities, open spaces, playgrounds, the outdoor pool, gardens and other recreational areas owned or used by the City for its final determination as to what action should be taken. The City Council may from time to time delegate certain authority and responsibilities to the Parks Commission as deemed necessary and appropriate. (Ord. 4035, §28; Ord. 4258, §1)

(Return to Contents)

Secs. 31-29 to 31-30.  Reserved.
(Return to Contents)

ARTICLE IV - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSIONS
DIVISION II. HEALTH & RECREATION CENTER BOARD
Sec. 31-31.  Duties.

There is hereby established the Health and Recreation Center Board of the City of Rolla, hereinafter referred to as "Board."

      The duties of the Board shall include, but are not limited to, the following:

To ensure the fiscal sustainability of the Health and Recreation Center by providing direct input to the management team on such matters as marketing and public relations, health and fitness management, and business management and accounting.

As a publicly funded enterprise, the Centre should be a leader in community health and wellness.  The Board should assist the Director in researching and implementing best management practices for the health, fitness and recreation industry.

Function as an interface between the Parks and Recreation staff and the community.

Establish, leverage, and maintain good working partnerships with other governmental entities, health institutions, and civic organizations in promoting community health and wellness.

Provide input into the City's Budget Plan for the Recreation Center Fund including cost of operations, fees, and charges.  The Board shall review and comment on the draft Recreation Center Fund budget prepared by the Parks Director no less than sixty (60) days prior to delivery to the Rolla City Council in August of each budget cycle. 

To advise the City Administration and Parks staff on maximizing usage of the Rec Center while recovering all reasonable operation costs.  (The Centre shall strive to recover all operating costs from membership and program fees).  Administration shall, not less often than annually and more often as the Council shall direct, report to the Council the number of users of facilities and programs, revenues generated from user fees as well as projected use of the facilities for the coming year and the schedule of fees for use thereof.

The Board shall provide at least annually input on the performance of the Director as it relates to the facility.  The Board shall assist the Director and City Administrator in preparing annual goals and objectives.  A Board representative should be included in the hiring of the Director. (Ord. 4258, §1)

(Return to Contents)


Sec. 31-32. Members.

Health and Recreation Center Board Members

The Parks and Recreation Commission shall consist of five (5) voting members representing various business principles nominated by the Mayor and approved by the City Council.  The members shall serve for a term of (3) three years or until their successors are appointed and confirmed as set forth in this section; provided, however, that the first appointees shall be appointed for staggered terms, one (1) member being appointed for a one-year term, two (2) members being appointed for a two-year term, and two (2) members being appointed for a three-year term. 

The Mayor, City Administrator, and the Parks & Recreation Director may act as ex officio, non-voting members of the Board.  Members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council.  The Parks and Recreation Director shall transmit monthly to the Advisory Committee all pertinent information as determined by the Board and City Administrator and submit monthly a summary report to the City Council.

Only the five (5) voting members of the Board shall cast votes.  A quorum is defined as a majority of the voting membership.

The anniversary date for appointment or reappointment of expiring Board members shall be April 1 of the appropriate year.  An annual meeting of the Board shall be held in the month of April, and the officers of the Board shall be elected at that meeting.

The failure to support the Board   through active participation at its meetings may be cause for removal.  (Active participation is defined as attending all scheduled meetings with an allowance of three (3) meetings missed per year but only for extenuating circumstances).  Members are encouraged to participate in special events.  The Chairman shall contact those missing three (3) scheduled meetings.  At the next meeting, the Chairman shall report to the Board and may recommend to the Mayor and City Council removal from the Board of such a member.

When a vacancy occurs, the Board shall notify the Mayor that a vacancy does indeed exist.  In case of a vacancy due to death, resignation or disqualification of one or more of the members, the unexpired term shall be filled by an appointment by the Mayor with consent of the City Council. (Ord. 4258, §1)

(Return to Contents)


Sec. 31-33.  Officers.

The Board shall elect its own officers in accordance with the following guidelines:
Officers elected shall include:

Chair: Duties are to preside at all meetings of the Board.  He or she shall be a member Ex-Officio of all Standing and Special Committees.  The Chairman may submit to the City a written report reviewing the Board activities of the past year and recommending future activities.  In case a vacancy occurs in the office of the Chairman, the Vice-Chairman shall become Chairman and a new Vice-Chairman shall be elected.

Vice-Chairman: The Vice-Chairman shall fulfill the duties of the Chairman when the latter, for any reason, is unable to act in his/her capacity as Chairman.

Secretary: The Secretary shall prepare the records of all scheduled Parks and Recreation Commission meetings.  The secretary shall record attendance, service hours, and voting and election results.  The City shall assist the secretary in this task.

The Board may form subcommittees for designated periods of time to work on specific projects.  Such subcommittees shall report their findings and recommendations to the Board, which shall make any final written report and recommendation to the Parks and Recreation Director.  Each said subcommittee shall be dissolved when work on the assigned project is determined to be completed by the Board. (Ord. 4258, §1)
(Return to Contents)


Sec. 31-34.  Meetings.

      The regular meetings of the Board shall be held the third Wednesday of each month at 6:30 p.m., or other so designated time, date or place, or special meetings on the call of the Chairman.  The regular meeting place shall be at the Health and Recreation Center.  A notice and tentative agenda of all meetings must be posted on the Public Notice Bulletin Board at City Hall and at the Health and Recreation Center when the meeting is held elsewhere.  All meetings are open to the public. (Ord. 4258, §1)

(Return to Contents)


Sec. 31-35.  Reserved. 

(Return to Contents)

ARTICLE VI - CONDUCT REGULATIONS
DIVISION 1 - GENERALLY
Sec. 31-36.  Definitions.
For the purposes of this Article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:

Director, A person immediately in charge of facility and activities, and to whom all attendants of such area are responsible.

Facility. A recreation center or any other area in the city, owned or used by the City, and devoted to active or passive recreation.  (Ord. 3593, §1; Ord. 4035, §36)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 31-37.  Enforcement.
Officials. The Director and attendants shall diligently enforce the provisions of this article.

Ejectment. The Director and any attendant shall have the authority to eject from the facility any person acting in violation of this article.

Seizure of property. The Director and any attendant shall have the authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing or device in the facility, or used, in violation of this article.  Items will be presented to police/parent/guardian for disposition of items in a manner determined by the Director.

Resistance.  In the event of resistance to action intended to correct a violation of this chapter, either physical or otherwise, the Director or any attendant shall refer the violation to the police department.

Penalties for violation.  Any person violating the provisions of any section of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances, except in the event the person violating the provisions of this chapter is, by reason of age, not subject to the jurisdiction of the municipal court of the city. (Ord. 3593, §1; Ord. 4035, §37)
(Return to Contents)

Secs. 31-38 to 31-42.  Reserved.
(Return to Contents)

DIVISION 2 - PROHIBITED ACTS RELATING TO RECREATION FACILITIES
Sec. 31-43. General disfiguration and removal.
It shall be unlawful for any person in a facility to mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove, any building; tables; benches; fireplaces; railings; paving or paving material; water lines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof; signs, notices or placards, whether temporary or permanent; monuments; stakes; posts; or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or facility property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal. (Ord. 3593, §1; Ord. 4035, §43)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 31-44. Restrooms and washrooms.
It shall be unlawful for any person in a facility to fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition. No person over the age of four (4) years shall use the restrooms and washrooms designated for the opposite sex. (Ord. 3593, §1; Ord. 4035, §44)

(Return to Contents)

Secs. 31-45 to 31-48.  Reserved.
(Return to Contents)

DIVISION 3.  BEHAVIOR
Sec. 31-49. Interference with users.
It shall be unlawful for any person in a facility to disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying any area, or participating in any activity. (Ord. 3593, §1; Ord. 4035, §49)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 31-50. Loitering, disorderly conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any person in a facility to sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats, or benches, or other areas; or to engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language; or to engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the public peace. (Ord. 3593, §1; Ord. 4035, §50)

(Return to Contents)

Secs. 31-51 to 31-56.  Reserved.
(Return to Contents)

DIVISION 4 - MERCHANDISING, ADVERTISING AND SIGNS*
Sec. 31-57. Advertising generally.
It shall be unlawful for any person in a facility to announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way to any article or service for sale or hire. (Ord. 3593, §1; Ord. 4035, §57)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 31-58.  Vending and peddling.
It shall be unlawful for any person in a facility to expose or offer for sale any article, thing or service, or to station or place any stand, cart, or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing. An exception is made as to any regularly licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority and regulation of the Director. (Ord. 3593, §1; Ord. 4035, §58)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 31-59. Posting signs.
It shall be unlawful for any person in a facility to paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatever, or to erect or cause to be erected any sign whatsoever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a facility. (Ord. 3593, §1; Ord. 4035, §59)

(Return to Contents)

Secs. 31-60 to 31-64.  Reserved.
(Return to Contents)

DIVISION 5 - OPERATING POLICIES
Sec. 31-65.  Hours of operation.
Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, the Health and Recreation Center shall be open to the public every day of the year during designated hours, except New Year’s Day, Easter, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving, Christmas, and Preventative Maintenance. The opening and closing hours for each individual facility shall be posted therein for public information. (Ord. 3593, §1; Ord. 4035, §65)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 31-66.  Closed areas.
Any section or part of any facility may be declared closed to the public by the Director at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals (daily or otherwise) and either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the director shall find reasonably necessary. (Ord. 3593, §1; Ord. 4035, §66 )

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 31-67.  Lost and found articles.
The finding of lost articles by attendants shall be reported to the Director, who shall make every reasonable effort to locate the owners. Items left for longer than 90 days will be disposed. The director shall also make every reasonable effort to find articles reported as lost. (Ord. 3593, §1; Ord. 4035, §67)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 31-68. Permit.
(a) Required. A permit shall be obtained from the Director before participating in any special use or activity in the Park system. A list of such uses and activities shall be kept on file in the Parks and Recreation office.

(b) Application. A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an application with the director or his/her designee.

The application shall state:

The name and address of the applicant.
The name and address of the person sponsoring the activity, if any.
The day and hours for which the permit is desired.
The facility or portion thereof for which such permit is desired.
An estimate of the anticipated attendance.
Any other information, which the Director shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued hereunder.
(c) Standards for issuance. The Director shall issue a permit hereunder when he finds:

That the proposed activity or use of the facility will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the facility.
That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation.
That the proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
That the proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or burdensome expense or police operation by city.
That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the day and hour required in the application.
(d) Appeal. Within five (5) days after receipt of an application, the Director shall apprise an applicant, in writing, of his reasons for refusing a permit, and any aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal, in writing, within five (5) days to the City Administrator, who shall consider the application under the standards set forth in subsection (c) hereof, and sustain or overrule the Director's decision within five (5) days. The decision of the City Administrator shall be final.

(e) Effect of permit. A permittee shall be bound by all facility rules and regulations and all applicable ordinances as fully as though the same were inserted in said permits.

(f) Liability of permittee. The person to whom a permit is issued shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whatever by reason of the negligence of the person to whom such permit shall have been issued.

(g)Revocation. The Director shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance, or upon good cause shown. (Ord. 3593, §1; Ord. 4035, §66

(Return to Contents)

Secs. 31-69 to 31-72.  Reserved.
CROSS REFERENCE: Licenses, Ch. 25.

Chapter 32 - Personnel
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter


Chapter Contents:
Article I - In General
§ 32-1. Adoption of personnel system and personnel rules and regulations.
§ 32-2. Appointments and promotions on merit.
§ 32-3. Personnel system shall be consistent with state and federal laws and local ordinances.
§ 32-4. Personnel rules and regulations may be amended by council.
§ 32-5. Amendments to ordinance - Permitted.
§ 32-6. Substance abuse policy.
§§ 32-7 to 32-10. Reserved.

Sec. 32-1. Adoption of personnel system and personnel rules and regulations.
That Section 32-1, Exhibit A is hereby repealed and a new Section 32-1, Exhibit A is enacted in lieu thereof.

This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after October 1, 2018.
(Ord. 2205, §1; Ord. 2759, §1; Ord. 2819, §§1-2; Ord. 2827, §1; Ord. 2859; Ord. 2882; Ord. 2899; Ord. 2953; Ord. 2975, §2; Ord. 2994, §2; Ord. 3035, §1; Ord. 3062, Ord. 3062, §1; Ord. 3063, §2; Ord. 3068; Ord. 3069; Ord. 3099; Ord. 3113; Ord. 3120; Ord. 3130; Ord. 3137; Ord. 3144; Ord. 3156; Ord. 3157; Ord. 3158; Ord. 3162; Ord. 3165; Ord. 3473; Ord. 3801; Ord. 4441)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 32-2. Appointments and promotions on merit.
The personnel system shall provide that all appointments and promotions of city officers and employees shall be made solely on the basis of merit and fitness. (Ord. 2205, §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 32-3. State and federal laws and local ordinances.
The personnel system and appropriate rules and regulations shall be consistent with all applicable state and federal laws and local ordinances. (Ord. 2205, §3.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 32-4. Amendment procedure.
The personnel rules and regulations may be modified or amended by ordinance. (Ord. 2205, §4; Ord. 3062, §2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 32-5. Amendments to ordinances - Permitted.
This Ordinance shall not preclude the passage of any other ordinances deemed necessary and appropriate to provide for an efficient personnel system. (Ord. 2205, §5.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 32-6. Substance abuse policy.
That the Substance Abuse Policy for the City of Rolla, Missouri approved by the city council on October 2, 1989, and designated as Ordinance No. 2707 be amended by exchanging the original policy for the following amended version - See attachment to Ord. 2710 "Amended Substance Abuse Policy for Rolla, Missouri". (Ord. 2707, §1; 2710, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 32-7 to 32-10. Reserved.

Chapter 33 - Police
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter


Chapter Contents:
Article I - Police Department
§ 33-1. Merit system established.
§ 33-2. Composition.
§ 33-3. Appointing authority.
§ 33-4. Qualifications.
§ 33-5. Chief of police - Appointment; term of office.
§ 33-6. Same - Line of authority.
§ 33-7. Powers of police generally.
§ 33-8. Handling intoxicated persons - Authority of police officers.
§ 33-9. Duties of police generally.
§ 33-10. Interrogation of members of the armed forces.
§ 33-11. Emergencies outside city - Police response.
§ 33-12. Use of excess force during nonviolent civil rights demonstrations is prohibited.
§ 33-13. Civil and criminal penalties for violating Section 33-12.
§§ 33-14 to 33-20. Reserved.


Article II - Police Personnel Board
§ 33-21. Police personnel board - Creation; composition; terms of office; qualifications generally.
§ 33-22. Same - Meetings; organization.
§ 33-23. Same - Examination for appointments.
§§ 33-24 to 33-28. Reserved.


Article III - Suspension, Demotion, Dismissal
§ 33-29 Suspension.
§ 33-30 Right of appeal.
§ 33-31 to 33-35. Reserved.


Article IV - Hearings
§ 33-36 Investigation and hearing by police personnel board; report of decision to city council; rights of disciplined officer.
§§ 33-37 to 33-41 Reserved.


Article V - Police Reserve Force
§ 33-42 Established.
§ 33-43 Number of members.
§ 33-44 Appointment; compensation.
§ 33-45 Qualifications.
§ 33-46 Supervision.
§ 33-47 Powers; duties.
§§ 33-48 to 33-53 Reserved.


Article VI - Pawnbrokers
§ 33-54.     Definitions
§ 33-55.     Business operating as Pawn Shop, Second Hand Dealer, Scrap Metal Dealer, or Precious Metals Business or Dealer.
§ 33-56.     Receipt for pledged property.
§ 33-57.     Contents and holding period for items covered under this ordinance.
§ 33-58.     Turn over records to Rolla Police Department.
§ 33-59.     On-line reporting required.
§ 33-60.     Hold order in effect, all businesses regulated by this ordinance may release property to law enforcement officer; not waiver of property rights; sale of property under hold order prohibited.
§ 33-61.     Exceptions to this ordinance.
§ 33-62.     Violations and penalties.
§§ 33-63 to 33-65. Reserved.


Article VII - Contracts
§ 33-66 Agreement between the City of Rolla and the Pulaski County Sheriff’s Department.
§ 33-67 Agreement between the City of Rolla and the University of Missouri Science & Technology Police Department.
§ 33-68. Contract with Phelps County Commission.
§§ 33-69 to 33-72 Reserved.

Article I - Police Department
Sec. 33-1. Merit system established.
There is hereby established for the city, as provided by Section 85.541 of the Revised Statutes of Missouri, a merit system police department. (Ord. 1193, §1.)



Sec. 33-2. Composition.
The police department of the city may, at full strength, consist of a chief of police, a supervisory staff as deemed appropriate by the chief and the city administrator, and such patrolmen as may be determined necessary by the mayor and city council from time to time. (Ord. 2023, §1; Ord. 3173, §1.)



Sec. 33-3. Appointing authority.
The appointing authority under the provisions of this article shall be the city administrator who shall have the power to appoint and remove members of the police department in accordance with personnel system regulations approved by the city council. (Ord. 2019, §7.(f) )



Sec. 33-4. Qualifications.
No member of the police department shall be permitted to serve as member of such department unless he is at least twenty-one (21) years of age and shall from time to time pass a satisfactory physical and mental examination. This Section is not applicable to telecommunicators, civilian employees, or school crossing guards. (Ord. 1193, §9; Ord. 3173, §1.)



Sec. 33-5. Chief of police - Appointment; term of office.
The chief of police shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council for an indefinite period. He shall hold his office during good behavior and efficient service. (Ord. 1193, §17; Ord. 1216, §1; Ord. 3173, §1.)



Sec. 33-6. Same - Line of authority.
The chief of police shall, in the discharge of his duties, be subject to the orders of the mayor, and all other members of the police department shall be subject to orders of their superiors in the police department and the mayor only. (Ord. 1193, §8.)



Sec. 33-7. Powers of police generally.
Every Law Enforcement Officer of the Police Department shall have power at all times to make or order arrests, with proper process, for any offense against the laws of the City or the State of Missouri and to keep the offender in the City Jail or any other suitable place to prevent his escape until a trial can be had before the proper officer, unless such offender can give a good and sufficient bond for his appearance for trial, and shall also have power to make arrests without process in all cases in which the officer has reasonable grounds to believe an offense against the laws of the City or the State of Missouri shall have been committed. Every member of the Police Department is empowered to serve all warrants, subpoenas, writ, or other process issued by the Police Judge of the City, or any judge of the State of Missouri, at any place within the limits of the County within which the City is located. (Ord. 1193, §10; Ord. 2960, §1; Ord. 3972, §2)



Sec. 33-8. Handling intoxicated persons - Authority of police officers.
Any person who appears to be incapacitated or intoxicated in a public place may be taken by a police officer to the person's residence, or to any available treatment service, or to any other appropriate local facility which may, if necessary, include a jail, for custody not to exceed 12 hours pursuant to Section 67.315 RSMo.

Any police officer detaining such person or taking action pursuant to subsection one shall enjoy immunity from prosecution in civil liability as provided in Section 67.315 RSMo. (Ord. 2389, §1, 2.)


Sec. 33-9. Duties of police generally.
The personnel of the police department shall be conservators of the peace within the city and shall patrol such beats and at such times as may be designated by the chief of police and shall be constantly active in the prevention of violations of the law of the state and of this Code or other ordinance of the city, in making arrests, in maintaining and preserving order and peace in the city.

The personnel of the police department shall at all times conduct themselves in accordance with the rules and regulations set forth in the department manual and shall obey all orders, whether made orally or in writing, issued by the chief of police or their immediate superior. (Ord. 2063, §1.)


Sec. 33-10. Interrogation of members of the armed forces.
No member of the police department shall at anytime, on duty or off duty, interrogate, investigate, harass or place in custody any member of the United States Armed Forces for the purpose of determining whether such member of the armed forces is in military status known as "absent without leave" (AWOL).

Any member of the police department violating the provisions of this Section shall be subject to suspension without pay, demotion or discharge.

All reported violations of this Section shall be investigated by the police committee of the city council, and such committee shall recommend to the council the action it deems necessary and proper.

The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the interrogating, investigating, detaining or placing in custody of any member of the United States Armed Forces who may have previously been reported to the chief of police to be a deserter of such armed forces by proper military authorities.

The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the interrogating, investigating, detaining or placing in custody any member of the United States Armed Forces for the violation of this Code or other city ordinances or any state or federal statute. (Ord. 1651, §§1 to 5.)



Sec. 33-11. Emergencies outside city - Police response.
Definitions:

Emergency situation: - For the purposes of this ordinance, "emergency situation" means any situation in which the police officer has reasonable belief that a crime is about to be committed, is being committed, or, has been committed involving injury or threat of injury to any person, property, or governmental interest, and the officer's response is reasonably necessary to prevent or end such emergency situation or mitigate the likelihood of injury involved in such emergency situation.

Police officer: - For the purposes of this ordinance, "police officer" means any police officer of the City of Rolla, Missouri who has completed the basic training program established by Chapter 590 of the Revised Statutes of Missouri. (see https://revisor.mo.gov/main/OneChapter.aspx?chapter=590)

Response: - For the purposes of this ordinance, "response" shall mean to take any and all action which the police officer may lawfully take as if exercising normal powers within the City of Rolla, Missouri.

Authority. Any police officer of the City of Rolla, Missouri shall have the authority to respond to an emergency situation outside the corporate limits of the City of Rolla, provided, however, such authorization to respond shall exist only within the jurisdiction described in Subsection (c) below.

Jurisdiction. The authority granted herein shall permit the response of one or more City of Rolla police officers in the following jurisdiction within the State of Missouri until the situation is no longer an emergency: Phelps County.

Report to Chief of Police. Every response to an emergency situation outside of the corporate limits of the City of Rolla, Missouri shall be reported to the Chief of Police.

Effective date. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval and upon the date that the County Commission of Phelps County has authorized by its order the response of City of Rolla police officers in said jurisdiction. (Ord. 2621, §§1-5.)


Sec. 33-12. Use of excess force during nonviolent civil rights demonstrations is prohibited.
The City of Rolla hereby adopts and will enforce this policy prohibiting the use of excessive force by law enforcement agencies within its jurisdiction against any individual engaged in nonviolent civil rights demonstrations. The City also prohibits the physical barring of any entrance or exit to such a facility and will enforce all applicable state laws regarding same. (Ord. 2895, §1)



Sec. 33-13. Civil and criminal penalties for violating Section 33-12.
Any person found to be violating any provision of this ordinance shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation.

Any person guilty of this violation shall be prosecuted for assault and on conviction thereof shall be fined and/or jailed as set forth in the applicable punishment provisions of the Rolla Municipal Code. Each day in which any such violations shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation. (Ord. 2895, §1)


Secs. 33-14 to 33-20. Reserved.

Article II - Police Personnel Board
Sec. 33-21. Police personnel board - Creation; composition; terms of office; qualifications generally.
There shall be established a Police Department Personnel Board, consisting of six members.  They shall be selected by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. Board appointments will require the approval of the City Council through a majority vote of the members elected to the City Council. Members of the Police Personnel Board shall serve four-year terms. The board members shall receive no compensation. The members shall be at least twenty-one years of age, taxpaying citizens and qualified voters of the City. Any member of the board may be removed by the Mayor and a majority vote of all members elected to the City Council for failure to attend meetings of the personnel board, or for good cause shown. In the event of a disciplinary hearing, the Board shall approve and appoint a Hearing Officer who shall have no vote in the Board’s decision, but shall serve to preside over the hearing and rule on evidentiary matters. The elected City Municipal Judge shall serve in the capacity of Hearing Officer unless he/she declines or a conflict exists for the Judge to serve in such capacity. If the Municipal Judge cannot serve, the Mayor shall appoint a Hearing Officer, who is a licensed Attorney authorized to practice law in the State of Missouri and who is not a current member of the Police Personnel Board. (Ord. 2162, §1; Ord. 2229, §1; Ord. 3911, §1; Ord. 4439, §1)



Sec. 33-22. Police personnel board - Meetings; organization.
The Police Personnel Board shall be subject to call and shall meet at such times and places as may be designated by the board chairman. The chairman of the board, to be elected by the board, shall preside at all meetings of the board, except for disciplinary hearings. Members of the board shall also elect a vice-chair to serve in the chairman’s absence and a secretary for recording minutes of meetings. (Ord. 2471A, §1; Ord. 3911, §1; Ord. 4439, §1)



Sec. 33-23. Same - Examinations for appointments.
The Police Personnel Board shall interview new patrol officer candidates and departmental promotions and shall certify a list of eligible candidates to the Chief of Police for appointment. (Ord. 1193, §4, Ord. 1193, §1818; Ord. 1472, §1; Ord. 1573, §1; Ord. 2672, §1; Ord. 3173, §1; Ord. 3911, §1)



Secs. 33-24 to 33-28. Reserved.

Article III - Suspension, Demotion, Dismissal
Sec. 33-29. Suspension.
Any suspension of a police officer shall not exceed thirty (30) calendar days for any one offense. A written statement of the reasons for the suspension shall be submitted to the police officer affected in each case. The police officer shall have the right of appeal as provided for in the City of Rolla Personnel Rules and Regulations. (Ord. 2064, §1; Ord. 2210, §2.)



Sec. 33-30. Right of appeal.
Any police officer receiving written notice of disciplinary action shall have the right to appeal such action in accordance with the city personnel rules and regulations.  The decision of the city administrator may be appealed to the police personnel board within seven calendar days of receipt of the decision of the city administrator concerning the appeal.  The city administrator shall immediately file such request with the chairman of the police personnel board.  Upon receipt of written request to appeal, the police personnel board shall grant a hearing, which may be public if requested in writing by the police officer, under the provisions of Section 33-36; provided that upon the filing of such request for hearing before the police personnel board, any order or discharge shall be temporarily stayed and such police officer may be suspended from duty without any pay until such time as the police personnel board has conducted the hearing as provided in Section 33-36.  (Ord. 2210, §3; Ord. 4439, §1)



Secs. 33-31 to 33-35. Reserved.


Article IV - Hearings
Sec. 33-36. Investigation and hearing by police personnel board; report of decision to city council; rights of disciplined officer.
The personnel board shall, upon written application for hearing, make an investigation of the reasons stated for the disciplinary action.  Any such hearing shall be closed to the public unless a written request for a public hearing is submitted to the board by the police officer in the application for hearing. It shall be the duty of the personnel board to hold the hearing as requested in a convenient place and in accordance with the rules and regulations as may from time to time be promulgated by the City.  After the holding the hearing as herein provided, the personnel board shall report in writing within three days, unless the time is extended for a good cause, all facts and circumstances developed in their investigation and the hearing held pertaining to the reasons as to why such police officer received disciplinary action and the decision of the police personnel board concerning whether or not the disciplinary action will be upheld, modified or repealed.  The city administrator shall provide the Mayor and the city council with the report of the police personnel board.  The police officer disciplined shall not be deprived of the right to legal counsel and shall be afforded the right under the rules of civil procedure to subpoena and cause to be subpoenaed witnesses on his behalf and the right to cross examine witnesses who appear against him.  (Ord. 2210, §4; Ord. 4439, §1)



Secs. 33-37 to 33-41. Reserved.

Article V - Police Reserve Force
Sec. 33-42. Established.
There is hereby established a police reserve force for the city. (Ord. 1987, §1.)



Sec. 33-43. Number of members.
The authorized number of persons appointed by the City of Rolla, Missouri, as members of the police reserve force shall be limited to no more than thirty (30) persons. (Ord. 2143, §1; Ord. 3437, §1)



Sec. 33-44. Appointment; compensations.
The members of the police reserve force shall be appointed by the chief of police and shall be compensated in accordance with the policy established by the Rolla Police Department. (Ord. 2328-A, §1.)



Sec. 33-45. Qualifications.
Only persons of good character and health, a minimum of twenty-one (21) years of age, a U.S. Citizen, who has successfully completed such medical, physical, mental or other requirements as may be prescribed by the chief of police and rules and regulations of the City of Rolla, and who is a certified peace officer as defined by Chapter 590 of the Revised Missouri Statutes, may be appointed to the Police Reserve Force of the City of Rolla. (Ord. 2328-A, §1; Ord. 2676, §1.)



Sec. 33-46. Supervision.
The police reserve force of the city shall be under the direct control and supervision of the chief of police, who shall have the authority to remove, suspend or discharge, with or without cause, any member thereof. (Ord. 1987, §3.)



Sec. 33-47. Powers; duties.
It shall be the duty of all members of the Police Reserve Force of the City of Rolla, Missouri, to complete successfully all of the training requirements established by the State of Missouri and the Chief of Police of the City of Rolla, Missouri. Upon successfully completing the prescribed training requirements established by the State of Missouri and the Chief of Police of the City of Rolla, Missouri, those members shall have the power to make arrests without process in all cases where they have reasonable grounds to believe any violation of an ordinance of the City of Rolla, Missouri, or of a law of the State of Missouri shall have been committed; and they shall have power to serve and execute all warrants, subpoenas, writs, or other process, and to make arrests with proper authority, as established by the State of Missouri and the City of Rolla, Missouri; and they shall perform such duties as assigned by the Chief of Police. (Ord. 2328-A, §1; Ord. 3972, §3)



Secs. 33-48 to 33-53. Reserved.


Article VI - Pawnbrokers
Sec. 33-54. Definitions.
"Pawnbroker", any person engaged in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods or engaged in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time;

"Scrap Metal Dealer", any secondhand dealer who engages in the business of buying junk, old iron, tools or fittings of any kind including but not limited to: copper, lead, brass, or scrap metals of any kind.

"Precious Metals Business or Dealer", any business or dealer, including jewelry stores who engage in the business of buying and selling used or secondhand jewelry, coins or other precious metals.

"Secondhand Dealer", any person who buys for resale or receives on consignment any pre-owned items, to include jewelry, coins, precious metals, household fixtures, water, gas, electric or plumbing fixtures, or other secondhand personal property of any kind whatsoever, except household furniture or books.

"Pawnshop", the location at which or premises in which a pawnbroker regularly conducts business;

"Pledged goods", tangible personal property other than choses in action, securities, or printed evidence of indebtedness, which property is deposited with or otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in the course of his business in connection with a pawn transaction;

"Person", an individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association or any other legal entity however organized;

"Person of Good Moral Character", a person who has no findings of guilt involving any felony offense or offense where range of punishment exceeds one year, within a five (5) year period.

"Pre-Owned Items", items that are purchased from an individual, who is not a wholesale dealer, or used as collateral by an individual to secure a loan. This includes but is not limited to: Antiques, coins, gold, silver, platinum, gems and semi-precious stones, watches, firearms, power tools, hand tools, computers, electronic equipment, cameras, camera equipment, including but not limited to film, digital and videotape, still and motion picture cameras, camcorders, and associated recording and viewing equipment. Electronic gaming equipment, game cartridges or discs, compact digital discs (CD’s) digital Video Discs (DVD’s) Musical instruments and equipment, bicycles, household items and any other self-propelled device not required to be licensed by the Missouri Department of Revenue, and any item purchased or used to secure a loan.

"Secured personal credit loan", every loan of money made in this City, the payment of which is secured by a security interest in tangible personal property which is physically delivered into the hands of the lender at the time of the making of the loan and which is to be retained by the lender while the loan is a subsisting obligation.  (Ord. 3640, §1, Ord. 4290, §1)



Sec. 33-55.  Business operating as Pawn Shop, Second Hand Dealer, Scrap Metal Dealer, or Precious Metals Business or Dealer.
It shall be prima facie evidence that a business as a Pawn Shop, Secondhand Dealer, Scrap Metal Dealer or Precious Metals Dealer if the business engages in the activity defined in section 33-54, B, C, D and E. (Ord. 3640, §2)

All businesses defined in this ordinance will be required to secure a business license from the City of Rolla.

No person or entity affected by this ordinance shall be open for business or receive any article or personal property or other valuable thing as pawned, pledged taken in barter or exchanged or purchased on any condition whatsoever, on any day between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on the following day. (Ord. 4290, §1)



Sec. 33-56. Receipt for pledged property.
Receipt for pledged property in accord with §367.031 RSMo., at the time of making any secured personal credit loan, the lender shall execute and deliver to the borrower a receipt for and describing the tangible personal property subjected to the security interest to secure the payment of the loan. The receipts utilized by the lender shall be numbered sequentially with preprinted numbers and shall contain, at least, the following information.

The name and address of the pawnshop;

The name and address of the pledgor; the pledgor’s description and the driver’s license, military identification number, identification certificate number, or other official number capable of identifying the pledgor;

The date of the transaction;

An identification and description of the pledged goods, including serial numbers if reasonably available.  (Ord. 3640, §3)

The maturity date of the business transaction, and a statement to the effect of the pledger is not obligated to redeem the pledged goods, and that the pledged goods may be forfeited to the pawnbroker thirty (30) days after the specified maturity date. Per State Law, this will become effective sixty (60) days starting January 1st, 2017. (Ord. 4290, §1)



Sec. 33-57.  Contents and holding period for items covered under this ordinance.
A pawnbroker shall not purchase or take in trade used or second hand personal property unless a record is established that contains the information set forth in §367.031 RSMo., and a signed document from the seller providing that the seller has the right to sell the property.  (Ord. 3640, §4)

No Gold, Silver, Diamonds, or other precious or semi-precious gems or metals received or purchased by any person subject to this ordinance shall be removed from the business within seven (7) days after the receipt thereof, except when redeemed by the owner, nor shall any such precious gems or metals be melted or re-cut or re-sized within seven (7) days from the receipts thereof.

Further, no person subject to this ordinance shall sell, transfer ownership or possession of or otherwise remove from said designated location any goods received in purchase, sale, barter, exchange, or pawn for seven (7) days from the receipt of such goods, except for redemption of such good by the owner. (Ord. 4290, §1)



Sec. 33-58. Turn over records to Rolla Police Department.
All businesses operating within the city of Rolla and regulated by this ordinance shall keep a well-bound book or other form of permanent record in which he shall legibly and permanently enter the following information:

The name, address, physical description, and the driver’s license number, social security number, military identification number, identification certificate number, or other number capable of identifying the seller/pledger.

A complete description of all pre-owned property, including precious gems or metals pledged with him or purchased by him. The description will include any number, letter markings, or engravings that may be on such property for the purchase of identification, including any owner applied markings. This record shall also contain the information required in section 33-56.

If any item contains in whole or in part, a precious gem or metal, the property shall be photographed and the photograph shall be attached to the record book or kept with other permanent record describing the property.

A signed document form a seller stating that the seller has the right to sell the property.

A picture of the seller or pledger. (A sign will be posted inside the business informing the seller or pledger that the picture is required by ordinance)

Records will be maintained for a period of one year.

At least 60 days prior to the destruction of a photograph or transaction form, the licensee shall notify, in writing, the Rolla Police Department of its intent to destroy such documents. The Rolla Police Department, at its option, may request the licensee to turn over all said documents to the police department.

The record will also include the disposition of the item. When an item is sold, transferred, or redeemed, the name and address of the person receiving the item, as well as the date of the transaction will be included.

Such records shall not be defaced or erased and shall be open to any peace officer as defined in section 590.020 RSMo, together with the articles purchased, or pledged, provided that the articles shall still be in the possession of the dealer or merchant. (Ord. 4290, §1)



Sec. 33-59.  On-line reporting required.
All businesses regulated by this ordinance will be required to upload the information for all transactions into the entity/database designated by the Rolla Police Department within two (2) business days of receipt of the goods received in purchase, sale, barter, exchange, or pawn. (Ord. 4290, §1)

Pursuant to §367.031 RSMo and section 33-59 hereof on a regular basis but not more than two (2) days after a transaction, all businesses regulated by this ordinance shall upload all information concerning their daily transactions into the entity/database designated by the Rolla Police Department. By authority of §367.031.4 RSMo and §610.021(14) the information herein required to be disclosed to the Rolla Police Department shall not be open to the public except by court order. (Ord. 3640, §5)



Sec. 33-60.  Hold order in effect, all businesses regulated by this ordinance may release property to law enforcement officer; not waiver of property rights; sale of property under hold order prohibited.
Pursuant to §367.047.1 RSMo., upon written notice from a law enforcement officer indicating that property in the possession of a regulated business and subject to a hold order is needed for the purpose of furthering a criminal investigation or prosecution, the regulated business shall release the property subject to the hold order to the custody of the law enforcement officer for such purpose and the officer shall provide a written acknowledgment that the property has been released to the officer. The release of the property to the custody of the law enforcement officer shall not be considered a waiver or release of the regulated business property rights or interest in the property. Upon investigation of the criminal investigation, the property shall be returned to the regulated business who consented to its release; except that if the law enforcement officer has not completed the criminal investigation within 120 days after its release, the officer shall immediately return the property to the pawnbroker or obtain and furnish to the pawnbroker a warrant for the continued custody of the property.

Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, the business shall not release or dispose of the property except pursuant to a court order or the expiration of the holding period of the hold order, including all extensions.  (Ord. 3640, §6; Ord. 4290, §1)




Sec. 33-61.  Exceptions to this ordinance.
Used Furniture Dealers, Used Book Store Dealers, Antique Dealers, Re-Sale Clothing Shops, and Flea Market Operators are exempt from this ordinance. (Ord. 4290, §1)


Sec. 33-62.  Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this Article shall be punishable by a fine, not to exceed $500.00. Each separate item of property pledged or taken in pledge in violation of this Article shall be deemed a separate violation. A license to do business in the City of Rolla, Missouri, for any person convicted of a violation of this Article shall immediately be revoked and no new license issued to that person, nor for the premises at which the violation occurred, unless and until the penalty for said violation, together with any applicable court costs, shall have been paid in full. (Ord. 3640, §7; Ord. 4290, §1)

Secs. 33-63 to 33-65. Reserved.


Article VII - Contracts
Sec. 33-66. Agreement between the City of Rolla and the Pulaski County Sheriff’s Department.
That the Mayor of the City of Rolla, Missouri be and is hereby authorized and directed to execute on behalf of the City of Rolla, Missouri, a certain agreement between the City of Rolla, Missouri and the Pulaski County Sheriff’s Department, a copy of said agreement being attached hereto and marked Exhibit A. (Ord. 3898, §1)



Sec. 33-67. Agreement between the City of Rolla and the University of Missouri Science & Technology Police Department.
That the Mayor of the City of Rolla, Missouri be and is hereby authorized and directed to execute on behalf of the City of Rolla, Missouri, an amended agreement between the City of Rolla, Missouri and the University of Missouri Science & Technology (Missouri S & T) Police Department, a copy of said agreement being attached hereto and marked Exhibit A. (Ord. 3899, §1; Ord. 3913, §1)



Sec. 33-68. Contract with Phelps County Commission.
That the Mayor of the City of Rolla, Missouri is hereby authorized and directed to execute on behalf of the City of Rolla, Missouri, a contract between the City of Rolla, Missouri and the Phelps County Commission for the continuation of a joint effort crime prevention program between the Rolla Police Department and Phelps County Sheriff’s Department. (Ord. 3931, §1)



Secs. 33-69 to 33-72. Reserved.

Chapter 34 - Restaurants and Other Food-Service Establishments
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter


Chapter Contents:
§ 34-1. Authority.
§ 34-2. Enforcement interpretation.
§ 34-3. Temporary food service and retail food establishments.
§ 34-4. Permits.
§ 34-5. Inspections.
§ 34-6. Examination and condemnation of food.
§ 34-7. Food-service establishments outside jurisdictions of the health authority.
§ 34-8. Plan review of future construction.
§ 34-9. Procedure when infection is suspected.
§§ 34-10 to 34-20. Reserved.


Chapter 34 - Restaurants and Other Food-Service Establishments
Sec. 34-1. Authority.
Health authority shall mean the Phelps/Maries County Health Department and the City of Rolla Building Codes Administrator or his/her designee. (Ord. 3724, §1; Ord. 4223, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 34-2. Enforcement Interpretation
The issuance, suspension, and revocation of operating permits and other available enforcement remedies shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. Food service and retail food establishments shall comply with sanitation requirements set forth in the 1999 Missouri Food Code. Inspections to determine compliance with the food code will be conducted by the health authority. The 1999 Missouri Food Code including any future updates, amendments or revisions stipulated by the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services is incorporated herein as if fully set out herein. (Ord. 3724, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 34-3. Temporary food service and retail food establishments.
As a general rule, temporary food service or retail food establishments must comply with all provisions of this Chapter applicable to their operation. The health authority may impose additional requirements, such as prohibiting the sale of certain potentially hazardous foods, when deemed necessary to protect the public health or prevent illness. The health authority may also relax or modify specific requirements for these physical facilities when in his/her opinion no imminent health hazard will result. (Ord. 3724, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 34-4. Permits.
(a) Required. It shall be unlawful to operate a food service or retail food establishment within the city, or its police jurisdiction, without a valid operating permit issued by the health authority and a city of Rolla business license. Only those who comply with the requirements of this Chapter and pay a required fee shall be entitled to receive and retain such a permit. A valid operating permit and a copy of the most recent health inspection shall be conspicuously posted in every food service and retail food establishment.

(b) Issuance. Each year, all persons, corporations, or other entities desiring to operate or continue operating a food service or retail food establishment within the city or its police jurisdiction shall make written application to the health authority for an operating permit and pay a required fee. Application forms are provided by the health authority and must be filled out completely and bear the signature of the applicant or applicants. For permit renewals, a previous year’s tax statement indicating annual gross food sales must be included. An application for a temporary food service or retail food establishment shall also include the dates of the proposed operation.

For new establishments, upon receipt of an application the health authority shall conduct an inspection of the proposed food service or retail food establishment to determine compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. When the health authority determines that the establishment meets applicable requirements of this Chapter, an operating permit will be issued to the applicant.

Operating permits are valid from July 1 through June 30 of the following year or from the date of issuance through June 30 of the current permit year. Operating permits for temporary food service establishments will be issued for a period not to exceed fourteen days. Permits are non-transferable.

(c) Suspension. Permits may be temporarily suspended or revoked by the health authority for failure of the holder to comply with the requirements of this Chapter. Notwithstanding other provisions of this Chapter, whenever the health authority finds unsanitary or other conditions in the operation of a food service or retail food establishment which, in their judgment, constitute a substantial hazard to the public health, they may without warning, notice or hearing, issue a written notice to the permit holder or operator citing such condition, specifying the corrective action to be taken, and specifying the time period within which such action shall be taken.

If deemed necessary, such order shall state that the establishment’s operating permit is immediately suspended or revoked, and all food service or retail food operations are to be immediately discontinued. Any person issued such an order shall comply immediately therewith, but upon written petition to the health authority, shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible.

(d) Reinstatement. A person who has their operating permit suspended or revoked may, at any time, make application for a re-inspection of their establishment for the purpose of reinstatement of the operating permit. Within ten days following receipt of a written request, including a statement signed by the applicant that in his/her opinion the conditions causing suspension or revocation of the permit have been corrected, the health authority shall make a re-inspection. If the applicant is in compliance with the requirements of this Chapter, the operating permit shall be reinstated.

(e) Revocation. In cases of serious or repeated violations of the requirements of this Chapter, or interference with the health authority in the performance of their duties, an operating permit may be permanently revoked. Prior to such action, the health authority shall notify the permit holder in writing, specifying the reasons the operating permit is subject to revocation and advising them the permit will be permanently revoked five days following service of the notice unless a request for hearing is filed with the health authority, by the permit holder within the five day period. A permit may be suspended for cause pending its revocation or a hearing relative thereto.

(f) Hearings. The Rolla City Council shall conduct hearings provided for in this Section at a time and place designated by the council. Based upon the record of such hearing, the council shall make a finding and shall sustain, modify or rescind any official notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the operating permit holder by the health authority. (Ord. 3724, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 34-5. Inspections.
(a) Generally. At least once during the calendar year, the health authority shall inspect each food service and retail food establishment located in the city, or its police jurisdiction, and shall make as many additional inspections and re-inspections as are necessary to ensure compliance with this Chapter.

(b) Access to establishments. The health authority, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter, at any reasonable time, any food service or retail food establishment within the city, or its police jurisdiction, for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this Chapter. They shall be permitted to examine all records of the establishment relevant to daily operations including food and supplies purchased, received or used, and persons employed.

(c) Issuance of notice. When the health authority conducts an inspection of a food service or retail food establishment and discovers requirements of Section 34-1 through 34-9 of this Chapter have been violated, they shall notify the operating permit holder or operator of such violations by means of an inspection report form or other written notice. In such notification, the health authority shall:

Specify the specific violations identified during the inspection.
Establish a specific and reasonable compliance schedule for correction of the identified violations.
Indicate in writing that failure to comply with the provisions of this Chapter or any notice issued pursuant to this Chapter may result in immediate suspension of the operating permit.
Indicate in writing that an opportunity for an appeal of any notice of inspection findings will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the health authority within the period of time established in the inspection report.
(d) Service of notices. Notices provided for in this Section shall be deemed properly served when the original or copy of the notice has been delivered personally to the permit holder or person in charge, or has been sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the permit holder. A copy of the notice shall be filed with the records of the health authority. (Ord. 3724, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 34-6. Examination and condemnation of food.
Food may be examined or sampled by the health authority as often as deemed necessary to determine its condition. The health authority may, upon written notice to the owner or person in charge order the immediate denaturing and disposal of any food they determine to be, or have probable cause to believe is adulterated, misbranded or otherwise unwholesome. They may also place said products under a hold order pending further investigation or laboratory testing. Under a hold order, food shall be permitted to be suitably stored but not served, sold or provided to the public with or without charge. It shall also be unlawful for any person to remove or alter a hold order notice or tag placed on food by the health authority, and neither such food nor the containers thereof shall be relabeled, repacked, reprocessed, altered, transported, disposed of, or destroyed without permission of the health authority except by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. After the owner or person in charge has had a hearing as provided for in paragraph (f) of Section 34-4 and on the basis of evidence produced at such hearing, or on the basis of their examination in the event a written request for a hearing is not received within ten days, the health authority may vacate the hold order, or may by written order direct the owner or person in charge of the food which was placed under the hold order to denature or destroy such food or to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this Chapter; provided, that such order of the health authority to denature or destroy such food or bring it into compliance with the provisions of this Chapter shall be stayed if the order is appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction within three days. (Ord. 3724, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 34-7. Food service or retail food establishments outside jurisdictions of the health authority.
Food from food service and retail food establishments outside the jurisdiction of the health authority of the city may be sold within the city if such food service and retail food establishment conform to the provisions of this Chapter or to substantially equivalent provisions. To determine the extent of compliance with such provisions, the health authority may accept reports from responsible authorities in other jurisdictions where such food service or retail food establishments are located. (Ord. 3724, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 34-8. Plan review of future construction.
When a food service or retail food establishment is hereafter constructed or extensively remodeled, or when an existing structure is converted for use as a food service or retail food establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or alternation, showing layout, arrangement and construction materials of work areas, and the location, size and type of fixed equipment and facilities, shall be submitted to the health authority for approval before such work is begun. (Ord. 3724, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 34-9. Procedure when infection is suspected.
When the health authority has reasonable cause to suspect possibility of disease transmission from any food service establishment employee, the health authority shall secure a morbidity history of the suspected employee, or make such other investigation as may be indicated, and take appropriate action. The health authority may require any or all of the following measures:

(a) The immediate exclusion of the employee from all food service establishments;
(b) The immediate closure of the food service establishments concerned until, in the opinion of the health authority, no further danger of disease outbreak exists;
(c) Restriction of the employee’s services to some area of the establishment where there would be no danger of transmitting disease; and
(d) Appropriate medical and laboratory examinations of the employee in question, of other employees, and of their bodily discharges. (Ord. 3724, §1)
(Return to Contents)



Secs. 34-10 to 34-20. Reserved.

Chapter 35 - Sewers and Water
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter



Chapter Contents:
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§ 35-1. Definitions.
§ 35-2. Establishing procedure for protests concerning solicitations or contract awards for the construction and maintenance of a public sewer and waste water system.
§ 35-3. Establishing access fee areas.
§ 35-3.1. Harris Subdivision Sewer Access Fee Area.
§ 35-3.2 Southside Sewer Access Fee Area.
§§ 35-4 to 35-28. Reserved.


ARTICLE II. SEWER BILLING
§ 35-29. Method of billing - Combined water and sewerage services.
§ 35-30. Due dates for water and sewerage bills.
§ 35-31. Owner and occupant jointly and severally liable for water and sewerage systems.
§§ 35-32 to 35-52. Reserved.


ARTICLE III. USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED
§ 35-53. Depositing objectionable waste on public or private property within city.
§ 35-54. Discharge of polluted water to natural outlet within the city.
§ 35-55. Construction or maintenance of privy, cesspool, etc. for disposal of sewage.
§ 25-56. Installation of suitable toilet facilities and connection with public sewer system within ninety days of notification.
§§ 35-57 to 61. Reserved.


ARTICLE IV. PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
§ 35-62. Use where public sanitary sewer not available; compliance with division.
§ 35-63. Permit - Required prior to commencement of construction; application fee.
§ 35-64. Same - Effective upon satisfactory completion of installation; final inspection.
§ 35-65. Compliance with state water pollution board recommendations; when permit denied; septic tank or cesspool discharge into natural outlet.
§ 35-66. Required use of public sewer upon availability; abandonment and filling of private facilities.
§ 35-67. Owner responsible for operation and maintenance costs.
§ 35-68. Division not to interfere with requirement imposed by health officer.
§ 35-69. Building sewer to be connected to public sewer when available.
§§ 35-70 to 35-74. Reserved.


ARTICLE V. BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
§ 35-75. Permit required by unauthorized person uncovering, using, etc., any public sewer or appurtenance thereof.
§ 35-76. Disposal in compliance with federal standards.
§ 35-77. Classes of building sewer permits; applicant, fee and permit conditions.
§ 35-78. Permit and connection contingent on capacity of system.
§ 35-79. Installation and connection costs to be borne by owner; indemnification of city; rebate program
§ 35-80. Separate and independent building sewer required for every building; exception.
§ 35-81. Use of old building sewers to serve new buildings.
§ 35-82. Size, slope, etc., of building sewers, excavation methods, etc., to comply with building and plumbing codes, etc.
§ 35-83. Elevation of building sewer; lifting of sanitary sewage from building drain.
§ 35-84. Discharge of surface runoff or groundwater to public sanitary sewer through connection of roof downspouts, etc., with building sewer or building drain.
§ 35-85. Sewer connections to conform to all applicable city regulations; deviations to be approved.
§ 35-86. Inspection and connection of building sewer to public sewer; supervision of connection.
§ 35-87. Excavations to be adequately guarded with barricades and lights; restoration of disturbed streets, sidewalks, etc. to satisfaction of city.
§§ 35-88 to 35-92. Reserved.


ARTICLE VI. USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS
§ 35-93. Stormwater, surface water, etc., - Discharge to sanitary sewer prohibited.
§ 35-94. Same - Discharge to storm sewers or approved natural outlet.
§ 35-95. Prohibiting the discharge of certain waters and wastes to public sewers.
§ 35-96. Certain substances, materials, etc. which may be prohibited from discharge by Public Works Director; factors to be considered.
§ 35-97. Action of Public Works Director upon discharge or proposed discharge of waters or wastes as enumerated in Section 35-96 and deemed unacceptable.
§ 35-98. Grease, oil and sand interceptors; when required, approval and accessibility.
§ 35-99. Maintenance of preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities in effective operation and at owner's expense.
§ 35-100. Installation and maintenance requirements for control manhole.
§ 35-101. Tests required on industrial wastes for compliance with governmental regulations and special conditions.
§ 35-102. Determination of measurements, tests, etc.; applicability of certain publication; method of sampling.
§ 35-103. Special agreements between city and industrial concern.
§§ 35-104 to 35-108. Reserved.


ARTICLE VII. PROTECTION OF SEWAGE WORKS FROM DAMAGE
§ 35-109. Damaging, tampering, etc. with any sewage works structure; interference with manhole; immediate arrest.
§§ 35-110 to 35-114. Reserved.


ARTICLE VIII. POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS
§ 35-115. Authority to enter property for purpose of inspection, observation, etc., - Limited to waste discharge.
§ 35-116. Same - Observance of company safety rules; indemnification of company; exception.
§ 35-117. Same - Property through which city holds duly negotiated easement; compliance with terms pertaining to property.
§§ 35-118 to 35-122. Reserved.


ARTICLE IX. USER RATES
§ 35-123. Basis for wastewater service charges.
§ 35-124. Definitions.
§ 35-125. Basis for wastewater service charges.
§ 35-126. Basic user rate for metered users.
§ 35-127. Basic user rate for nonmetered residential users.
§ 35-128. Surcharge rate.
§ 35-129. Computation of surcharge.
§ 35-130. Computation of wastewater service charge.
§ 35-131. Connection permit fee schedule.
§ 35-132. Sewer connection fees.
§ 35-133. Sewer connections outside corporate limits of the city.
§ 35-134. Sewer and water use rates at the Rolla National Airport
§§ 35-135 to 35-139. Reserved.


ARTICLE X. CHARGES FOR WASTEWATER SERVICES (USER CHARGES)
§ 35-140. Notice to cease all violations within specified time period; revocation of sewage disposal permit.
§ 35-141. Violation continued beyond time limit provided for in Section 35-140.
§ 35-142. Violators liable to city for expense, loss, etc.
§§ 35-143 to 35-147. Reserved.


ARTICLE XI. BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS
§ 35-148. Established.
§ 35-149. Composition; appointment of members.
§ 35-150. Term of office.
§ 35-151. Qualifications of members.
§ 35-152. Reserved.
§ 35-153. Duties generally.
§ 35-154. Powers generally.
§ 35-155. Bond required.
§ 35-156. Monthly statement of revenues & expenses; Reports; Quarterly report to Council.
§ 35-157. Employees of public utilities - Limitation on number; compensation.
§ 35-158. Budget review, adoption and amendment § Audit reporting.
§ 35-159. Assessment and collection of rates for city owned utilities.
§ 35-160. Funds § Collection and deposit to public utility account.
§ 35-161. Same § Disbursements.
§ 35-162. Transfers to City general revenue fund.
§ 35-163. Accrued funds - Use to purchase improvements and retire indebtedness.
§ 35-164. Same - Restrictions on use.
§ 35-165. Contracts required for supplies and services; exception; approval of contracts by city council.
§ 35-166. Uncollectible utility bills.
§§ 35-167 to 35-169. Reserved.


ARTICLE XII. WATER SERVICE
§ 35-170. Authority of mayor to restrict, etc., use of water.
§ 35-171. Right of city to shut off water.
§ 35-172. Permit - Required.
§ 35-173. Same - Contents of application; issuance.
§ 35-174. Agreement between city and user of water based on regulations, rates, etc.
§ 35-175. Responsibility of owner for attachment, etc., between dwelling and street main.
§ 35-176. Right to turn on water into service pipe restricted to city; exception.
§ 35-177. Inspection.
§ 35-178. Liability of city for damages resulting from failure of water services, etc.
§ 35-179. Water rates generally.
§ 35-180. Introduction and regulation of fluoride in the public water supply system.
§ 35-181. Lead Ban.


ARTICLE XIII. USE OF PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY REQUIRED EXCEPTIONS
§ 35-182. Drilling, operating, or maintaining private wells or water supplies.
§ 35-183. Plugging of existing wells and connection to public water supply.
§ 35-184. Operation and use of private well or water supply when access to public water supply not available.
§ 35-185. Construction permit required prior to commencement of drilling, installation, or construction; application; fee; inspection provisions.
§ 35-186. Permit for operation of private well or water supply.
§ 35-187. Compliance with applicable governmental regulations.
§ 35-188. Definition of public water supply.
§ 35-189. Private wells for heat pumps.
§§ 35-190 to 35-193. Reserved.


ARTICLE XIV PRETREATMENT FOR INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER USERS
§ 35-194. Purpose and policy.
§ 35-195. Administration.
§ 35-196. Abbreviations.
§ 35-197. Definitions.
§ 35-198. Prohibited discharge standards.
§ 35-199. National categorical pretreatment standards.
§ 35-200. Local limits.
§ 35-201. City's right of revision.
§ 35-202. Dilution.
§ 35-203. Pretreatment facilities.
§ 35-204. Additional pretreatment measures.
§ 35-205. Accidental discharge/slug control plans.
§ 35-206. Hauled wastewater.
§ 35-207. Wastewater analysis.
§ 35-208. Wastewater discharge permit requirement.
§ 35-209. Wastewater discharge permitting: Existing connections.
§ 35-210. Wastewater discharge permitting: New connections.
§ 35-211. Wastewater discharge permit application contents.
§ 35-212. Application signatories and certification.
§ 35-213. Wastewater discharge permit decisions.
§ 35-214. Wastewater discharge permit duration.
§ 35-215. Wastewater discharge permit contents.
§ 35-216. Wastewater discharge permit appeals.
§ 35-217. Wastewater discharge permit modification.
§ 35-218. Wastewater discharge permit transfer.
§ 35-219. Wastewater discharge permit revocation.
§ 35-220. Wastewater discharge permit reissuance.
§ 35-221. Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions.
§ 35-222. Baseline monitoring reports.
§ 35-223. Compliance schedule progress reports.
§ 35-224. Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline.
§ 35-225. Periodic compliance reports.
§ 35-226. Reports of changed conditions.
§ 35-227. Reports of potential problems.
§ 35-228. Reports from unpermitted users.
§ 35-229. Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting.
§ 35-230. Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste.
§ 35-231. Analytical requirements.
§ 35-232. Sample collection.
§ 35-233. Timing.
§ 35-234. Record keeping.
§ 35-235. Right of entry: Inspection and sampling.
§ 35-236. Refused access.
§ 35-237. Confidential information.
§ 35-238. Publication of users in significant noncompliance.
§ 35-239. Notification of violation.
§ 35-240. Consent orders.
§ 35-241. Show cause hearing.
§ 35-242. Compliance orders.
§ 35-243. Cease and desist orders.
§ 35-244. Administrative penalties.
§ 35-245. Emergency suspensions.
§ 35-246. Termination of discharge.
§ 35-247. Injunctive relief.
§ 35-248. Civil penalties.
§ 35-249. Prosecution for violations.
§ 35-250. Remedies nonexclusive.
§ 35-251. Performance bonds.
§ 35-252. Liability insurance.
§ 35-253. Water supply severance.
§ 35-254. Public nuisances.
§ 35-255. Contracts listing.
§ 35-256. Upset.
§ 35-257. Prohibited discharge standards.
§ 35-258. Bypass.
§ 35-259. Pretreatment charges and fees.
§ 35-260. Severability.
§§ 35-261 to 35-275. Reserved.


Appendices
Reserved
Appendix "B" - Sewer/Wastewater Inventory - January 2000


ARTICLE I IN GENERAL
Sec. 35-1. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this ordinance shall be as follows:

"BOD" (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five (5) days at 20oC, expressed in milligrams per liter.

"Building drain" shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.

"Building sewer" shall mean the extension of the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.

"Combined sewer" shall mean a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.

"Control manhole" shall mean a structure located on a site from which industrial wastes are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The purpose of a "control manhole" is to provide access for the City of Rolla representative to sample and/or measure discharges.

"Federal act" shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq) as amended by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 (Pub. L. 92-500) and (Pub. L. 93-243).

"Garbage" shall mean solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.

"Industrial wastes" shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from normal domestic wastewater.

"Natural outlet" shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater.

"Normal domestic wastewater" shall mean wastewater that has a BOD concentration of not more than 200 mg/1 and a suspended solids concentration of not more than 250 mg/1.

"Person" shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or group.

"pH" shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.

"Pretreatment" shall mean the treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction into the wastewater treatment works.

"Properly shredded garbage" shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension.

"Public sewer" shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.

"Public works director" shall mean the public works director of the City of Rolla or his authorized deputy, agent, or representative.

"Sanitary sewer" shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.

"Sewage" shall mean a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, and stormwaters as may be present.

"Sewage treatment plant" shall mean any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.

"Sewage works" shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.

"Sewer" shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage or storm water runoff.

"Sewerage" shall mean the system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation and pumping of sewage.

"Shall" is mandatory, "may" is permissible.

"Slug" shall mean any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal operation.

"Standard methods" shall mean the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.

"Storm drain" (sometimes termed "storm sewer") - shall mean a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.

"Stormwater runoff" shall mean that portion of the precipitation that is drained into the sewers.

"Suspended solids" shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering.

"Wastewater" shall mean the spent water of a community. It may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercials buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present.

"Wastewater facilities" shall mean the structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport effluent to a watercourse.

"Wastewater treatment works" shall mean an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "pollution control plant".

"Watercourse" shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3)



Sec. 35-2. Establishing procedure for protests concerning solicitations or contract awards for the construction and maintenance of a public sewer and waste water system.
The city council of the City of Rolla does hereby establish the following procedures for prompt consideration of initial protests filed by contractors or subcontractors concerning the solicitations or contract awards for construction and maintenance of the City of Rolla projects including a public sewer and waste water system, as follows:

A protest is a written complaint concerning the City of Rolla solicitation or award of a sub-agreement or contract which must be filed in writing with the city clerk of the City of Rolla by a party with a direct financial interest adversely affected by the City of Rolla procurement action for the construction and maintenance of a public sewer and waste water system.

A party with a financial interest which believes it is adversely affected by a procurement action by the City of Rolla must file a written protest stating the basis for said protest with the city clerk of the City of Rolla as early in the procurement process as possible. A protest must be received by the clerk within seven (7) days after the basis for the protest is known or reasonably should have been known. Said city council, upon receipt of said protest shall hold a hearing as soon as reasonably possible or proper and legal notification to the party with the financial interest which is allegedly adversely affected by the action of the City of Rolla and that said protestor shall be accorded a complete hearing and shall have the right to adduce evidence, both verbal and documentary to the city council and upon conclusion of the hearing and the evidence adduced as submitted the city council shall announce and issue its written decision and order making disposition of the issues raised in said protest. A written copy of the decision of the city council shall be served upon the protestor within seven (7) days after the hearing.

Protestant shall have seven (7) days thereafter to file a protest appeal with the appropriate United States or state agency or official making any awards of financial assistance to the City of Rolla in the construction and maintenance of said public utility projects.

The protest appeal shall be governed by the rules and regulations of the Environmental Protection Agency as set forth in 40CFR, Part 31, Section 31.36(b)(12) which are incorporated by reference herein as the same pertains to the City of Rolla.

The provisions of this ordinance shall be incorporated in any solicitations, contract awards, or sub-agreements entered into by the City of Rolla.

The provisions of this ordinance are severable and if any provision or part hereof shall be held invalid or unconstitutional or inapplicable to any person or circumstance, such invalidity, unconstitutionality or inapplicability shall not affect or impair the remaining provisions of this ordinance.

(Ord. 2814, §§1-7; Ord. 2886, §3)



Sec. 35-3. Establishing access fee areas.
For recouping cost of extending sewers into unsewered areas of the City of Rolla the City Council shall establish by ordinance access fee areas.

The Public Works Director with the approval of City Council shall establish the boundaries of the access fee area, determine the appropriate access fee and cause these sewers to be constructed.

(Ord. 3419, §1)


Sec. 35-3.1. Harris Subdivision Sewer Access Fee Area.
The Harris Subdivision Sewer Access Fee Area is hereby established. The boundaries of this area are described as follows: (Ord. 3424, §1)

The West 1500 feet of the South Half of the North half of the Northwest Quarter of Section 24, Township 37 North, Range 8 West of the 5th P.M. in Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri. Containing 27.7 acres, more or less.

The City Council of the City of Rolla, Missouri declares that it is necessary to construct sewers within the said sewer Access Fee Area for sanitary purposes, and that it will be to the best interest of the residents of said Access Fee Area and the City of Rolla to construct said sewers. (Ord. 3424, §2)

The City Council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, hereby authorizes the City Engineer to prepare plans and specifications for construction of the sewers within said Access Fee Area, including all necessary laterals, manholes, and other appurtenances and including an estimate of the cost thereof, and to file the same with the City Clerk who shall keep the same subject to the inspection of the public. (Ord. 3424, §3)

Anyone connecting to this sewer constructed by the City of Rolla in this Access Fee Area shall pay to the City of Rolla as an Access Fee $2700.00; and anyone connecting to a sewer built by others in this Access Fee Area shall pay to the City of Rolla as an Access Fee $400.00. (Ord. 3424, §4)



Sec. 35-3.2 Southside Sewer Access Fee Area.
The Southside Access Fee Area is hereby established. The boundaries of this area are described in Ordinance Number 3159, Passed by the City Council of the City of Rolla, Missouri and approved by the Mayor on the 26th day of November, 1996. (Ord. 3462, §1)

The City Council of the City of Rolla, Missouri declares that it is necessary to construct sewers within the said sewer Access Fee Area for sanitary purposes, and that it will be to the best interest of the residents of said Access Fee Area and the City of Rolla to construct said sewers. (Ord. 3462, §2)

The City Council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, hereby authorizes the City Engineer to prepare plans and specifications for construction of the sewers within said Access Fee Area, including all necessary laterals, manholes, and other appurtenances and including an estimate of the cost thereof, and to file the same with the City Clerk who shall keep the same subject to the inspection of the public. (Ord. 3462, §3)

Anyone connecting to this sewer constructed by the City of Rolla in this Access Fee Area shall pay to the City of Rolla as an Access Fee $2700.00; and anyone connecting to a sewer built by others in this Access Fee Area shall pay to the City of Rolla as an Access Fee $400.00. These access fees shall be adjusted on an annual basis based on the Construction Cost Index published by American City & County or by other methods approved by the City Council of the City of Rolla. (Ord. 3462, §4)

These Access Fees shall not apply to the connections made in conjunction with the Neighborhood Improvement District as described in Ordinance Number 3310, Passed by the City Council of the City of Rolla, Missouri and approved by the Mayor on the 3rd day of May, 1999. Further, this Access Fee shall not apply to the connections made in conjunction with any 50-50 cost share agreements entered into before January 1, 2002. (Ord. 3462, §5)



Secs. 35-4 to 35-28. Reserved.


ARTICLE II SEWER BILLING


Sec. 35-29. Method of billing - Combined water and sewerage services.
The general manager of Rolla Municipal Utilities or such other officers or representatives of the city as may be designated from time to time shall cause all water meters to be read and bills for sanitary sewerage services to be rendered monthly as services accrue. All bills shall be due and payable from and after the date such bills are rendered, at the office of the municipal utilities, during the regular hours of business. The general manager, or other persons designated, may calculate the amount of each bill for sanitary sewerage services and may add the same to the amount of the bill of the customer for water and water services and render such customer a combined bill for such water and sewerage services. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-30. Due dates for water and sewerage bills.
The due date of bills for sanitary sewerage services shall be the same as the due date of the customer's bill for water service. If any bill for water and sanitary sewerage service is not paid by the due date, the water service will be disconnected. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-31. Owner and occupant jointly and severally liable for water and sewerage systems.
The occupant and user of the premises receiving sanitary sewerage services or water and sewerage services combined and the owner of such premises shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for such service rendered on the premises. The city shall have power to sue the occupant or owner, or both of the real estate in a civil action to recover any sum due for services plus a reasonable attorney's fee to be fixed by the court. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Secs. 35-32 to 35-52. Reserved.


ARTICLE III USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED
Sec. 35-53. Depositing objectionable waste on public or private property within city.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the City of Rolla, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City of Rolla, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-54. Discharge of polluted water to natural outlet within the city.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City of Rolla, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City of Rolla, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this ordinance. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-55. Construction or maintenance of privy, cesspool, etc. for disposal of sewage.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-56. Installation of suitable toilet facilities and connection with public sewer system within ninety days of notification.
The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the City of Rolla and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the City of Rolla, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, within ninety (90) days of the date of the official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within one hundred (100) feet of the property line. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Secs. 35-57 to 35-61. Reserved.


ARTICLE IV PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
Sec. 35-62. Use where public sanitary sewer not available; compliance with division.
Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of Article III, Section 35-56, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this Article. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-63. Permit - Required prior to commencement of construction; application fee.
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the public works director. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the City of Rolla, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the public works director. A permit and inspection fee of twenty-five ($25) dollars shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-64. Same - Effective upon satisfactory completion of installation; final inspection.
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the public works director. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the public works director when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within sixty (60) hours of the receipt of notice to the public works director. (Ord. 2136, § 2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-65. Compliance with state water pollution board recommendations; when permit denied; septic tank or cesspool discharge into natural outlet.
The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of Public Health of the State of Missouri. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than one acre. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-66. Required use of public sewer upon availability; abandonment and filling of private facilities.
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in Article IV, Section 35-65, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this Ordinance, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-67. Owner responsible for operation and maintenance costs.
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the City of Rolla. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-68. Division not to interfere with requirement imposed by health officer.
No statement contained in this Article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health Department. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-69. Building sewer to be connected to public sewer when available.
When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected to said sewer within sixty (60) days and the private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean back run gravel or dirt. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Secs. 35-70 to 35-74. Reserved.


ARTICLE V BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
Sec. 35-75. Permit required by unauthorized person uncovering, using, etc., any public sewer or appurtenance thereof.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into; use; alter; or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the public works director. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-76. Disposal in compliance with federal standards.
All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except those discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to the Federal Act and more stringent state and local standards. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-77. Classes of building sewer permits; application, fee and permit conditions.
There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits; (a) for residential and commercial service, and (b) for service establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the City of Rolla. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the public works director. A permit, and inspection fee of fifty ($50) dollars for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and fifty ($50) dollars for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the City of Rolla at the time the application is filed.

The industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must provide information describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics, and type of activity. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-78. Permit and connection contingent on capacity of system.
A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment facilities have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-79. Installation and connection costs to be borne by owner; indemnification of city; rebate program.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection and maintenance of the building sewer (sewer lateral) shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City of Rolla from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation or replacement of the building sewer. The City of Rolla shall provide a rebate equivalent to twenty-five dollars per linear foot ($25/LF) for sewer lateral replacement in the City's street right-of-way. The rebate is intended to offset the additional cost of sewer lateral replacement in the street right-of-way. Beginning in January 2007 said rebate will be adjusted to reflect the Consumer Price Index for the preceding year. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3; Ord. 3721, §1)



Sec. 35-80. Separate and independent building sewer required for every building; exception.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another or an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-81. Use of old building sewers to serve new buildings.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the public works director, to meet all requirements of this Ordinance. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-82. Size, slope, etc., of building sewers, excavation methods, etc., to comply with building and plumbing codes, etc.
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the City of Rolla. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-83. Elevation of building sewer; lifting of sanitary sewage from building drain.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-84 Discharge of surface runoff or groundwater to public sanitary sewer through connection of roof downspouts, etc., with building sewer or building drain.
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, interior and exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-85. Sewer connections to conform to all applicable city regulations; deviations to be approved.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the City of Rolla, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M.and the S.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gas tight and water tight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the public works director before installation. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-86. Inspection and connection of building sewer to public sewer; supervision of connection.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the public works director when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the public works director or his representative. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-87. Excavations to be adequately guarded with barricades and lights; restoration of disturbed streets, sidewalks, etc. to satisfaction of city.
All excavation for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City of Rolla. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Secs. 35-88 to 35-92. Reserved.


ARTICLE VI USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS
Sec. 35-93. Stormwater, surface water, etc. - Discharge to sanitary sewer prohibited.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, including interior and exterior foundation drains, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-94. Same - Discharge to storm sewers or approved natural outlet.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the public works director. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the public works director, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-95. Prohibiting the discharge of certain waters and wastes to public sewers.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:

Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.

Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, which constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two (2) mg/1 as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.

Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works. (Ord. 3070, §1)

Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-96. Certain substances, materials, etc. which may be prohibited from discharge by public works director; factors to be considered.
Any waters or wastes having (1) a five (5) day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 parts per million by weight, or (2) containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids, or (3) having an average daily flow greater than two (2) percent of the average sewage flow of the city, shall be subject to the review of the public works director. Where necessary in the opinion of the public works director, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to (1) reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million by weight, or (2) reduce the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight, or (3) control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the public works director and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing."

No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the public works director that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, can have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the public works director will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:

Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred-fifty (150) oF (65oC).

Any waters or wastes containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/1 or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one hundred-fifty oF (0 and 65oC).

Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower or greater shall be subject to review and approval of the public works director.

Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.

Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the public works director for such materials.

Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the public works director as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of state, federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.

Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the public works director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.

Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.

Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/1 as Hg at any time except as permitted by the public works director in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations.

Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/1 at any time except as permitted by the public works director in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations.

Materials which exert or cause:

Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride or sodium sulfate);

Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);

Unusual BOD (chemical oxygen demand) or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works;

Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined herein.

Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)


Sec. 35-97. Action of public works director upon discharge or proposed discharge of waters or wastes as enumerated in Section 35-96 and deemed unacceptable.
If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possesses the characteristics enumerated in Section 35-96 of this Article, and which in the judgment of the public works director, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life to constitute a public nuisance, the public works director may:

Reject the wastes;

Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;

Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or

Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing sewer charges under the provision of Article IX.

If the public works director permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the public works director, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-98. Grease, oil and sand interceptors; when required, approval and accessibility.
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the public works director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the public works director, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)

Every person in the city of Rolla required by this Ordinance to install a grease, oil and sand interceptor shall permit the Director of Public Works or any person he shall designate to inspect the interceptors. If in the opinion of the Director of Public Works or the person he shall designate, the interceptor is not functioning adequately as installed to clean liquid waste, the Director of Public Works or his designee shall issue a summons noting the date of inspection, the reasons for failure, and any required remedial action. After the expiration of ten days from the date of inspection and issuance of summons, in the event the interceptor has not been rendered capable of passing inspection, the owner shall be deemed to have created a nuisance as defined in Sections 28-1 and 28-6 of the Rolla City Code, and the Director shall be empowered to proceed as in that Chapter. (Ord. 2935, §1)



Sec. 35-99. Maintenance of preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities in effective operation and at owner's expense.
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.(Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3)



Sec. 35-100. Installation and maintenance requirements for control manhole.
When required by the public works director, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the public works director. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-101 Tests required on industrial wastes for compliance with governmental regulations and special conditions.
The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests, and analyses of waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this Ordinance and any special conditions for discharge established by the City of Rolla or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge.

The number, type, and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the City of Rolla, but no less than once per year the industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, state, and local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of measurements and laboratory analyses to the City of Rolla at such times and in such manner as prescribed by the City of Rolla. The owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analyses, and reporting required by the City of Rolla. At such times as deemed necessary, the City of Rolla reserves the right to take measurements and samples of analyses by an outside laboratory service. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-102. Determination of measurements, tests, etc.; applicability of certain publication; method of sampling.
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this Ordinance shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property.

The particular analyses involved will determine whether a twenty-four (24) hour composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-103. Special agreements between city and industrial concern.
No statement contained in this Article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the City of Rolla and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the City of Rolla for treatment, subject to payment therefore, by the industrial concern. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Secs. 35-104 to 35-108. Reserved.


ARTICLE VII PROTECTION OF SEWAGE WORKS FROM DAMAGE
Sec. 35-109. Damaging, tampering, etc. with any sewage works structure; interference with manhole; immediate arrest.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Secs. 35-110 to 35-114. Reserved.


ARTICLE VIII POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS
Sec. 35-115. Authority to enter property for purpose of inspection, observation, etc. - Limited to waste discharge.
The public works director and other duly authorized employees of the City of Rolla bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. The public works director or his representative shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-116. Same - Observance of company safety rules; indemnification of company; exception.
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in Section 35-115, the public works director or duly authorized employees of the City of Rolla shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the City of Rolla employees and the City of Rolla shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by City of Rolla employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in Section 35-100. (Ord. 2136, § 2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-117. Same - Property through which city holds duly negotiated easement; compliance with terms pertaining to property.
The public works director and other duly authorized employees of the City of Rolla bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the City of Rolla holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Secs. 35-118 to 35-122. Reserved.


ARTICLE IX USER RATES
Sec. 35-123. Basis for wastewater service charges.
It is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to the protection of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the City of Rolla to collect charges from all users who contribute wastewater to the City's treatment works. The proceeds of such charges so derived will be used for the purpose of operating, maintaining and retiring the debt of such public wastewater treatment works. (Ord. 2886, §3)



Sec. 35-124. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this ordinance shall be as follows:

"BOD" (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) - shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Centigrade, express in milligrams per liter (mg/1).

"Normal Domestic Wastewater" shall mean wastewater that has a BOD concentration of not more than 200 mg/1 and a suspended solids concentration of not more than 250 mg/1.

"Operation and Maintenance" shall mean all expenditures during the useful life of the treatment works for materials, labor, utilities, and other items which are necessary for managing and maintaining the sewer works to achieve the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed.

"Replacement" shall mean expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes replacement.

"Residential Contributor" shall mean any contributor to the City's treatment works whose lot, parcel of real estate, or building is used for domestic dwelling purposes only.

"Shall" is mandatory; "May" is permissive.

"SS" (denoting Suspended Solids) shall mean solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering.

"Treatment Works" shall mean any devices and systems for the storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage, or liquid industrial wastes. These include intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, sewage collection systems, individuals systems, pumping, power, and other equipment and their appurtenances; extensions improvements, remodeling, additions and alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled supply such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any works, including site acquisition of land that will be an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal for residues resulting from such treatment (including land for composing sludge, temporary storage of such compost, and land used for the storage of treated wastewater in land treatment systems before land application); or any other method or system for preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating, or disposing of municipal waste or industrial waste, including waste in combined storm water and sanitary sewer systems.

"Useful Life" shall mean the estimated period during which a treatment works will be operated.

"User Charge" shall mean that portion of the total wastewater service charge which is levied in a proportional and adequate manner for the cost of operation, maintenance, and replacement of the wastewater treatment works.

"Water Meter" shall mean a water volume measuring and recording device, furnished and installed by the City of Rolla. (Ord. 2886, §3; Ord. 3017, §2)



Sec. 35-125. Basis for wastewater service charges.
The wastewater service charge for the use of and for service supplied by the wastewater facilities of the City of Rolla shall consist of a service availability fee for the operation and maintenance of the collection system and a basic wastewater treatment user charge for wastewater treatment operation, maintenance and replacement, sewer system reserve fund, and a surcharge rate for BOD and SS.

The service availability fee shall be based on the estimated cost for the collection system operation, maintenance and replacement costs.

The basic wastewater treatment user charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by water meters having the following normal concentrations:

A five day, 20 degree centigrade (20oC) biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) of 200 mg/1.
A suspended solids (SS) content of 250 mg/1.
It shall consist of treatment operation, maintenance and replacement costs plus sewer system reserve fund costs and shall be computed as follows:

Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and maintain the wastewater facilities, including a replacement fund for the year and a sewer system reserve fund, for all works categories.
Proportion the estimated costs to wastewater facility categories by Volume, Suspended Solids and BOD, if possible.
Estimate wastewater Volume, pounds of SS and pounds of BOD to be treated.
Proportion the estimated costs of non-industrial users by Volume, Suspended Solids and BOD.
Compute costs per 1,000 gallons for normal sewage strength.
Compute surcharge costs per pound and BOD and SS in excess of normal sewage strength.
A surcharge will be levied to all users whose wastewater exceeds the normal concentrations for BOD (200 mg/1) and SS (250 mg/1).  The surcharge will be based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for all wastes which exceed the 200 mg/1 and 250 mg/1 concentration for BOD and SS respectively.  Section 35-129 specifies the procedure to compute a surcharge.

That portion of the total user charge collected which is designated for operation and maintenance including replacement purposes as established in Section 35-126, shall be deposited in a separate non-lapsing fund known as the Operation, Maintenance and Replacement Fund and will be kept in two primary accounts as follows:

An account designated for the specific purpose of defraying operation and maintenance costs (excluding replacement) of both collection and treatment works (Operation and Maintenance Account).
An account designated for the specific purpose of ensuring replacement needs over the useful life of the treatment works (Replacement Account).  Deposits in the replacement account shall be made annually from the operation, maintenance and replacement revenue in the amount of $272,189 annually. 
The adequacy of the service availability fee and the wastewater service charge shall be reviewed annually by accountants for the City of Rolla and presented in their annual audit report.  The service availability fee and the wastewater service charge shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in operation and maintenance costs, replacement costs, or the sewer system reserve fund.

The City will review the user charge system every year and revise user charge rates as necessary to ensure that the system generates adequate revenues to pay the costs of operation and maintenance including replacement and that the system continues to provide for the proportional distribution of operation and maintenance including replacement costs among users and user classes.

The City will notify each user at least annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate being charged for operation, maintenance including replacement of the treatment works.

The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges and surcharges shall be the metered water consumption read to the lowest even increment of 1000 gallons.

If the person discharging wastes into the public sewer procures any part, or all, of his water from sources other than the City of Rolla Water System, all or a part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the person shall install and maintain, at his expense, water meters of a type approved by the Public Works Director for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained from these other sources.
Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required by the Public Works Director if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined from the metered water consumption records.
Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be installed, owned and maintained by the person.  Following approval and installation such meters may not be removed, unless service is cancelled, without the consent of the Public Works Director.  (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3; Ord. 3486, §2; Ord. 3881, §2; Ord. 4379, §2)


Sec. 35-126. Basic user rate for metered users.
Each user shall pay for the services provided by the City based on his use of the treatment works as determined by water meters acceptable to the City.

User charges shall be based on water used during the current month.  If a user has a consumptive use of water, or in some other manner uses water which is not returned to the wastewater collection system, the user charge for that contributor may be based on a wastewater meters or separate water meters installed and maintained at the contributor's expense, and in a manner acceptable to the City.

On a monthly basis each contributor shall pay a user charge rate for operation and maintenance including replacement for each 1,000 gallons of water use.

This rate per 1,000 gallons shall be as follows:

As of first billing after

January 1, 2018            $5.25/1,000 gallons
January 1, 2019            $5.25/1,000 gallons
January 1, 2020            $5.25/1,000 gallons
January 1, 2021            $5.25/1,000 gallons

In addition, a service availability fee will be assessed for all users.  This fee will be assessed based on the cost of operation and maintenance of the collection system.  Each user will be assessed based on the water meter size.  The following table presents these costs:

As of first billing after January 1, 2018

Water Meter Size                      Service Availability Fee
Up to 1"                                   $3.00/month
1.5"                                         $4.25/month
2.0"                                         $6.25/month
3.0"                                         $12.50/month
4.0"                                         $18.75/month
6.0"                                         $31.25/month

As of first billing after   January 1, 2019

Water Meter Size                      Service Availability Fee
Up to 1"                                   $6.00/month
1.5"                                         $8.50/month
2.0"                                         $12.50/month
3.0"                                         $25.00/month
4.0"                                         $37.50/month
6.0"                                         $62.50/month

As of first billing after   January 1, 2020

Water Meter Size                      Service Availability Fee
Up to 1"                                   $9.00/month
1.5"                                         $12.75/month
2.0"                                         $18.75/month
3.0"                                         $37.50/month
4.0"                                         $56.25/month
6.0"                                         $93.75/month

As of first billing after   January 1, 2021

Water Meter Size                      Service Availability Fee
Up to 1"                                   $12.00/month
1.5"                                         $17.00/month
2.0"                                         $25.00/month
3.0"                                         $50.00/month
4.0"                                         $75.00/month
6.0"                                         $125.00/month

Any user which discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge from the City's treatment works, or any user which discharges any substance which singly or by interaction with other substances causes identifiable increases in the cost of operation, maintenance, or replacement of the treatment works, shall pay for such increased costs.  The charge to each such user shall be determined by the responsible plant operating personnel and approved by the city council

The user charge rates established in this Article apply to all users, regardless of their location, of the City's treatment works. (Ord. 2391, §1; Ord. 2556, §1; Ord. 2886, §3; Ord. 2950, §2; Ord. 3017, §2; Ord. 3082, §2; Ord. 3215, §2; Ord. 3267, §2; Ord. 3359, §2; Ord. 3418, §2; Ord. 3486, §2; Ord. 3530, §2; Ord. 3703, §2; Ord. 3770, §2; Ord. 3830, §2; Ord. 3881, §2; Ord. 3935, §1; Ord. 3966, §1; Ord. 4060, §1; Ord. 4117, §1; Ord. 4166, §1; Ord. 4234, §1, Ord. 4306, §1; Ord. 4379, §2)



Sec. 35-127. Basic user rate for nonmetered residential users.
All residential non-metered users of wastewater facilities shall pay a flat rate annual charge to cover the charge per 1,000 gallons usage and the service availability fee equivalent to a one-inch water meter.

The flat rate annual charge for non-metered users shall be as follows:

As of first billing after

January 1, 2018            $365.40 per year
January 1, 2019            $377.28 per year
January 1, 2020            $389.16 per year
January 1, 2021            $401.04 per year

The Public Works Director may require such flat rate user to install a metering device on the water supply to measure the amount of service supplied and to adjust the annual user fee accordingly.

(Ord. 2391, §2; Ord. 2459, §2; Ord. 2556, §2; Ord. 2886, §3; Ord. 2950, §2; Ord. 3017, §2; Ord. 3082, §2; Ord. 3215, §2; Ord. 3267, §2; Ord. 3359, §2; Ord. 3418, §2; Ord. 3486, §2; Ord. 3530, §2; Ord. 3703, §2; Ord. 3770, §2; Ord. 3830, §2; Ord. 3881, §2; Ord. 3935, §1; Ord. 3966, §1; Ord. 4060, §1; Ord. 4117, §1; Ord. 4166, §1; Ord. 4234, §1, Ord. 4306, §1; Ord. 4234, §1; Ord. 4306, §1; Ord. 4379, §2)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 35-128. Surcharge rate. (See Appendix "A")
The rates for surcharges for BOD and SS shall be as follows:

Unit BOD charge of $0.926 per pound.
Unit SS charge of $0.741 per pound. 


(Ord. 2136, § 2; Ord. 2886, §3; Ord. 2950, §2; Ord. 3017, §2; Ord. 3082, §2; Ord. 3215, §2; Ord. 3267, §2; Ord. 3359, §2; Ord. 3418, §2; Ord. 3486, §2; Ord. 3530, §2; Ord. 3703, §2; Ord. 3770, §2; Ord. 3830, §2; Ord. 3881, §2; Ord. 3935, §1; Ord. 3966, §1; Ord. 4060, §1; Ord. 4117, §1; Ord. 4166, §1; Ord. 4379, §2)

 



Sec. 35-129. Computation of surcharge. (See Appendix "A")
The concentration of wastes used for computing surcharges shall be established by waste sampling.  Waste sampling shall be performed as often as may be deemed necessary by the Public Works Director and shall be binding as a basis for surcharges.  The wastewater surcharge shall be computed by the formula:

Total monthly charge to extra strength user =
V ($5.25/1000 gal unit charge)
+ V ($0.926/1000 gal unit BOD charge) (BODes-BODnd)(.00834)
+ V ($0.741/1000 gal unit SS charge) (sees - SEND)(.00834)
Where:

V is the Volume of wastewater in 1000 gallons discharged by the extra strength user during the month.
Unit flow charge is in $/1000 gal from paragraph 4
Unit BOD charge is in $/lb BOD from paragraph 4Unit SS charge is in $/lb SS from paragraph 4
BOD is the normal BOD strength in milligrams per liter (mg/1) as defined in Sec. 35-124 of the ordinance.
SS is the normal domestic SS strength in mg/1 as defined in Sec. 35-124 of the ordinance and .00834 is a unit conversion factor.
es is extra strength
nd is normal domestic
(Ord. 2136, § 2; Ord. 2886, §3; Ord, 4379, §2)



Sec. 35-130. Computation of wastewater service charge. (See Appendix "A")
The total wastewater service charge (user charge) shall be computed by the formula found in Appendix "A".  (Ord. 2391, §3; Ord. 2556, §3; Ord. 2886, §3)



Sec. 35-131. Connection permit fee schedule.
No permit required by this Chapter shall be issued and no sewer connection made until the owner or owners of the land to be served by such connections, or someone for him or them, shall have paid to the City, the appropriate fee as provided as follows:

Single dwelling or mobile home, one hundred fifty dollars per unit

Duplex and apartment building, seventy-five dollars per unit.

Rooming houses, dormitories, fraternities, motels, hotels, convalescent homes, hospitals and similar uses:
5 to 11 occupants            $150.00
12 to 74 occupants          $300.00
75 to 99 occupants          $420.00
100 to 149 occupants       $600.00
150 to 199 occupants       $840.00
200 to 399 occupants       $1,200.00
400 and over                   $2,400.00

Single (commercial, office, retail or wholesale) business, one hundred and fifty dollars.

Multi-(commercial, office, retail or wholesale) business, one hundred fifty dollars plus seventy-five dollars for each additional set facilities over one.

Industrial uses, one hundred fifty dollars for the first five thousand square feet plus an additional fee of seventy-five dollars for each additional five thousand square feet (or portion thereof).

Assembly uses: Theaters, night clubs, restaurants, lecture halls, recreation centers, terminals, schools, churches, eleemosynary, religious and educational institutions and similar uses.  Based on capacity:  First seventy-five persons, one hundred fifty dollars; for each additional one hundred persons or fraction thereof, one hundred fifty dollars.  (Ord. 2197, §1; Ord. 2886, §3; Ord. 3422, §2)

This Section shall be in full force and effect as of April 1, 2001.  (Ord. 3422, §3)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 35-132. Sewer connection fees.
Sewer connection fees, when applicable, shall be paid to the City in accordance with the schedule of fees that are listed in Section 35-130 of this Ordinance.  An additional tapping fee of fifty dollars shall be paid in advance to the City for connections made to the public sewer at locations other than those private sewer lines which have been stubbed out and capped.  All sewer taps must be made by or under the direction of the public works director or his representative.  (Ord. 2209, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-133. Sewer connections outside corporate limits of the city.
No person shall be permitted to connect any sewer line to any part of the sewer system of the city which lies outside the corporate limits of the city; provided, the public works director may, with the consent of the city council, issue a permit authorizing the connection of sewer lines outside the corporate limits of the city to the city sanitary sewer system, and under the following conditions:

The owner of the land shall submit a petition for annexation of the land into the city;

The parcel of property shall be developed and used in accordance with the plans for its land use adopted by the City Council and approved by the Mayor. If no plans for its land use have been adopted and approved at the time of the application for service, then the service shall not be permitted until plans have been adopted and approved;

Except as otherwise provided by the Mayor and City Council, the parcel of property shall be developed in accordance with city specifications and standards as though the property were within the city's limits.

The sewer connection fees, as set forth in Section 35-131, shall be paid in advance;

The owner of the premises to be served is subject to a monthly sewer use fee that will be established as follows:

If the applicant has a separate water supply system, which serves more than one user, the applicant shall install a master meter on his main water distribution system to specifications approved by the city. This meter shall be read each month by the city and the applicant shall be charged a monthly fee that is equal to the corresponding fee paid for premises situated within the corporate limits, as established by Section 35-126.

If the applicant has an individual water supply, which serves one residence only, the city reserves the right to establish an annual sewer use fee without setting an individual water meter and the fee shall be equal to the rate of the corresponding annual use fee paid for premises situated within the corporate limits, as established by Section 35-127.

The owner shall be responsible for construction of all sewer mains, together with all individual service lines. The city may at its option arrange for the sewer mains and have the owner or owners pay all associated cost for the installation in advance;

Detailed plans for the applicant's proposed sewer system shall be submitted to the city for approval by the public works director. If the system is already constructed, as-built plans must be furnished for review. The city may at its option arrange for the sewer main plans or as-built plans and have the owner or owners pay all associated cost for the preparation in advance;

The owner shall authorize right of entry by the city representative or agent, at any time, for the purpose of inspecting and testing the owner's sewer system or to perform work to correct or improve such sewer system.

The owner shall correct, repair or alter, within a specified time period, any portion of the sewer line found to be defective by the city's representative or agent upon verbal or written notice by the public works director or his representative;

In the event the owner fails to meet the specified time schedule to correct such sewer system the city may perform such corrective work and the owner shall compensate the city for such work in an amount equal to the actual cost to the city or by a contractor;

Upon completion of construction of the sewer line and the fulfillment of all special conditions set by the city, the owner shall dedicate a perpetual maintenance easement to the city, including the ownership of the system. At that time, the city shall allow the connection and shall operate and maintain the new collection system;

All sanitary sewer lines permitted by this section shall comply with all city ordinances governing the installation of sanitary sewers within the corporate limits of the city;

The city reserves the right to cut off or disconnect any connection made under the provisions of this section in the event the charges or fees required by the chapter become delinquent or in the event of a violation of the provisions of the chapter. (Ord. 2197, §1; Ord. 2886, §3; Ord. 3436, §1)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 35-134. Sewer and water use rates at the Rolla National Airport.
Retail water and sewer rates at the Rolla National Airport shall be the same as those rates established by the City of Rolla for use within the corporate limits of the City of Rolla.

A wholesale rate of $1.25/1,000 is hereby established for sale of water from the Rolla National Airport to other political subdivisions within the State of Missouri.

The wholesale rate shall be used for the sale of water for agricultural use upon the Rolla National Airport.
(Ord. 4151)

(Return to Contents)

Secs. 35-135 to 35-139. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)

ARTICLE X - CHARGES FOR WASTEWATER SERVICES (USER CHARGES)
Sec. 35-140. Notice to cease all violations within specified time period; revocation of sewage disposal permit.
Any person found to be violating any provisions of this Ordinance except Article VII shall be served by the City of Rolla with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-141. Violation continued beyond time limit provided for in Section 35-140.
Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in Article X, Section 35-140, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount not exceeding one-hundred (100) dollars for each violation. Each twenty-four (24) hour period in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-142. Violators liable to city for expense, loss, etc.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall become liable to the City of Rolla for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the City of Rolla by reason of such violation. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Secs. 35-143 to 35-147. Reserved.


ARTICLE XI BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS
Sec. 35-148. Established.
There is hereby established, within the city, an executive department to be known as the Board of Public Works. (Ord. 2886, §3; Ord. 3699, §1; Ord. 3941, §1)



Sec. 35-149. Composition; appointment of members; compensation.
(a) The Board of Public Works shall consist of four persons, who shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council as other appointive officers of the city are appointed and confirmed.

(b) Each member of the Board so appointed under this Article shall receive a salary for his services commensurate with the compensation provided members of the City Council as established by ordinance (Ord. 630, §1; Ord. 2886, §3; Ord. 3699, §1; Ord. 3941, §1)



Sec. 35-150. Term of office.
(a) The members of the Board of Public Works shall hold office for a term of four years or until their successors are appointed and qualified.

(b) Vacancies in the Board of Public Works, occasioned by removals, resignations or otherwise, shall be reported to the mayor and be filled in like manner as original appointments, except that if the vacancy is an unexpired term, the appointment shall be made for only the unexpired portion of that term. Consistent with RSMo 77.340 the mayor may, with the consent of a majority of all the members elected to the council, remove from office any appointive officer of RMU at will; and any such appointive officer may be so removed by a two-thirds vote of all the members elected to the council, independently of the mayor§s approval or recommendation. (Ord. 2124, § 1; Ord. 2221, §1; Ord. 2886, §3; Ord. 3699, §1; Ord. 3941, §1)



Sec. 35-151. Qualifications of members.
The members of the Board of Public Works shall be electors of the city who have resided therein for a period of two years before their appointment. Not more than two members of the board shall belong to the same political party and its administration shall in all respects be entirely non-partisan. No member shall hold any other city office, either by appointment or election, during his official term as a member of the board and any member of the Board of Public Works who shall accept a nomination or appointment for any other city office during his official term, shall be deemed thereby to have resigned as a member of the board and his membership shall thereby be, ipso facto, vacated. (Ord. 630, §3; Ord. 2886, §3; Ord. 3699, §1; Ord. 3941, §1)



Sec. 35-152. Reserved.


Sec. 35-153. Duties generally.
The Board of Public Works shall have full power and it shall be its duty, to take charge of and exercise full control over the waterworks, electric light and power system owned by the city or any other public utility which it may hereafter acquire or develop and all appurtenances thereto belonging and shall enforce the performance of all contracts and work and have charge and custody of all books, records, property and assets belonging or pertaining to such public utility, as provided by chapter 91 of the Revised Statutes of Missouri. It is the intention of this provision to confer full power and authority on the Board of Public Works to operate the utilities, except as may be otherwise provided by law, regulation, or ordinance. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize a sale of said utilities without a vote of the electorate of Rolla; however, said Board may provide for the sale or other disposition of any useless, obsolete or surplus supplies, equipment, or real estate not needed in the current or future operation of such utilities. The disposal of real estate shall be in the same manner prescribed by ordinance for other City property. (Ord. 1037, §2; Ord. 2886, §3; Ord. 3699, §1; Ord. 3941, §1)



Sec. 35-154. Powers generally.
In the process of operating public utilities, the Board of Public Works is vested with full power and authority and authorized to manage, control, and operate such public utilities, and by way of description but not of limitation, to make such repairs, replacements, additions or extensions of service as it may deem proper for the public good, to enter into contracts with other public and private entities for the purchase of their product or the sale thereto subject to limitations prescribed in Sec. 35-164, to purchase operating supplies and equipment, the full power and authority to employ such labor as may be necessary in its behalf and prescribe and fix the compensation for said services necessary to operate said utilities and the power to negotiate and approve the acquisition of any interest in real property where the consideration to be paid by the City does not exceed the sum of $100,000 per acquisition or transaction. (Ord. 1037, §3; Ord. 2886, §3; Ord. 3699, §1; Ord. 3941, §1; Ord. 4206, §1)



Sec. 35-155. Bond required.
The Board of Public Works shall jointly give an indemnity bond to the city for the faithful performance of their duties and the faithful accounting for all funds coming into their hands in such sum as required by the City Council, the expense of which shall be paid out of special utility account without expense to individual members of the board; however, should the board members be covered by a blanket bond or insurance coverage to the same extent, this bonding requirement shall not apply. (Ord. 1037, §10; Ord. 2635, §2; Ord. 2886, §3; Ord. 3699, §1; Ord. 3941, §1)

It shall be the duty of the board to require such employees as it may designate to obtain an indemnity bond in such amount as required by the Council. The cost of such bond shall be paid by the public utilities; however, should such employees be covered by a blanket bond or insurance coverage to the same extent, this requirement shall not apply. (Ord. 1037, §9; Ord. 2635, §3; Ord. 2886, §3; Ord. 3699, §1; Ord. 3941, §1)



Sec. 35-156. Monthly statement of revenues & expenses; Reports; Quarterly report to Council.
It shall be the duty of the Board of Public Works to make up an account monthly of all revenues, obligations and expenses incurred by the Board, in operating the utilities, including gross monthly total payroll, setting forth in items, the amounts due, to whom and for what service or account.  Such statement of accounts shall be examined, checked, and certified by the Board for payment, as true and correct;

The Board shall submit monthly Board meeting minutes to City;

No less than once per calendar quarter the Board shall make a public presentation to the Council a report that contains, at a minimum, key financial statements, status of pending projects, energy supply issues (i.e. MoPEP), energy market conditions and potential issues impacting RMU, City, and the citizens of Rolla.  In addition, no less than annually the Board shall submit comparative utility rate information relative to a sampling of other MO cities and cooperatives.

As needed and in confidence the Board will keep Council informed of pending real estate purchases where the consideration to be paid by the City exceeds the sum of $100,000, per acquisition or transaction, and of pending litigation, including the potential need for eminent domain.  Property transactions included in the endorsed budget do not require City Council notification, unless there is a serious potential for adverse impact on surrounding properties.

(Ord. 1037, §5; Ord. 2886, §3; Ord. 3699, §1; Ord. 3941, §1; Ord. 4206, §1)



Sec. 35-157. Employees of public utilities - Limitation on number; compensation.
(a) The Board of Public Works shall select, employ and fix the salary of a general manager. The Board shall employ all necessary employees, including engineers, inspectors, clerks, and others, to carry on and operate all public utilities under its control. The Board of Public Work§s appointed general manager shall fix the hours and duties of engineers, inspectors, clerks and other employees and shall fix their compensation not to exceed the prevailing wage paid for the employees§ respective classification in the general area of the City or by other cities, public entities, and public cooperatives of comparable size. The general manager shall have the day-to-day duty and responsibility to manage the utilities subject to the authority of the Board. No individual member of the Board shall request or recommend the employment, retention, promotion, reduction or discharge of any employee.

(b) It is not intended or expected that the Board of Public Works shall pay the maximum salaries fixed but it is intended that the board shall employ only the necessary number required and pay them just compensation for their services, consistent with a compensation strategy and plan. The general manager will disclose and discuss with the city administrator any significant changes in compensation strategies or benefit plans prior to implementation. (Ord. 1037, §1; Ord. 1481, §1; Ord. 2076, §1; Ord. 2731, §1; Ord. 2886, §3; Ord. 3699, §1; Ord. 3941, §1)



Sec. 35-158. Budget review, adoption and amendment § Audit reporting.
(a) The Board of Public Works shall be solely responsible for the preparation and adoption of the Rolla Municipal Utilities Annual Operating Budget. Said budget shall comply with all applicable state laws pertaining to adoption. Prior to the Board approving the annual budget, the Board of Public Works shall schedule a public hearing on the proposed budget. No less than thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of said budget the Board of Public Works will present a copy of said approved budget in its entirety to the City Clerk and Council for consideration. Upon consideration of the budget by council, the City Council may elect to endorse said budget in its entirety by resolution. If no action is taken to endorse said budget within thirty (30) days of receipt, the budget shall be deemed endorsed. Failure to endorse said budget by resolution will not delay implementation thereof.

(b) The Board of Public Works may amend said budget once endorsed. Prior to the Board approving the amended budget, the Board of Public Works shall schedule a public hearing on the amended budget. No less than thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of said amended budget, the Board of Public Works will present a copy of said amended budget in its entirety to the City Clerk and Council for consideration. Upon consideration of the amended budget by council, the City Council may endorse said amended budget in its entirety by resolution. If no action is taken to endorse said budget amendment, the budget shall be deemed endorsed. Failure to endorse said amendment by resolution will not delay implementation thereof.

(c) All financial records shall be audited in compliance with all GASB rules and in conjunction with the City§s annual audit. The Board shall submit the annual audit to Council. (Ord. 3699, §1; Ord. 3941, §1)



Sec. 35-159. Assessment and collection of rates for city owned utilities.
(a) The assessment and collection of rates for water, electric, electric power, electric light or for the production of service of any other plant or works which the city may own or operate, shall be under the control and supervision of the Board of Public Works subject to this Code and other ordinances of the City. Prior to the Board approving any rate adjustment, the Board of Public Works shall schedule a public hearing on the proposed rate change. At the first available monthly City Council meeting, in the month immediately preceding the implementation of a change in rates for any service not otherwise submitted in the annual budget per Sec. 35-165, the Board of Public Works shall present the rate adjustment to the City Council for consideration. Upon consideration of the proposed rate change, Council may elect to endorse said rate change by resolution. If no action is taken to endorse said rate change prior to the effective date, the proposed rate shall be deemed endorsed. Failure to endorse said rates by resolution will not delay implementation thereof. (Ord. 630, §11; Ord. 2886, §3; Ord. 3699, §1; Ord. 3941, §1)

(b) Assessment and collection of cost adjustment charges may be considered and shall be under the control and supervision of the Board of Public Works subject to this Code and other ordinances of the City. Prior to the Board approving any cost adjustment clause, the Board of Public Works shall schedule a public hearing on the proposed methodology to be used in calculating said adjustment rate. At the first available monthly City Council meeting, in the month immediately preceding the implementation of a cost adjustment clause for any service not otherwise submitted in the annual budget per Sec. 35-165, the Board of Public Works shall present said cost adjustment clause to the City Council for consideration. Upon consideration of the proposed cost adjustment clause, Council may elect to endorse said adjustment clause by resolution. If no action is taken to endorse said adjustment clause prior to the effective date, the proposed cost adjustment clause shall be deemed endorsed. Failure to endorse said cost adjustment clause by resolution will not delay implementation thereof. After the effective date of any approved cost adjustment clause, the Board of Public Works shall implement said adjustment clause as prescribed with no further review required. (Ord. 3941, §1)



Sec. 35-160. Funds § Collection and deposit to public utility account.
In the process of operating the utilities, as provided in this Article, it shall be the duty of the Board of Public Works, through its servants and employees, to collect all sums due for services rendered and on all accounts in connection with the operation of the utilities and all sums so collected, shall be deposited by the Board to the credit of a special account, to be known as the public utility account. The Board shall periodically but no less than every five (5) years bid out the utilities§ banking depository. (Ord. 1037, §4; Ord. 2886, §3; Ord. 3699, §1; Ord. 3941, §1)



Sec. 35-161. Same § Disbursements.
All bills and expenses in connection with the operation of the utilities shall be paid out of the public utility account, which shall be under the general control of the Board of Public Works. No sums shall be paid, except upon checks drawn by any member of the Board of Public Works. The Mayor or City Clerk shall be primary signatory in the absence of a Board member primary signature. All checks shall be countersigned by the Board of Public Works§ appointed general manager or in the absence of general manager, the RMU operations manager or business/finance manager. (Ord. 1037, §4; Ord. 2449, §1; Ord. 2731, §2; Ord. 2886, §3; Ord. 2897, §2; Ord. 3699, §1; Ord. 3941, §1)



Sec. 35-162. Transfers to City general revenue fund.
a.) There shall be transferred monthly from the public utility account, to the general revenue fund of the City, an amount equal to 5% (five percent) of the gross receipts of basic water service and 5.5% (five and one-half percent) of the gross receipt of electric service, which shall become a part of the general funds of the City to be used for any and all general purposes including street and traffic lighting costs. The rate for electric service will be reduced to 5% (five percent) after 12 months (effective twelve (12) months after the effective date of this ordinance). The purpose of this monthly transfer is to take the place of the franchise tax and general property tax heretofore paid by the Missouri General Utilities to the City. §Basic water and electric service§ shall include those operating revenues generated from the residential, commercial, and industrial sale of water and electric service (including the service availability fee or other like receipts or operating revenues serving the same purpose). In turn, RMU shall bill the City for utility billing services, water hydrant consumption, and street lighting services on a monthly basis. Said services shall be agreed upon by the City and Board of Public Works and accounted for accordingly. (Ord. 1037, §6; Ord. 2886, §3; Ord. 3699, §1; Ord. 3941, §1; Ord. 4023, §1)

b.) This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after November 1, 2011. (Ord. 4023, §2)



Sec. 35-163. Accrued funds - Use to purchase improvements and retire indebtedness.
Whatever remains in the public utility account and whatever may accrue, shall be at the disposition of the Board of Public Works for the operation of the public utilities, making improvements and betterments and extensions and to do all things that in their judgment is for the best interest of the utility and for the further purpose of paying all interest and principal on account of the indebtedness incurred by said utilities. It is the intent of this provision to accumulate a reserve fund consistent with good operation of said utilities. Establishment of said reserve fund shall be disclosed to the Council and public through submittal of monthly financial statements. The reserve fund shall be at the disposition of the Board of Public Works for the above purposes. (Ord. 1037, §7; Ord. 2886, §3; Ord. 3699, §1; Ord. 3941, §1)



Sec. 35-164. Same - Restrictions on use.
Where no restriction is specially provided by this Code or other ordinance the board shall have full power to contract for and provide all necessary labor and material and supplies as it may deem necessary and submit its account for allowance and payment out of the special public utility account as provided in this Article. (Ord. 1037, §8; Ord. 2886, §3; Ord. 3699, §1; Ord. 3941, §1)



Sec. 35-165. Contracts required for supplies and services; exception; approval of contracts by city council.
The doing of all work and furnishing of all supplies for the waterworks, electric power and light plant or any other plant or work which may be under its supervision or control, shall be let out by the Board of Public Works in the same manner as other public works are let out, except in cases where it is not practicable to do such work or furnish such material by contract. Except as herein provided all contracts and long-term financial obligations (those exceeding one year in duration) in excess of $100,000 shall be submitted to the Council for approval, under such restrictions and regulations as may be provided by ordinance.

Exceptions:

(a) Endorsement of the budget by the Council authorizes the expenditure by the Board of Public Works for all purchases, and supplies included in said budget;

(b) All long-term financial obligations once endorsed by Council shall be paid by the Board of Public Works (i.e. multi-year obligations or power supply contracts);

(c) Emergency procurement in excess of $100,000 shall not require approval of City Council. The Board of Public Works shall notify the Council of emergency procurements at the next available Council meeting.(Ord. 630, §10; Ord. 2886, §3; Ord. 3699, §1; Ord. 3941, §1)



Sec. 35-166. Uncollectible utility bills.
Customers moving out of the service area with an uncollectible bill shall be responsible for all collection fees and/or attorney fees plus court costs and interest. (Ord. 3779, §1; Ord. 3941, §1)



Secs. 35-167 to 35-169. Reserved.


ARTICLE XII WATER SERVICE
Sec. 35-170. Authority of mayor to restrict, etc., use of water.
Whenever in the judgment of the mayor the public exigency shall require it, he shall have the right and authority, by proclamation to be published in one or more newspapers printed within the city, to limit in respect to time, or wholly suspend and prohibit for such length of time as such exigency shall in his judgment require, the drawing or use of water for public or private fountains and for street or yard sprinkling, or for either such purposes. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-171. Right of city to shut off water.
Whenever any of the rules and regulations set out in this Article or such other rules and regulations as the city may adopt are violated, the water shall be shut off from the building or place of such violation, although two or more persons may receive the water through the same pipe the water shall not be again turned on except by the order of the superintendent of the water system. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-172. Permit - Required.
No person shall be permitted to tap or make any connection with the distributing pipe of the water works of the city except upon written permit from the city. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-173. Same - Contents of application; issuance.
All applications for permits to tap the water mains, to open the streets for the purpose of laying water pipes, or to extend the same upon any streets, lane, alley, sidewalk, or open public grounds, or open private premises, or to make connections with the water system for any purpose shall be made in writing at the office of the superintendent of the water system, on the form prescribed and furnished by the city for that purpose, and by the person engaged to do such plumbing. Such person shall be an authorized plumber and the application shall state the name of the person desiring to have the plumbing done, the location of the premises, what the premises are used for, the purpose for which it is desired to use the water, and such accessible information as may be required to enable the city to keep a proper record of each case. When more than one building or tenant is supplied through one service pipe, the application for the supply of such building or tenants with water shall be made by one person, who shall be held responsible for all supplies through such pipes. Upon compliance with these conditions, the superintendent of the water system shall issue a written permit granting the applicant the privilege of a service attachment and the use of water. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-174. Agreement between city and user of water based on regulations, rates, etc.
The rules, regulations and water rates named and fixed shall be considered and are a part of the contract with every person supplied with water through the water system of the city. Every person by taking water shall be considered and accepted as expressing his consent to be bound thereby. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-175. Responsibility of owner for attachments, etc., between dwelling and street main.
(a) All attachments and appurtenances used in supplying water from the street mains to the front of the dwelling or structure must be supplied by the owner or occupant of the premises except that the water meter box and it's appurtenances shall be placed in a location acceptable to the City.

(b) The City, through its distribution agent, Rolla Municipal Utilities, shall be responsible for maintaining all water lines located on City property, or in the right-of-way, including the water main, main taps, pipe, laterals, fittings and valves between the main and the edge of the right-of-way. The owner or occupant of the premises shall be responsible for perpetual maintenance of customer service lines outside the right-of-way. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3; Ord. 3644, §1)



Sec. 35-176. Right to turn on water into service pipe restricted to city; exception.
No person other than the superintendent or his authorized agent shall turn the water into any service pipe in the first instance, or after water has been turned off by the superintendent on account of the violations of this chapter. Water shall not be turned on until the applicant shall have paid the water rental due for the current quarter. Plumbers are strictly prohibited from turning water into any service pipe except upon authority of the superintendent or for the temporary purpose of testing their work. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-177. Inspection.
All private work done in which the city water shall be used will be inspected as to strength and quality by the superintendent immediately before the water is turned on. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-178. Liability of city for damages resulting from failure of water services, etc.
It is expressly stipulated by the city that no claim shall be made against it by reason of the breaking or freezing of any service pipe or fixtures, or if from any other cause the supply of water should fail; nor from damage arising from the shutting off of water to repair mains, making connections or extensions; nor any other purpose that may be deemed necessary. The right is reserved to cut off the supply of water at any time for the purpose of repairing or otherwise, any permit or regulation to the contrary notwithstanding. Except in case of emergency, notice shall be given. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-179. Water rates generally.
The tariff of rates for the use of water through the water system of the city shall be established by the city and may be changed from time to time as required by conditions. (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3.)



Sec. 35-180. Introduction and regulation of fluoride in the public water supply system.
The city, acting by and through its legally constituted board of public works, is hereby authorized and directed to provide the means and to proceed with the introduction of fluoride additive meeting applicable standards into the public water supply of the city in such quantities as are required to provide throughout the pipe distribution system a fluoride concentration of approximately 0.7 parts fluoride per million parts of water.

The city acting by and through its legally constituted board of public works, shall keep an accurate record of the amount of fluoride bearing chemical applied to the quantities of water treated, and cause such analytical tests to be made for fluoride (in terms of the element F) in the untreated and treated water as it shall be directed to do by the Missouri Division of Health.  (Ord. 2136, §2; Ord. 2886, §3, Ord. 4218, §1)



Sec. 35-181. Lead Ban.
General Policy

Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is:

To ban the use of lead materials in the public drinking water system and private plumbing connected to the public drinking water system; and

To protect city residents from lead contamination in the city’s public drinking water system and their own private plumbing systems.

Application. This ordinance shall apply to all premises served by the public drinking water system of the city of Rolla, Missouri.

Policy. This ordinance will be reasonably interpreted by the water purveyor. It is the purveyor’s intent to ban the use of lead based material in the construction or modification of the city’s drinking water system or private plumbing connected to the city system. The cooperation of all consumers is required to implement the lead ban.

If, in the judgment of the water purveyor or his authorized representative, lead based materials have been used in new construction or modifications after January 4 2014, due notice shall be given to the consumer. The consumer shall immediately comply by having the lead base materials removed from the plumbing system and replaced with lead free materials. If the lead base materials are not removed from the plumbing system, the water purveyor shall have the right to discontinue water service to the premises.
(Ord. 4248, §1)

Definitions

The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this ordinance.

"Consumer" means the owner or person in control of any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system;

"Lead base materials," means any material containing lead in excess of the quantities specified in Section II.A.3.

"Lead free" means:

In General.

When used with respect to solder and flux, refers to solders and flux containing not more than 0.2 percent (0.2%) lead; and

When used with respect to pipes and pipefittings, refers to pipes and pipefittings containing not more than 0.25 percent (0.25%) lead.

Calculation. The weighted average lead content of a pipe, pipe fitting, plumbing fitting, or fixture shall be calculated by using the following formula: For each wetted component, the percentage of lead in the component shall be multiplied by the ratio of the wetted surface area of that component to the total wetted surface area of the entire product to arrive at the weighted percentage of lead of the component. The weighted percentage of lead of each wetted component shall be added together, and the sum of these weighted percentages shall constitute the weighted average lead content of the product. The lead content of the material used to produce wetted components shall be used to determine compliance with paragraph (A)(2). For lead content of materials that are provided as a range, the maximum content of the range shall be used.

"Public drinking water system" means any publicly or privately owned water system supplying water to the general public which is satisfactory for drinking, culinary and domestic purposes and meets the requirements of the Missouri Department of Natural Resources; and

"Water purveyor" means the owner, operator, or individual in responsible charge of a public water system.

"Exemptions"

pipes, pipe fittings, plumbing fittings, or fixtures, including backflow preventers, that are used exclusively for non-potable services such as manufacturing, industrial processing, irrigation, outdoor watering, or any other uses where the water is not anticipated to be used for human consumption; or

toilets, bidets, urinals, fill valves, flush-o-meter valves, tub fillers, fire hydrants, shower valves, service saddles, or water distribution main gate valves that are two inches in diameter or larger.
(Ord. 4248, §2)

Lead Banned from Drinking Water Plumbing

No water service connection shall be installed to any premises where lead base materials were used in new construction or modifications of the drinking water plumbing after January 4, 2014.

f a premise is found to be in violation of Section III. A., water service shall be discontinued until such time that the drinking water plumbing is lead free.

(Ord. 4248, §3)

(Return to Contents)

ARTICLE XIII USE OF PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS
Sec. 35-182. Drilling, operating, or maintaining private wells or water supplies.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drill, operate, or otherwise maintain a private well or water supply on public or private property within the City of Rolla or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City of Rolla, except as otherwise provided in this Article. (Ord. 3052, §1; Ord. 3511, §2)



Sec. 35-183. Plugging of existing wells and connection to public water supply.
Except as otherwise provided in this Article, the owners of any property located wholly or partially within the City of Rolla are required at each owner's expense to plug any existing private wells in accordance with 10 CSR 23-3.110 of the Missouri Code of State Regulations and to cease utilizing any private water supplies to the extent that such wells and/or water supplies are located within the City of Rolla or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City of Rolla or supply water to property located within the City of Rolla. Such owners are further required to connect the houses, buildings, or other facilities on the property (to the extent the structure requires a potable water supply) to the public water system. Connection shall be made within 120 days of the effective date of annexation of the affected property into the city. This requirement shall not apply to any property located within the City of Rolla prior to May 1, 1995 provided the property and existing structures are served by the private well (Grandfathered Property) or to any property annexed into the City of Rolla after May 1, 1995 with lots which are a minimum of three acres and zoned Rural Residential (RR). Once the primary structure served by the private well is destroyed or replaced, the "Grandfather Clause" no longer applies and the private well shall be properly plugged as stipulated herein. Any property owner electing to or required to connect to the public water supply per this section, shall comply with all requirements of this Article and become a "full requirements water customer", of the public water supply system. (Ord.3052, §1; Ord. 3511, §2; Ord. 4348, §1)



Sec. 35-184. Operation and use of private well or water supply when access to public water supply not available.
Where access is not available to the public water supply for a parcel or any portion thereof, such parcel or any portion thereof may be connected to a private well and private water supply until such time as access to the public water supply is available. Availability for these purposes shall be defined as a functioning main of the public water supply system being located within 100 feet of the nearest boundary of the parcel. During all times that access is not available, the owner of such parcel shall operate and maintain the private well and/or private water supply in a sanitary manner at the owner's expense, and shall comply with the provisions of Section 35-187. When access is available, the requirements set forth in Section 35-183 shall become applicable. (Ord. 3052, §1; Ord. 3511, §2)



Sec. 35-185. Construction permit required prior to commencement of drilling, installation, or construction; application; fee; inspection provisions.
Before commencement of drilling, installation, or construction of a private well or private water supply under the authority of Section 35-184, the owner of such parcel or any portion thereof shall first obtain a written Construction Permit signed by the General Manager of the Rolla Municipal Utilities. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the City of Rolla or the Rolla Municipal Utilities, and the applicant shall supplement such application with any plans, specifications, and other information as is deemed necessary by the General Manager of the Rolla Municipal Utilities. A permit and inspection fee of five dollars ($5.00) shall be required to be paid to the Rolla Municipal Utilities at the time the application is filed.

Prior to completion of the private well or water supply, the Rolla Municipal Utilities shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of the drilling, installation, or construction and, in any event, the holder of the Construction Permit shall notify the Rolla Municipal Utilities both before any underground portions are covered and when the work is ready for final inspection. The inspection shall be made within sixty (60) hours (exclusive of weekends and holidays) of the receipt of notice to the Rolla Municipal Utilities.

Construction permits shall be valid for a period not exceeding one (1) year from date of issuance. (Ord. 3052, §1; Ord. 3511, §2)



Sec. 35-186. Permit for operation of private well or water supply.
After the drilling, installation, or construction pursuant to the Construction Permit is completed to the satisfaction of the Rolla Municipal Utilities, the Rolla Municipal Utilities shall issue an Operation Permit, which shall be valid for a period of five (5) years, unless terminated upon 90 days written notice due to violation of the provisions of this Article. The Operation Permit may be renewed for an additional period of five (5) years if the facility passes inspection by the Rolla Municipal Utilities.

Rolla Municipal Utilities, at its discretion, shall perform yearly inspections of the installation to verify compliance with applicable ordinances.

When access to the public water supply becomes available, the requirements set forth in Section 35-183 shall become applicable upon the expiration of the Operation Permit. (Ord. 3052, §1; Ord. 3511, §2)



Sec. 35-187. Compliance with applicable governmental regulations.
The type, capacities, location, and layout of any private well or water supply authorized by Section 35-184 shall comply with all applicable regulations, if any, of the State of Missouri or any federal agency. Failure to comply with such recommendations and regulations shall be grounds for the denial of a permit. The issuance of the permits by the Rolla Municipal Utilities shall not in any way relieve the permittee of the duties, obligations, or restrictions imposed by the State of Missouri or any federal agency. (Ord. 3052, §1; Ord. 3511, §2)



Sec. 35-188. Definition of public water supply.
For purposes of this Article, public water supply shall mean any of the following:

(a) The water supply system operation and maintained by the City of Rolla through its municipal utilities; or

(b) The water supply system operated and maintained by a public water supply district; or

(c) A water supply system operated by a water corporation regulated by the Missouri Public Service Commission; or

(d) A water supply system operated by a not-for-profit corporation which is licensed by the State of Missouri to provide a public water supply. (Ord. 3052, §1; Ord. 3511, §2)



Sec. 35-189. Private wells for heat pumps.
(a) Private wells may be utilized for closed loop heat pump systems, as defined and discussed in 10 CSR 23-5 in the Missouri Code of State Regulations. A construction permit and an operation permit as provided in Sections 35-185 and 35-186 of this Code are required. Such wells shall comply in all respects with the Heat Pump Construction Code set forth in 10 CSR 23-5. Failure to comply with same shall be grounds for denial of a permit. The issuance of a permit by Rolla Municipal utilities shall not in any way relieve the permittee of the duties, obligations, or restrictions imposed by the State of Missouri or any federal agency with jurisdiction.

(b) Private wells shall not be permitted for any type of open loop heat pump system, as defined and discussed in 10 CSR 23-5 in the Missouri Code of State Regulations. (Ord. 3411, §1; Ord. 3511, §2)



Secs. 35-190 to 35-193. Reserved.


ARTICLE XIV PRETREATMENT FOR INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER USERS
Sec. 35-194. Purpose and policy.
This ordinance sets forth uniform requirements for users of the Publicly Owned treatment Works for the City of Rolla and enables the City to comply with all applicable State and Federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 403). The objectives of this ordinance are:

To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Publicly Owned treatment Works that will interfere with its operation;
To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Publicly Owned Treatment Works that will pass through the Publicly Owned Treatment Works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the Publicly Owned Treatment Works;
To protect both Publicly Owned Treatment Works personnel from injury who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public;
To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the Publicly Owned Treatment Works;
To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works; and
To enable the City to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other Federal or State laws to which the Publicly Owned Treatment Works is subject.
This ordinance shall apply to all users of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works. The ordinance authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-195. Administration.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the city engineer shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the city engineer may be delegated by the city engineer to other City personnel. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-196 Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations, when used in this ordinance, shall have the designated meanings:

BOD -Biochemical Oxygen Demand
CFR -Code of Federal Regulations
COD -Chemical Oxygen Demand
EPA -U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
gpd -gallons per day
mg/l -milligrams per liter
NPDES-National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
POTW-Publicly Owned Treatment Works
RCRA -Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIC -Standard Industrial Classification
TSS -Total Suspended Solids
U.S.C. -United States Code
(Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-197 Definitions.
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated.

(a) Act or "the Act." The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251.

(b) Approval Authority. State of Missouri.

(c) Authorized Representative of the User.

(1) If the user is a corporation:

(a) The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
(b) The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty-five (25) million dollars (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
(2) If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively.

(3) If the user is a Federal, State, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee.

(4) The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3), above, may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the City.

(d) Biochemical Oxygen Demand or BOD. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five (5) days at 20° centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l).

(e) Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Categorical Standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.

(f) City. The City of Rolla.

(g) Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director, or other duly authorized official of said agency.

(h) Existing Source. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act.

(i) Grab Sample. A sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes.

(j) Indirect Discharge or Discharge. The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act.

(k) Instantaneous Maximum Allowable Discharge Limit. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.

(l) Interference. A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the City's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent State or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any State regulations contained in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.

(m) Medical Waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.

(n) New Source.

(1) Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:

(a) The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or
(b) The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or
(c) The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered.
(2) Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of Section 35-194 (b) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.

(3) Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has:

(a) Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program
(I) any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or
(II) significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
(b) Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph.
(o) Noncontact Cooling Water. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product.

(p) Pass Through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the City's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.

(q) Person. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all Federal, State, and local governmental entities.

(r) pH. measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units.

(s) Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).

(t) Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.

(u) Pretreatment Requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.

(v) Pretreatment Standards or Standards. Pretreatment standards shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.

(w) Prohibited Discharge Standards or Prohibited Discharges. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in Section 35-198 of this ordinance.

(x) Publicly Owned Treatment Works or POTW. A "treatment Works," as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned by the City. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.

(y) Septic Tank Waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.

(z) Sewage. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.)

(aa) Significant Industrial User.

(1) A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or

(2) A user that:

(a) Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater);
(b) Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or
(c) Is designated as such by the City on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
(3) Upon finding that a user meeting the criteria in Subsection (2) has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the City may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user.

(bb) Slug Load or Slug. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in Section 35-198 of this ordinance.

(cc) Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code. A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget.

(dd) Storm Water. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.

(ee) City engineer. The person designated by the City to supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this ordinance, or a duly authorized representative.

(ff) Suspended Solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering.

(gg) User or Industrial User. A source of indirect discharge.

(hh) Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.

(ii) Wastewater Treatment Plant or Treatment Plant. That portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. (Ord, 3183)



Sec. 35-198 Prohibited Discharge Standards.
(a) General Prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other-National, State, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.

(b) Specific Prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:

(I) Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140° F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;

(2) Wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or more than 9.5, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment;

(3) Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no case solids greater than one and one half inches (1.5") or three and eighty one, one hundredth centimeters (3.81 cm) in any dimension;

(4) Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW;

(5) Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F (65 °C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F (40°C);

(6) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;

(7) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems;

(8) Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the city engineer in accordance with Section 35-206 of this ordinance;

(9) Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;

(10) Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the City's NPDES permit;

(11) Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations;

(12) Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the city engineer;

(13) Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes;

(14) Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the city engineer in a wastewater discharge permit;

(15) Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test;

(16) Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW;

(17) Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than one hundred (100)mg/l; or

(18) Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, of more than one hundred percent (100%) or any single reading over ten percent (10%) of the Lower Explosive Limit of the meter.

Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-199 National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405471 are hereby incorporated.

(a) Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the city engineer may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c).

(b) When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the city engineer shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e).

(c) A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard.

(d) A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403. 15. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-200- Local Limits.
No local limits are needed at this time. (Ord. 3183; Ord. 3670, §2)



Sec. 35-201 City's Right of Revision.
The City reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-202 Dilution.
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The city engineer may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-203 Pretreatment Facilities.
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this ordinance and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in Section 35-198 of this ordinance within the time limitations specified by EPA, the State, or the city engineer, whichever time limitation is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city engineer for review, and shall be acceptable to the city engineer before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the City under the provisions of this ordinance. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-204 Additional Pretreatment Measures
(a) Whenever deemed necessary, the city engineer may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this ordinance.

(b) The city engineer may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.

(c) Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city engineer, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the city engineer and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense.

(d) Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-205 Accidental Discharge/Slug Control Plans.
At least once every two (2) years, the city engineer shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The city engineer may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the city engineer may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:

(a) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;

(b) Description of stored chemical;

(c) Procedures for immediately notifying the city engineer of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by Section 35-227 of this ordinance; and

(d) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plan site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-206 Hauled Wastewater.
(a) Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the city engineer, and at such times as are established by the city engineer. Such waste shall not violate Section 35-198 of this ordinance or any other requirements established by the City. The city engineer may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits.

(b) The city engineer shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The city engineer may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The city engineer also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this ordinance.

(c) Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the city engineer. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the city engineer. The city engineer may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The city engineer may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge.

(d) Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-207 Wastewater Analysis.
When requested by the city engineer, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within thirty (30) days of the request. The city engineer is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-208 Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirement.
(a) No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the city engineer, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to Section 35-209 of this ordinance may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein.

(b) The city engineer may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this ordinance.

(c) Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in Sections 35-239 through 35-255 of this ordinance. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all Federal and State pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of Federal, State, and local law. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-209 Wastewater Discharge Permitting: Existing Connections.
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this ordinance and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within ninety (90) days after said date, apply to the city engineer for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with Section 35-21 l of this ordinance, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective date of this ordinance except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the city engineer. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-210 Wastewater Discharge Permitting: New Connections.
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with Section 35-21 l of this ordinance, must be filed at least sixty (60) days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-211 Wastewater Discharge Permit Application Contents.
All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The city engineer may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information:

(a) All information required by Section 35-222(b) of this ordinance;
(b) Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;
(c) Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation;
(d) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production;
(e) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day);
(f) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge;
(g) Time and duration of discharges; and
(h) Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the city engineer to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application.
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-212 Application Signatories and Certification.
All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement:

"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the - possibility of penalty and imprisonment for knowing violations."

(Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-213 Wastewater Discharge Permit Decisions.
The city engineer will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the city engineer will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The city engineer may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-214 Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration.
A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five (5) years, at the discretion of the city engineer. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-215 Wastewater Discharge Permit Contents.
A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the city engineer to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW.

(a) Wastewater discharge permits must contain:

(l) A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five (5) years not more than five;
(2) A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the City in accordance with Section 35-218 of this ordinance, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;
(3) Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards;
(4) Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on Federal, State, and local law; and
(5) A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable Federal, State, or local law.
(b) Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions:

(l) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
(2) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works;
(3) Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges;
(4) Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
(5) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
(6) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment;
(7) A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable Federal and State pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and
(8) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city engineer to ensure compliance with this ordinance, and State and Federal laws, rules, and regulations. (Ord. 3183)


Sec. 35-216 Wastewater Discharge Permit Appeals.
The city engineer shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the city engineer to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within sixty (60) days of notice of its issuance.

(a) Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal.

(b) In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit.

(c) The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal.

(d) If the city engineer fails to act within thirty (30) days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.

(e) Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the municipal court for the twenty fifth Judicial Circuit Court of Missouri within ninety (90) calendar days of the Notice of Issuance. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-217 Wastewater Discharge Permit Modification.
The city engineer may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:

(a) To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State, or local pretreatment standards or requirements;
(b) To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance;
(c) A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
(d) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the City's POTW, City personnel, or the receiving waters;
(e) Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit;
(f) Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
(g) Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
(h) To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or
(i) To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. (Ord. 3183)
Note: Modification for this purpose may not be allowed unless the permit istransferable as provided in Section 33-2181



Sec. 35-218 Wastewater Discharge Permit Transfer.
Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least sixty (60) days advance notice to the city engineer and the city engineer approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the city engineer must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which:

(a) States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes;

(b) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and

(c) Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit.

Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-219 Wastewater Discharge Permit Revocation.
The city engineer may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:

(a) Failure to notify the city engineer of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;

(b) Failure to provide prior notification to the city engineer of changed conditions pursuant to Section 35-226 of this ordinance;

(c) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;

(d) Falsifying self-monitoring reports;

(e) Tampering with monitoring equipment;

(f) Refusing to allow the city engineer timely access to the facility premises and records;

(g) Failure to meet effluent limitations;

(h) Failure to pay penalties;

(i) Failure to pay sewer charges;

(1) Failure to meet compliance schedules;

(k) Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application;

(1) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or

(m) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this ordinance.

Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-220 Wastewater Discharge Permit Reissuance.
A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with Section 35-211 of this ordinance, a minimum of sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-221 Regulation of Waste Received from Other Jurisdictions
If another municipality, or user located within another municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the city engineer, with City of Rolla Council approval, shall enter into an inter-municipal agreement with the contributing municipality.
Prior to entering into an agreement required by paragraph (a), above, the city engineer shall request the following information from the contributing municipality:
A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW by contributing municipality;
An inventory of all users located within the contributing municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and
Such other information as the city engineer may deem necessary.
An inter-municipal agreement, as required by paragraph (a), above, shall contain the following conditions:
A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use ordinance which is at least stringent as this ordinance and local limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in Section 35-200 of this ordinance. This requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the City's ordinance or local limits;
A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis;
A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing municipality; which of these activities will be conducted by the city engineer; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and the city engineer;
A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the city engineer with access to all information that the contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;
Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW;
Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's discharge;
A provision ensuring the city engineer access to the facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the city engineer; and
A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the inter-municipal agreement. (Ord. 3183)


Sec. 35-222 Baseline Monitoring Reports.
Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the city engineer a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (b), below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the city engineer a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (b), below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.

Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.

Identifying Information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner.

Environmental Permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility.

Description of Operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.

Flow Measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).

Measurement of Pollutants.

The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process.

The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the city engineer, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in Section 35-222 of this ordinance.

Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in Section 35-222 of this ordinance.

Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.

Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in Section 35-223 of this ordinance.

Signature and Certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 35-212 of this ordinance. (Ord. 3183)


Sec. 35-223 Compliance Schedule Progress Reports.
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by Section 35222(b)(7) of this ordinance:

The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation);

No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months;

The user shall submit a progress report to the city engineer no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and

In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the city engineer. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-224 Reports on Compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standard Deadline.
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the city engineer a report containing the information described in Section 35222(b)(4-6) of this ordinance. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 35-212 of this ordinance. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-225 Periodic Compliance Reports.
All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the city engineer but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 35-212 of this ordinance.

All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.

If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the city engineer, using the procedures prescribed in Section 35- 230 of this ordinance, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-226 Reports of Changed Conditions.
Each user must notify the city engineer of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least sixty (60) days before the change.

The city engineer may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under Section 35-211 of this ordinance.

The city engineer may issue a wastewater discharge permit under Section 35-213 of this ordinance or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under Section 35-217 of this ordinance in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.

For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of twenty percent (20%) or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-227 Reports of Potential Problems.
In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonrouting, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the city engineer of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.

Within five (5) days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the city engineer, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damages to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this ordinance.

A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in paragraph (a), above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-228 Reports from Unpermitted Users.
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the city engineer as the city engineer may require. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-229 Notice of Violation/Repeat Sampling and Reporting.
If sampling performed by a user indicated a violation, the user must notify the city engineer within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the city engineer within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the city engineer monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the city engineer samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-230 Notification of the Discharge of Hazardous Waste.
Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and State hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. All notifications must take place no later than one hundred and eighty (180) days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under Section 35-226 of this ordinance. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self monitoring requirements of Section 35-222, 35-224, and 35- 224 of this ordinance.

Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of paragraph A, above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a onetime notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification.

In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the city engineer, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and State hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations.

In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical.

This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this ordinance, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable Federal or State law. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-231 Analytical Requirements.
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If-40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-232 Sample Collection.
Except as indicated in Section (b), below, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the city engineer may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.

Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-233 Timing.
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-234 Record Keeping.
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this ordinance shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this ordinance and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the City, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the city engineer. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-235 Right of Entry: Inspection and Sampling.
The city engineer shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this ordinance and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the city engineer ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.

Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the city engineer will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.

The city engineer shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations.

The city engineer may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated every six (6) months to ensure their accuracy.

Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the city engineer and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user.

Unreasonable delays in allowing the city engineer access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this ordinance. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-236 Refused Access.
If the city engineer has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this ordinance, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routing inspection and sampling program of the City designed to verify compliance with this ordinance or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the city engineer may proceed as outlined in Sec. 35-245 and immediately suspend the user's discharge. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-237 Confidential Information.
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the city engineer's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city engineer, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable State law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-238 Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance.
The city engineer shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall mean:

Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six- (6) month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount;

Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six(6) month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);

Any other discharge violation that the city engineer believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;

Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the city engineer's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;

Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;

Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;

Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or

Any other violation(s) which the city engineer determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-239 Notification of Violation
When the city engineer finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city engineer may serve upon that user a written Notice of Violation. Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the city engineer. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the

Notice of Violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city engineer to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a Notice of Violation. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-240 Consent Orders.
The city engineer may enter into Consent Orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to Sections 35-242 and 35-243 of this ordinance and shall be judicially enforceable. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-241 Show Cause Hearing.
The city engineer may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the city engineer and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-242 Compliance Orders.
When the city engineer finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city engineer may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violations, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-243 Cease and Desist Orders.
When the city engineer finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the city engineer may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to:

(a) Immediately comply with all requirements; and

(b) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.

Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-244 Administrative Penalties
When the city engineer finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city engineer, with City of Rolla Council approval, may penalize such user in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500). Such penalties shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other long term average discharge limits, penalties shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation.

Unpaid charges and penalties shall, after thirty (30) calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of one tenth percent (0.1%) of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of three percent (3%) per month. A lien against the user's property will be sought for unpaid charges and penalties.

Users desiring to dispute such penalties must file a written request for the city engineer to reconsider the penalty along with full payment of the penalty amount within thirty (30) days of being notified of the penalty. The City of Rolla Council will convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The City of Rolla Council may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the penalty.

Issuance of an administrative penalty shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-245 Emergency Suspensions.
The city engineer may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonable appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The city engineer may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment.

Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city engineer may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The city engineer may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city engineer that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in Section 35-246 of this ordinance are initiated against the user.

A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the city engineer prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under Sections 35-241 or 35-246 of this ordinance. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-246 Termination of Discharge.
In addition to the provisions in Section 35-219 of this ordinance, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination:

Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;

Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of it discharge;

Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;

Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or

Violation of the pretreatment standards in Section 35-198 of this ordinance.

Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under Section 35-241 of this ordinance why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the city engineer shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-247 Injunctive Relief.
When the city engineer finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city engineer may petition the Municipal Court through the City's Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this ordinance on activities of the user. The city engineer may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 248 Civil Penalties.
A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the City for a maximum civil penalty of five hundred dollars ($500) per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation.

The city engineer may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the City.

In determining the amount of civil liability, the Court shall take into account all relevant circumstance, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires.

Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-249 Prosecution for Violations.
A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be in violation of this chapter, punishable by a penalty of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or both.

A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be in violation of this chapter and be subject to a penalty of at least five hundred dollars ($500.00), or be subject to imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under State law.

A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this ordinance, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with-, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be subject to a penalty of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or both.

In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be subject to a penalty of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than one (1) year(s), or both. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-250 Remedies Nonexclusive.
The remedies provided for in this ordinance are not exclusive. The city engineer may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the City's enforcement response plan. However, the city engineer may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the city engineer is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-251 Performance Bonds.
The city engineer may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this ordinance, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the City, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the city engineer to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-252 Liability Insurance.
The city engineer may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this ordinance, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-253 Water Supply Severance.
Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-254 Public Nuisances.
A violation of any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the city engineer. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the Rolla City Code Chapter 28, Sections 28-1 thru 28-17 governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the City for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-255 Contractor Listing [Optional].
Users which have not achieved compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are not eligible to receive a contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the City. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the City held by a user found to be in significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards or requirements may be terminated at the discretion of the city engineer. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-256 Upset.
For the purposes of this section, "upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of paragraph (c), below, are met.
A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that:
An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset;
The facility was the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and
The user has submitted the following information to the city engineer within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five (5) days.
A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;
The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and
Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance;
In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof;
Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on an claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought of noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards;
Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility i restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. (Ord. 3183)

Sec. 35-257 Prohibited Discharge Standards.
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in Section 35-198(a) of this ordinance or the specific prohibitions in Section 35-198(b)(3) through 35-256(f) of this ordinance if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either:

A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or

No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the City was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-258 Bypass.
For the purposes of this section,

"Bypass" means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility.

"Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.

A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section. (c) If a user knows in advance of need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the city engineer, at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass, if possible.
A user shall submit oral notice to the city engineer of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (S) days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The city engineer may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours.

Bypass is prohibited, and the city engineer may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:

Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or sever property damage;

There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and

The user submitted notices as required under paragraph (c) of this section.

The city engineer may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the city engineer determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in paragraph (d) of this section. (Ord. 3183)


Sec. 35-259 Pretreatment Charges and Fees.
The City may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the City's Pretreatment Program which may include:

Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications;

Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users;

Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction;

Fees for filing appeals; and

Other fees as the City may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this ordinance and are separate from all other fees and penalties chargeable by the City. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-260 Severability.
If any provision of this ordinance is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be effected and shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 3183)



Sec. 35-261 to 35-275. Reserved.


APPENDIX "A"
Reserved

APPENDIX "B" - SEWER/WASTEWATER INVENTORY - October 2008
Description	Purchase
Price	Life
Cycle	Uniform
Annual
Cost
RADIOS
Maxon Radio-Jet Vac	398.83	10	40
Midland Radio #232	495.00	10	50
TEKK Radio Mod T-50	465.00	10	47
Maxon Radio-Sludge Truck	340.00	10	34
Midland Port. Radio-Mod #70.143B	360.00	10	36
Midland Radio #264-Mod #70-336B	350.00	10	35
Midland Radio-Mod #70-336B	350.00	10	35
Midland Port. Radio-Mod #70	360.00	10	36
Midland Base-Mod #70840B	700.00	10	70
Midland Port.-Mod #70-143B	360.00	10	36
Midland #233-Mod #70380B	700.00	10	70
Midland #231-Mod #70340B	700.00	10	70
Midland #261-Mod #70-336B	350.00	10	35
TEKK Radio Mod T-50	465.00	10	47
Maxon Radio #266-Dump Truck	393.83	10	39
LAB EQUIPMENT
Microscope Galen III	1,370.00	10	137
Vac. Pump. GAST	300.00	10	30
Orion NH3 Probe Mod #0-9512BN	416.00	10	42
Analytical Balance	2,195.00	10	220
Stirrer, Mod #S7225	120.00	10	12
Stirrer, Mod #S7225	120.00	10	12
Wheaton Still 5.0L	2,109.00	10	211
Steambath, BOEKEL	350.00	10	35
Autoclave-Mod #2340	2,800.00	10	280
Hot plate, Therm.	285.00	10	29
Dessicator BOEKEL	180.00	10	18
Incubator, FREAS-Mod #815	2,100.00	10	210
Orion NH3Probe-MOD#85-12	600.00	3	200
Orion pH/ISE Meter-Mod#720A	1,400.00	5	280
Orion PH/ISE Meter-Mod#720A	1,400.00	5	280
Drying Oven. Grieve	650.00	10	65
Hach Port. D.O. Meter-Mod#16046	1,400.00	10	140
Microscope Swift-Mod.23(FEC)	274.00	10	27
Microscope, Bausch & Lomb (V.R.)	350.00	10	35
Illuminator (FEC)	274.00	10	27
H2O Bath Incubator	983.00	10	98
Muffel Furnace-Mod#F6010 (thermolyne)	1,495.00	10	150
Triple Beam Balance	500.00	10	50
Orion B.O.D. Probe-Mod#97-08-99	940.00	5	188
Orion B.O.D. Probe-Mod#97-08-99	940.00	5	188
Hanna D.O. Probe-Mod#HI 9142	478.00	10	48
Misc. Glass Lab	9,000.00	10	900
Blender	100	10	10
Microscope - Fisher Scientific	2,000.00	10	200
LAB EQUIPMENT - SAMPLERS
ISCO Sampler-Mod#1580	1400	10	140
Sigma Sampler-Mod#900 (VR)	2,458.80	10	246
Sigma Sampler-Mod#900 (VR)	2,458.00	10	246
Sigma Sampler	2,400.00	10	240
Sigma Sampler (SW)	5,000.00	10	500
LAB EQUIPMENT - REFRIGERATORS
Westinghouse-Refrigerator 14" (VR)	685.00	10	69
Roper Refrigeration RT18DKXXWOO SE	520.00	10	52
Gibson Refrigerator 14'-Mod#MDLRT 15 SE	500.00	10	50
ROLLING STOCK
Trucks-Wastewater
2004 Chevrolet Pickup, § ton 4x4 #232	13,984.00	10	1,398
1997 Ford Pickup § ton F150 4x4 #231	18,018.00	10	1,802
2007 Ford Pickup § ton F150 4x4 #233	18,018.00	10	1,802
2003 Terragator Sludge Truck #235	85,130.00	15	5,675
1999 Dodge Pickup § ton 4x4 #234	12,000.00	10	1,200
Trucks-Sewer
2007 JHC Jet Vac #265	149,851.00	10	14,985
2005 JHC Tandem Dump Truck #266	31,883.50	12	2,657
1999 Ford TV Truck #263	170,000.00	15	11,333
2008 Ford F250 § ton Pickup, 9000GVW, 40 HP #264     	15,000.00	7	2,143
2006 John Deere Backhoe #269	40,000.00	10	4,000
Bobcat 873G § 2000 #262	26,120.00	10	2,612
WASTEWATER EQUIPMENT
Drum Pump, Finish Thompson	572.50	10	57
Torrential Floating Pump 5 HP	2,435.00	10	244
HP Desk Jet 600 Printer	289.00	10	29
15" Monitor	120.00	10	12
Computer	1,860.00	10	186
Scanner-Mod#FB-675	250.00	10	25
Air Cond.-Mod#A3T12F2AL-U (VR)	384.00	10	38
Wacher 16 hp Pump-Mod#PTS4U	2,726.90	10	273
Air Compressor 1 1/2 hp-Mod#XER6641	425.00	10	43
Jacuzz HP pump	350.00	10	35
3" Trash Pump	2,400.00	5	480
Goulds 1/2 HP Sump Pump	422.21	10	42
John Boat 14'	500.00	10	50
6 hp Evinrude Motor	750.00	10	75
Grinder	125.00	10	13
Battery Charger	125.00	10	13
Air Tank	75.00	10	8
Act. Torch	315.00	10	32
COLLECTION SYSTEM-SEWER
1992 Extenda Jet #268	20,000.00		
Pipe Laser, Topcon #TPL3G	7,307.63	10	731
Sewer Rodder SRBCO Mod#538	17,500.00	10	1,750
First Aid Kit	200.00	10	20
Manhole Lift	1,000.00	10	100
Manhole Lift	750.00	10	75
Coleman Generator	450.00	10	45
Emergency O2	395.00	10	40
Husqvarna Chain Saw	400.00	10	40
Air Compressor Mod#P100CWD	7,900.00	10	790
Snow Plow Mod #60381	1,700.00	10	170
Welder, Lincoln Mod #K2tlps	1,710.00	10	171
Cut Off Saw, Stihl	728.00	10	73
Snow Blade, Western Mod#60381	1,700.00	10	170
Root Cutter, Sewer Egt of AM (4 EA)	1,300.00	10	130
Electric Eel	2,500.00	10	250
OFFICE FURNITURE
Chair with Arms	200.00	10	20
Chair Roller	1,500.00	10	150
Desk Cole Brand	350.00	10	35
Chair Roller	250.00	10	25
Secretarial Chair Roller	250.00	10	25
Secretarial Chair Roller	150.00	10	15
4 Drawer File Cabinet	200.00	10	20
Cabinet (Chem)	300.00	10	30
Martin 4 Drawer File Cabinet	250.00	10	25
4 Drawer File Cabinet	250.00	10	25
Lab chair Roller	150.00	10	15
Table	250.00	10	25
Table	250.00	10	25
SOUTHEAST PLANT
Mech. Barscreen East inf.	90,000.00	20	4,500
Mech. Barscreen West stormwater	70,000.00	20	3,500
Mech. Barscreen West inf.	80,000.00	20	4,000
Return Liftstation	70,000.00	20	3,500
OX Ditch Rotors (6) 12,000 ea	72,000.00	20	3,600
Final Clarifier Drive	250,000.00	20	12,500
Parshall Flume & flow meter	25,000.00	20	1,250
Frequence Drives (2) 25,000 ea	50,000.00	20	2,500
East side Stormwater Clarifier	500,000.00	20	25,000
Flow Meter & Flume	5,000.00	20	250
Grit Removal System	6,000.00	20	300
Primary Clarifier	66,000.00	20	3,300
Trickling Filter	120,000.00	20	6,000
Final Clarifier	48,000.00	20	2,400
Activated Sludge Unit	400,000.00	20	20,000
Flygt Lift Station	50,000.00	20	2,500
Stormwater Clarifier	500,000.00	20	25,000
Flow Meter & Flume	13,755.00	20	688
Stormwater Pump Station	60,000.00	20	3,000
Blowers (3 each)	105,000.00	20	5,250
Grit Classifier	4,500.00	20	225
Raw Sludge Pump (WEMCO)	12,000.00	20	600
Raw Sludge Pump (WEMCO)	4,000.00	20	200
Sump Pump	1,800.00	20	90
Water Seal Unit	2,500.00	20	125
Trickling Tower	250,000.00	20	12,500
Flow Recorder	3,215.00	20	161
Trickling Tower Pump Station	50,000.00	20	2,500
12" Motorized Valve	2,688.00	20	134
12" Mag Meter	4,150.00	20	208
Record Indicator	2,500.00	20	125
Fans	900.00	20	45
Ultra Sonic Flow Meter	1,099.00	20	55
Automatic Sampler	1,200.00	20	60
Sand Filter	156,800.00	20	7,840
Air Compressor	10,000.00	20	500
VICHY ROAD
Sewage Treatment Unit	200,000.00	20	10,000
Hycore (Comminutor)	60,000.00	20	3,000
Flow Meter & Flume	4,500.00	20	225
Grit Removal Eqt.	6,000.00	20	300
Stormwater Clarifier	9,180.00	20	459
Stormwater Pump Station	40,000.00	20	2,000
Stormwater Flow Meter & Flume	6,000.00	20	300
Blower (2 each)	26,675.00	20	1,334
Trickling Tower	100,000.00	20	5,000
Polishing Tank	50,000.00	20	2,500
Trickling Tower Pump Station	40,000.00	20	2,000
Grit Classifier	4,500.00	20	225
Water Seal Unit	2,500.00	20	125
Raw Sludge Pumps	6,500.00	20	325
Office Desk	150.00	20	8
Office Chair	110.00	20	6
Lab Stool	105.00	20	5
Tools	200.00	20	10
SOUTHWEST
Mechanical Bar Screen	125,000.00	20	6,250
Flow Meter & Flume	35,000.00	20	1,750
Sewage Treatment Unit	400,000.00	20	20,000
4,906,370.00	TOTAL	272,189
(Ord. 3359, §2; Ord. 3486, §2)

Chapter 36 - Streets and Sidewalks
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter


Chapter Contents:
Article I - In General
§ 36-1. Demonstrations, exhibitions, etc.
§ 36-2. Obstructing street and sidewalks.
§ 36-3. Disposition of articles placed in any street or sidewalk.
§ 36-4. Conducting business in streets, sidewalks, etc..
§ 36-5. Suspending merchandise over.
§ 36-6. Overhanging branches, limbs, etc.
§ 36-7. Obstructing gutters, etc.
§ 36-8. Depositing dirt, debris, etc., on city thoroughfares.
§ 36-9. Damaging bridges, sidewalks, culverts, etc.
§ 36-10. Cleaning sidewalks.
§ 36-11. Traveling on streets closed to travel; removing barricades.

ARTICLE II. STREET NAMES
§ 36-12. Application for change of street name - Deposit required.
§ 36-13. Renaming Gene Street to Chestnut Drive.
§ 36-14. Renaming County Road No. 25 to Chapman Drive.
§ 36-15. Renaming Woodcrest Drive to Winchester Drive.
§ 36-16. Renaming Hazelwood Drive to H - J Drive.
§ 36-17. Naming of Lion's Club Drive.
§ 36-18. Naming of Southview Drive.
§ 36-19. Changing the name of Pine Street (North of Highway 63) to Elm Street.
§ 36-20. Renaming Falling Leaves Lane to Dover Lane.
§ 36-20.1 Changing the name of Germann Road to Oak Knoll Road and Wildwood Court to Germann Court.
§ 36-20.2 Changing the name of Lake Vista Court to Del Mar Court and Century Court to LaJolla Court.
§ 36-20.3 Naming the street (between Brook Drive and Camelot Court in the Meadowbrook Subdivision) Lancelot Drive.
§ 36-20.4 Changing the name of HiTech Drive, A.K.A. HiTech Boulevard to Brewer Drive.
§ 36-20.5 Naming of Vista Drive.
§ 36-20.6 Changing the name of Vista Drive to Bluebird Lane.
§ 36-20.7 Changing the name of Tucker Lane to Kent Lane.
§ 36-20.8 Changing the names of Carl Line Ave. to Line Ave., Elmwood Dr. to Redwood Dr., Long View Ln. to Longview Ln., Co. Rd. 5110 to Osage Dr., Co. Rd. 5020 to Little Oaks Rd., Co. Rd. 5010 to Rolla St., Co. Rd. 7130 to Hartville Rd., Highway 63 to Bishop Ave., and Hwy CC and Private Rd. 5012 to Lions Club Dr.
§ 36-20.9 Changing the name of 14th Street, beginning at I-44 and going across Bishop Avenue to State Street, from 14th Street to University Drive.
§ 36-20.10 Change the street name of Curtis Street to Curtis Drive and Bishop's Alley to State Street. (City of Rolla)
§ 36-20.11 Change the street name of State Route V to Hy Point Industrial Park Drive. (City of Rolla)
§ 36-20.12 Change the street name of Halifax Court to Newcastle Court (City of Rolla)
§ 36-20.13 Change the street name of a portion of El Bosa Nova Lane to Collegiate Boulevard. (UMR)
§ 36-20.14 Change the street name from St. John’s Parkway to Mercy Parkway. (Mercy Medical Center)
§ 36-20.15 Naming a street segment, located between White Columns Road and Fraternity Drive, as “International Village Drive” (Rolla City Council)
§ 36-20.16 Change the street name from Eagleson Drive to Silverstone Drive.
§ 36-20.17 Change the name of the west end of 12th Street to Fitch Street.

ARTICLE III. CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 36-21. Work to be done in accordance with standard plans and specifications.
§ 36-22. Operations under supervision of Director of Public Works.
§ 36-23. Authority of Director of Public Works.
§ 36-24. Applicability-preemption.

DIVISION 2. FRANCHISE, ROW USE AGREEMENTS, AND LICENSES
§ 36-25.     Definitions.
§ 36-26.     Franchise, ROW Use Agreements, or Licenses required.
§ 36-27.     Application for Franchise or ROW Use Agreement.
§ 36-28.     General ROW obligations.
§ 36-29.     Facility location requirements.
§ 36-30.     Relocation of facilities.
§§ 36-31. to 36-40.  Reserved.

ARTICLE IV. ROW PERMITS
§ 36-41. Excavation Permit required – exceptions.
§ 36-42. Obstruction Permit required – exceptions.
§ 36-43. Extent of ROW Permit generally.
§ 36-44. ROW Permit application.
§ 36-45. Fee.
§ 36-46. Issuance.
§ 36-47. ROW Permit requirements.
§ 36-48. ROW Permit denial and revocation.
§§ 36-49 to 36-66. Reserved.

ARTICLE V. EXCAVATIONS IN ROW
§ 36-67. Keeping ROW clean during operations.
§ 36-68. Right of city to clean ROW on failure of ROW user to do so – recovery of costs from tax bill or bond.
§ 36-69. Restoration of ROW by city if ROW user fails to restore – recovery of costs.
§ 36-70. Excavation standards and specification requirements.
§ 36-71. Closing ROW temporarily for repair work.
§ 36-72. Manner of performing work – generally.
§ 36-73. Length of excavation limited – exception.
§ 36-74. Temporary driveways.
§ 36-75. Duty to protect public, etc.
§ 36-76. Hours of work.
§ 36-77. Guarantee of work.
§ 36-78. Jurisdiction, inspection, stop work orders, appeals, and penalties.
§ 36-79. Reservation of Rights.
§§ 36-80 to 36-90. Reserved.

ARTICLE VI. TREES
§ 36-91. Purpose.
§ 36-92. Duties and responsibilities.
§ 36-93. Interference with city employees.
§ 36-94 to 36-99.  Reserved.
ARTICLE VII.  BICYCLE PEDESTRIAN ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 36-100.   Duties.
§ 36-101.   Members.
§ 36-102.   Officers.
§ 36-103.   Meetings.
§ 36-104.   Ordinances pertaining to the Bicycle and Pedestrian activities.
§ 36-105.   Limitations.


Chapter 36
Streets and Sidewalks
Article 1 - In General
Sec. 36-1. Demonstrations, exhibitions, etc.
Any person, other than one holding a parade permit under Chapter 27, Article X – Parades of this code, who shall conduct on any street, alley or sidewalk any exhibition or demonstration of any article or thing or process or so use any street, alley or sidewalk for private purposes as to block or obstruct the same or impede or interfere with travel and traffic thereon shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 4004, §1)



Sec. 36-2. Obstructing streets and sidewalks.
Any person who shall deposit, place, paint, write, erect or maintain any structure, material, article, substance, decoration or thing on, in or above any street, curb, gutter, park, parkway, sidewalk or public place of the city, except as specifically authorized by the city council by resolution, or as otherwise provided for by ordinance or this Code, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; provided, however:

That a person owning or operating a restaurant, coffee shop or other business may provide tables, chairs, plants or seating accommodations for its customers on the sidewalks adjacent to the business subject to the condition that a straight, unobstructed pathway at least sixty (60) inches wide be maintained on the sidewalk along the entire length of the sidewalk used by the business; and

That nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent any merchant or tradesman from placing any packages of merchandise, which the merchant or tradesman may be receiving or sending away, subject to the conditions that a straight unobstructed pathway at least thirty-six (36) inches wide be maintained or remain on the sidewalk for more than two (2) hours. (Ord. 4004, §1)



Sec. 36-3. Disposition of articles placed in any street or sidewalk.
Any article, except abandoned vehicles, placed in or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, thoroughfare or other public place within the city contrary to ordinance, or any such article lost or abandoned in such place, shall be taken up and delivered into the custody of the Chief of Police, who shall notify the owner thereof, if known. Property held for more than six (6) months that has not been claimed by the owner, the owner has refused (or if such owner) is unknown or cannot be found) then the property shall be disposed of in a manner deemed appropriate by the Chief of Police.

Abandoned vehicles shall be subject to the procedures outlined in the Missouri Revised Statues Chapter 304 Traffic Regulations and all other applicable chapters. (Ord. 4004, §1)



Sec. 36-4. Conducting business in streets, sidewalks, etc.
Whoever shall, upon any street, public place or sidewalk, expose or offer any merchandise or other property for show or sale, by auction or otherwise, except newspapers and pamphlets other than magazines, or conduct any business whatsoever, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor unless those persons are conducting business in public sidewalks in the central business district and arts and entertainment district, and have complied with the business licensing and health ordinances and regulations, where applicable.

"Central business district" shall mean that area set out in section 42-194 of this Code and arts and entertainment district set out in section 42.232 of this Code.

These provisions shall not be construed to affect or abrogate section 36-2, prohibiting the erection of structures in city rights-of-way. (Ord. 4004, §1)



Sec. 36-5. Suspending merchandise over.
Whoever shall suspend merchandise or other articles in front of any store or other building which shall extend over the sidewalk, at any height above the sidewalk, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.

Areas zoned Central City Districts may have permitted signs conforming to Section 42-244, 4(a) of this Code. (Ord. 4004, §1)



Sec. 36-6. Overhanging branches, limbs, etc.
It shall be unlawful for any person occupying, in charge or control of or owning any real estate in the city to permit the trees on such property to hang over the sidewalks, streets and alleys so that the lower limbs thereof shall be closer than fourteen (14) feet to the vehicular traveled portion of any street or alley and shall not hang closer than eight (8) feet to any sidewalk. (Ord. 4004, §1)



Sec. 36-7. Obstructing gutters, etc.
Any person who shall destroy, tear up or otherwise damage any gutter, trench or channel, dug, made or used for the purpose of carrying off water or draining any street, thoroughfare or other public place within the city, or who shall fill up or otherwise obstruct the free passage of water through any such gutter, trench or channel, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 4004, §1)



Sec. 36-8. Depositing dirt, debris, etc., on city thoroughfares.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or dump or to cause or allow the placing, depositing or dumping, washing or eroding of any earth, dirt, rock, clay, sand, shale, building material, debris or rubbish from property or vehicles owned or controlled by them, onto any street, sidewalk or thoroughfare within the city or upon the property of any other person without that person’s permission.

If the placing, depositing, dumping, washing or eroding of earth, dirt, rock, clay, sand, shale or any other material upon streets, sidewalks or thoroughfares within the city creates conditions that, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, are unsafe or pose a hazard to the public, the city shall immediately notify the person responsible for such condition or who owns or controls the land from which such materials came to abate the unsafe or hazardous conditions. If the placing, depositing, dumping, washing or eroding of earth, dirt, rock, clay, sand, shale, or any other material upon streets, sidewalks or thoroughfares within the city is the result of earth moving, construction of buildings or other activities being performed under permits issued by the city, the Director may issue stop work orders and suspend any permits until the unsafe or hazardous conditions are abated and adequate provisions are in place to prevent reoccurrence.

If the city is unable to immediately locate or notify any responsible person pursuant to subsection (b) above, or if upon notification such person is unable or unwilling to abate the hazardous or unsafe conditions, or if such person agrees to abate the conditions but fails to do so, the city may proceed to abate such conditions.

The city shall keep a record of the cost of each unsafe or hazardous condition abated under this section. The city may recover the cost of such abatement by issuing tax bills against the property from which the materials constituting the unsafe or hazardous condition came. Before such tax bills are issued, the Director of Public Works shall give notice to the property owner of any property from which the materials came that the Director intends to recommend that the city council tax bill the property for the cost of abatement. The notice shall state that the property owner may, within seven (7) days of receipt of the notice, request a hearing before the City Council to contest the appropriateness of tax billing the cost of abatement.

Any hearing requested under this section shall be held as soon as possible after the request at the next regularly scheduled bi-monthly meeting of the City Council. All interested parties may appear at such hearing either in person or by attorney and present evidence concerning the matters at issue. If after hearing the City Council finds that the landowner or one acting for his benefit is responsible for the conditions abated, the costs of the abatement shall be tax billed to the land contributing to the conditions abated. (Ord. 4004, §1)



Sec. 36-9. Damaging bridges, sidewalks, culverts, etc.
Any person who shall remove, tear up or otherwise destroy or damage any bridge, culvert, sidewalk, pavement, crosswalk or stepping stones in or upon any street, thoroughfare or ally of the city, without having lawful authority to do so, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 4004, §1)



Sec. 36-10. Cleaning sidewalks.
All persons are hereby required to keep the sidewalks in front of, or adjacent to, the property or premises owned or occupied by them or under their control, within the city, clear and free from rubbish, filth, refuse, dirt, and from any and all obstructions and dangerous agencies of every kind and description whatsoever; and any person failing to observe the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 4004, §1)



Sec. 36-11. Traveling on streets closed to travel; removing barricades..
It shall be unlawful for any person to use, travel or drive upon any street within the city in the course of construction or improvement, while the same is closed to public travel. It shall be notice to all that a street is closed to public travel when the same has barricades and street closed signs constructed, erected or placed at the end of such street, and it shall be unlawful for any person to remove any barricade and street closed signs when placed across any street, when the same is placed there for the purpose of showing that the street is closed. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 4004, §1)



ARTICLE II STREET NAMES
Sec. 36-12. Application for change of street name - Deposit required.
That there is hereby established a requirement that any person seeking to apply to the City of Rolla, Missouri for a change of name of street shall, as part of the process therein, pay to the City of Rolla, Missouri the sum of $300.00 as a deposit to cover the expense of publication, the balance of which, upon the conclusion of the process, will be refunded to the applicant. (Ord. 2732, §1; Repealed by Ord. 4004, §1)



Sec. 36-13. Renaming Gene Street to Chestnut Drive.
The public street known as "Gene Drive", in the City of Rolla, Missouri, said street connecting McFarland Drive and Sycamore Drive, is hereby renamed and declared to be "Chestnut Drive.” (Ord. 1951, §1; Repealed by Ord. 4004, §1)



Sec. 36-14. Renaming County Road No. 25 to Chapman Drive.
That all of that portion of County Road No. 25 lying within the corporate limits of the City of Rolla, Missouri, shall be and the same is hereby renamed Chapman Drive, and said road shall henceforth bear the name of and be designated as Chapman Drive in the City of Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 2250, §1; Repealed by Ord. 4004, §1)



Sec. 36-15. Renaming Woodcrest Drive to Winchester Drive.
That certain road known as Woodcrest Drive located in the Woodcrest Estates Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, shall be and the same is hereby renamed Winchester Drive, and said road shall henceforth bear the name of and be designated as Winchester Drive in the City of Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 2261, §1; Repealed by Ord. 4004, §1)



Sec. 36-16. Renaming Hazelwood Drive to H - J Drive.
That the street known as Hazelwood Drive be renamed H - J Drive. (Ord. 2412, §1; Repealed by Ord. 4004, §1)



Sec. 36-17. Naming of Lion's Club Drive.
That the city council finds it necessary to name that portion of the southeast arterial situated between the intersection of Highway CC and Highway 63 and the intersection of Highway O and the unnamed street commonly known as the proposed southeast arterial as Lion's Club Drive. (Ord. 2629, §1; Repealed by Ord. 4004, §1)



Sec. 36-18. Naming of Southview Drive.
That the city council finds it necessary to name that portion of a proposed unnamed collector situated between the intersection of Highway 72 and a proposed unnamed collector and running south to the city limits as Southview Drive. (Ord. 2629, §2; Repealed by Ord. 4004, §1)



Sec. 36-19. Changing the name of Pine Street (North of Highway 63) to Elm Street.
That the city council finds it necessary to change the name of Pine Street (North of Highway 63) to Elm Street as shown on Exhibit "A". (Ord. 2654, §1; Repealed by Ord. 4004, §1)



Sec. 36-20. Renaming Falling Leaves Lane to Dover Lane.
That the city council finds it necessary to change the name of Falling Leaves Lane to Dover Lane. (Ord. 2655, §1; Repealed by Ord. 4004, §1)



Sec. 36-20.1. Changing the name of Germann Road to Oak Knoll Road and Wildwood Court to Germann Court.
That the city council finds it necessary to change the name of Germann Road to Oak Knoll Road and Wildwood Court to Germann Court. (Ord. 2739, §1; Repealed by Ord. 4004, §1)



Sec. 36-20.2. Changing the name of Lake Vista Court to Del Mar Court and Century Court to LaJolla Court.
That the city council finds it necessary to change the name of Lake Vista Court to Del Mar Court and Century Court to LaJolla Court. (Ord. 2736, §1; Repealed by Ord. 4004, §1)



Sec. 36-20.3 Naming the street (between Brook Drive and Camelot Court in the Meadowbrook Subdivision) Lancelot Drive.
That the street located between Brook Drive and Camelot Court in the Meadowbrook Subdivision be named Lancelot Drive. (Ord. 3047, §1; Repealed by Ord. 4004, §1)



Sec. 36-20.4 Changing the name of HiTech Drive, A.K.A. HiTech Boulevard to Brewer Drive.
That the city council finds it necessary to change the name of HiTech Drive, a.k.a. HiTech Boulevard to Brewer Drive. (Ord. 3048, §1; Repealed by Ord. 4004, §1)



Sec. 36-20.5 Naming of Vista Drive.
That after consideration, the city council has determined that a need exists to name an unnamed street to Vista Drive (see attached exhibit A).
That a resolution was published for a period of seven days to provide notice of the proposed street name change.
That after four weeks of such publication a majority of the resident property owners along the line of such street have not filed with the city clerk their written protest against such proposed naming, that the city council shall consider this ordinance to name the unnamed street to Vista Drive. (Ord. 3089, §§1-3; Repealed by Ord. 4004, §1)


Sec. 36-20.6 Changing the name of Vista Drive to Bluebird Lane.
That after consideration, the city council has determined that a need exists to change the name of Vista Drive to Bluebird Lane (see attached exhibit A).
That a resolution was published for a period of seven days to provide notice of the proposed street name change.
That after four weeks of such publication a majority of the resident property owners along the line of such street have not filed with the city clerk their written protest against such proposed change of name, that the city council shall consider this ordinance to change the name of Vista Drive to Bluebird Lane. (Ord. 3090, §§1-3; Repealed by Ord. 4004, §1)


Sec. 36-20.7 Changing the name of Tucker Lane to Kent Lane.
That after consideration, the City Council has determined that a need exists to change the name of Tucker Lane to Kent Lane.
That a resolution was published for a period of seven days to provide notice of the proposed street name change.
That after four weeks of such publication a majority of the resident property owners along the line of such street have not filed with the City Clerk their written protest against such proposed change of name, that the City Council shall consider this ordinance to change the name of Tucker Lane to Kent Lane. (Ord. 3240, §§1-4; Repealed by Ord. 4004, §1)


Sec. 36-20.8 Changing the names of Carl Line Ave. to Line Ave., Elmwood Dr. to Redwood Dr., Long View Ln. to Longview Ln., Co. Rd. 5110 to Osage Dr., Co. Rd. 5020 to Little Oaks Rd., Co. Rd. 5010 to Rolla St., Co. Rd. 7130 to Hartville Rd., Highway 63 to Bishop Ave., and Hwy CC and Private Rd. 5012 to Lions Club Dr.
That after consideration. the City Council has determined that a need exists to change the name of Carl Line Ave. to Line Ave. Elmwood Dr., to Redwood Dr. Long View Ln. to Longview Lane, Co. Rd. 5110 to Osage Dr., Co. Rd. 5020 to Little Oaks Rd., Co. Rd. 5010 to Rolla St. Co. Rd. 7130 to Hartville Rd. Highway 63 to Bishop Ave. and Hwy CC and Private Rd. 5012 to Lions Club Dr.
That a resolution was published for a period of seven days to provide notice of the proposed street name change.
That after four weeks of such publication a majority of the resident property owners along the line of such street have not filed with the City Clerk their written protest against such proposed change of name, that the City Council shall consider this ordinance to change the names of certain streets in the southside annexation area. (Ord. 3252, §§1-3; Repealed by Ord. 4004, §1)


Sec. 36-20.9 Changing the name of 14th Street, beginning at I-44 and going across Bishop Avenue to State Street, from 14th Street to University Drive.
That after consideration, the City Council has decided to change the name of 14th Street, beginning at I-44 and going across Bishop Avenue to State Street, from 14th Street to University Drive.
That a resolution was published for a period of seven days to provide notice of the proposed street name change.
That after four weeks of such publication a majority of the resident property owners along the line of such street have not filed with the City Clerk their written protest against such proposed change of name, that the City Council shall consider this ordinance to change the name of 14th Street to University Drive.
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage of approval. (Ord. 3557, §§1-4)


Sec. 36-20.10 Change the street name of Curtis Street to Curtis Drive and Bishop's Alley to State Street. (City of Rolla)
That after consideration, the City Council has decided to change the name of Curtis Street to Curtis Drive and Bishop's Alley to State Street.
That a resolution was published for a period of seven days to provide notice of the proposed street name change.
That after four weeks of such publication a majority of the resident property owners along the line of such street have not filed with the City Clerk their written protest against such proposed change of name, that the City Council shall consider this ordinance to change the name of Curtis Street to Curtis Drive and Bishop's Alley to State Street. (Ord. 3599, §§1-3; Repealed by Ord. 4004, §1)


Sec. 36-20.11 Change the street name of State Route V to Hy Point Industrial Park Drive. (City of Rolla)
That after consideration, the City Council has decided to change the name of State Route V to Hy Point Industrial Park Drive.
That a resolution was published for a period of seven days to provide notice of the proposed street name change.
That after four weeks of such publication a majority of the resident property owners along the line of such street have not filed with the City Clerk their written protest against such proposed change of name, that the City Council shall consider this ordinance to change the name of State Route V to Hy Point Industrial Park Drive. (Ord. 3612, §§1-3; Repealed by Ord. 4004, §1)


Sec. 36-20.12 Change the street name of Halifax Court to Newcastle Court (City of Rolla)
That after consideration, the City Council has decided to change the name of Halifax Court to Newcastle Court.
That a resolution was published for a period of seven days to provide notice of the proposed street name change.
That after four weeks of such publication a majority of the resident property owners along the line of such street have not filed with the City Clerk their written protest against such proposed change of name, that the City Council shall consider this ordinance to change the name of Halifax Court to Newcastle Court. (Ord. 3652, §§1-3; Repealed by Ord. 4004, §1)


Sec. 36-20.13 Change the street name of a portion of El Bosa Nova Lane to Collegiate Boulevard. (UMR)
That after consideration, the City Council has decided to change the name of a portion of El Bosa Nova Lane to Collegiate Boulevard.
That a resolution was published for a period of seven days to provide notice of the proposed street name changes.
That after four weeks of such publication a majority of the resident property owners along the line of such street have not filed with the City Clerk their written protest against such proposed change of name, that the City Council shall consider this ordinance to change the name of a portion of El Bosa Nova Lane to Collegiate Boulevard. (Ord. 3821, §§1-3; Repealed by Ord. 4004, §1)

Sec. 36-20.14     Change the street name from St. John’s Parkway to Mercy Parkway (Mercy Medical Clinic)
That after consideration, the Rolla City Council has decided it would be desirable to change the name of St. John’s Parkway to Mercy Parkway. (Ord. 4078, §1)

That after the prescribed review/comment period of four weeks following such publication a majority of the resident property owners along the line of such street have not filed with the City Clerk their written protest against such proposed change of name, the City Council shall consider an ordinance to change the name of St. John’s Parkway to Mercy Parkway. (Ord. 4078, §2)

The ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval by City Council. (Ord. 4078, §3)

Sec. 36-20.15     Naming a street segment, located between White Columns Road and Fraternity Drive, as International Village Drive” (Rolla City Council).
That after consideration, the City Council has decided it would be desirable to designate the street segment located between White Columns Road and Fraternity Drive as “International Village Drive.” (Ord. 4173, §1)

This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.
(Ord. 4173, §2)

(Return to Contents)


Sec. 36-20.16      Change the street name from Eagleson Drive to Silverstone Drive.

That after consideration, the City Council approved the request to change the name of the street that begins at the intersection of Vichy Road and the area between the northeast sides of Lot 1 and Lot 2 of the Arwood Hills No. 1 Subdivision and ends at the rim of the cul-de-sac that connects Lot 1, Lot 3, and Lot 4 of the Rolla Skilled Nursing Home Facility Plat No. 2 be changed from Eagleson Drive to Silverstone Drive. (Ord. 4442, §1)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. (Ord. 4442, §2)

Sec. 36-20.17      Change the name of the west end of 12th Street that is situated between 14th Street and the vacated section of 12th Street, which is currently part of the parcel that is identified by the Phelps County Assessor Account Number of 7071, to Finch Street. (12th to Fitch Street)

That after consideration, the City Council approved the request to change the west end of 12th Street that is situated between 14th Street and the vacated section of 12th street, which is currently part of the parcel that is identified by the Phelps County Assessor Account Number of 7071 to Fitch Street. (Ord. 4471, §1)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. (Ord. 4471, §2)


ARTICLE III - RIGHTS-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT

DIVISION 1. GENERALLY

Sec. 36-21. Work to be done in accordance with standard plans and specifications.
Any person who shall do any work for which a permit is required hereunder shall conduct such work in accordance with standard plans and specifications on file in the office of the Director of Public Works. (Ord. 4004, §1; Ord. 4469, §1)



Sec. 36-22. Operations under supervision of Director of Public Works.
All operations for which a permit is granted pursuant to this article shall be under the direction and supervision of the Director of Public Works.  (Ord. 4004, §1; Ord. 4469, §1)



Sec. 36-23. Authority of Director of Public Works.
Whenever the use, convenience or necessity of the public shall require it, the Director of Public Works shall have the authority to order the owners or agents in charge of property adjacent to which curb cuts, sidewalks, curbs, or driveways are maintained upon the rights-of-way, alter such improvement in such manner as he shall find reasonably necessary under the circumstances, if such improvement fails to conform to the aforesaid standard plans and specifications. The Director shall allow a reasonable period of time for such alteration to be made. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain such nonconforming curb cut, sidewalk, curb or driveway after the expiration of such time. (Ord. 4004, §1; Ord. 4469, §1)




Sec. 36-24.  Applicability – preemption.
Applicability. Except as provided for herein and where limited by applicable law, Articles III-VI shall apply to all excavations and use, construction, operation, and maintenance of facilities or structures, in the ROW of the city.  No person shall commence or continue with the operation of any facilities or structures in the ROW except as provided and in compliance with Articles III-VI.  Because numerous types of users and uses of the ROW may be subject to various or changing regulatory schemes under federal or state law, any such limitation or qualification that may be applicable to less than all users and uses of the ROW are not duplicated herein, but are nevertheless incorporated herein, whenever application is so required by law, including but not limited to applicable provisions of Chapter 67 RSMo. and other applicable state and federal law.  

Preemption.  No provision of this chapter shall apply to any circumstance in which such application shall be unlawful under superseding federal or state law and furthermore, if any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this chapter is now or in the future superseded or preempted by state or federal law or found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unauthorized, such provision shall be automatically interpreted and applied as required by law.  (Ord. 4469, §1)

DIVISION 2. PERMITS
Sec. 36-25. DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of Articles III-VI, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives shall have the meanings set forth herein, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended.

Abandoned Facilities - Any equipment, materials, apparatuses, devices, or facilities that are: 1) declared abandoned by the owner of such equipment or facilities, 2) no longer in active use for a period of six months or more, and the owner of such equipment or facilities fails to respond within thirty (30) days to a written notice sent by the city, or 3) as otherwise may be defined by applicable law.

Antenna - Any device that transmits and/or receives electromagnetic wireless radio waves or signals for voice, data or video communications purposes including, but not limited to, television, text, AM/FM radio, microwave, cellular telephone, communications service, or otherwise.

Applicant - Any person who has applied for a ROW Use Agreement, Franchise, License, ROW Permit, or any other authorization to install, maintain, repair, or otherwise physically access facilities in the rights-of-way.

Communications Service - The transmission via facilities, in whole or in part, of any writings, signs, signals, pictures, sounds, or other forms of intelligence through wire, wireless, or other means, including, but not limited to, any telecommunications service, enhanced service, information service, or internet service, as such terms are now, or may in the future, be defined under applicable law, and including all instrumentalities, facilities, apparatus (communications facilities), and services (among other things, the receipt, forwarding, and delivery of telecommunications) incidental to such transmission or designed to directly or indirectly facilitate or accept such transmission and shall also include “video services” as defined in § 67.2677 RSMo.  The term "communications service" does not include the rental of conduit or physical facilities. 

Excavation, Excavating, or Excavate - Any act by which earth, asphalt, concrete, sand, gravel, rock, or any other material in or on the ground is cut into, dug, uncovered, removed, or otherwise displaced, by means of any tools, equipment, or explosives, except:

Any de minims displacement or movement of ground caused by pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
The replacement of utility poles and related equipment at the existing general location that does not involve either a street or sidewalk cut; or
Any other activity which does not disturb or displace surface conditions of the earth, asphalt, concrete, sand, gravel, rock, or any other material in or on the ground.
Facilities or Facility - Any equipment, installation, or structure located in the rights-of-way, including without limitation, cables, wires, lines, poles, towers, antenna, conduit facilities, vaults, pedestals, transmitters, meters, fiber, foundations, and any other equipment, infrastructure, structures, or obstruction. Facilities shall not include mailboxes, lawful vehicular parking or use, or lawful minor incidental uses such as driveway aprons, private utility connections, or other incidental facilities which may be permitted by a license issued by the Director of Public Works as provided herein. 

Facilities Maintenance or Maintenance - The construction, installation, repair, upgrade, or other physical access to the facility in the ROW that does not involve excavation.

Franchise - A binding and accepted ordinance for certain ROW users to occupy the rights-of-way for the purpose of providing, transporting, or distributing electricity, gas, water, steam, lighting, energy, or sewer service to any person or area in the city's limits and boundaries. 

License - The executed agreement between the Director of Public Works and a person to use and occupy the rights-of-way for the purpose of installing incidental temporary facilities within the rights-of-way or incidental uses such as ingress and egress facilities, lateral utility lines, or driveway aprons.

Obstruction Permit - A permit issued by the city for the ROW user to provide maintenance to its facilities or otherwise perform work in the ROW that does not involve excavation but requires the ROW user to occupy or obstruct the ROW.

Person - A corporation, partnership, proprietorship, individual, organization, governmental entity, or any natural person.

Rights-of-way or ROW - The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, or alleyway in which the city has an ownership interest or right of management and including such adjacent areas within such public ways within such city control, except as may be limited by law.

ROW Use Agreement - The document granting consent by the city to use the rights-of-way for the purpose of providing communication services or for such other use for which a franchise or license is not applicable as provided for herein.

ROW Permit - An Excavation Permit and/or an Obstruction Permit.

ROW User - All persons and entities, whether a Missouri Public Service Commission registered utility or otherwise, owning, controlling, leasing, maintaining, using, or installing facilities in the rights-of-way of the city, not otherwise expressly exempted. To the extent permitted by law, a ROW user shall not include the city.  

(Ord. 4469, §1)



Sec. 36-26. Franchise, ROW Use Agreements, or Licenses required.
Franchise, ROW Use Agreement, or License.

Franchise. A Franchise shall be obtained in conformance with all applicable Franchise procedures for any ROW user seeking to use the rights-of-way for the purpose of providing, transporting, or distributing electricity, gas, water, steam, lighting, energy, or sewer service to any person or area in the city’s limits and boundaries.

ROW Use Agreement. A ROW Use Agreement shall be required for all other ROW users, except as provided herein or otherwise required by law. A ROW Use Agreement shall conform to all applicable laws and requirements, including as provided herein, but shall not be subject to procedures applicable to Franchises.

License for Incidental Uses. Persons desiring to install an incidental use, which includes installation of temporary structures or minor incidental uses in the rights-of-way, such as driveway aprons, ingress or egress facilities, and similar incidental uses that utilize a small area of the rights-of-way and serves the principal structure, may be permitted without a Franchise or ROW Use Agreement pursuant to a License issued by the Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works shall have discretion to establish such application, requirements, and conditions applicable to such uses consistent with the purposes of Articles III-VI or as otherwise established by law. The applicant shall be required to pay an application fee and an inspection fee as established by the Director of Public Work. Any person granted a License hereunder shall be subject to the applicable requirements of Articles III-VI. Unless otherwise stated in the License, a License shall be for an indefinite time and shall be revocable at any time on written notice in the public interest by the city.

Condition Precedent to ROW Permit. Unless otherwise required by applicable law, no ROW Permit required under Article IV may be issued to any person unless or until such person has a valid Franchise, ROW Use Agreement, or License with the city that authorizes that person’s use of the rights-of-way. Unless prohibited by applicable law, in addition to any other reason provided herein, the Director of Public Works may deny a ROW Permit to any person that does not have a valid Franchise, ROW Use Agreement, or License with the city.

Grant and Nature of Approval; Terms and Compensation. The authority granted by the city pursuant to any ROW Use Agreement, Franchise, or License shall be for non-exclusive use of the city’s rights-of-way. Such grant does not in any way limit the continuing authority of the city through the proper exercise of its statutory powers to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the public.  The granting of any ROW Use Agreement, License, or Franchise by the city shall not be deemed to create any property interest of any kind in favor of the ROW user, nor shall it create any relationship of agency, partnership, joint venture, or employment between the parties.

Transferability. The Director of Public Works shall not unreasonably withhold its consent as provided herein, but any costs incurred shall be paid by the ROW user to the extent not prohibited by applicable law. In the case of the city granting consent to transfer, the transferee shall be subject to the terms and conditions of Articles III-VI.

Use of City or Third-Party Facilities. No ROW Use Agreement, Franchise, or License shall grant the right to use facilities owned or controlled by the city (including Rolla Municipal Utilities) or a third party, and no such use shall occur, nor shall any Franchise, ROW Use Agreement, or License excuse such person from first obtaining a pole attachment agreement or other express consent for such right or use before locating on facilities controlled or owned by the city (including Rolla Municipal Utilities) or a third party.

Lease Required for Public Lands. Unless otherwise provided, use or installation of any facilities or other structure within non-rights-of-way public property of the city shall be permitted only if a lease agreement or other separate written approval has been negotiated and approved by the city with such reasonable terms as the city may require.

Forfeiture of Agreement and Privilege.  In case of failure on the part of the ROW user, including its successors and assigns, to comply with any of the provisions of Articles III-VI or a ROW Use Agreement or Franchise, or if the ROW user, its successors and assigns should do or cause to be done any act or thing prohibited by or in violation of Articles III-VI or the terms of the authorization of such use, or otherwise loses authority to provide its service in the city, the ROW user, its successors and assigns shall forfeit all rights and privileges permitted by any ROW Use Agreement or Franchise, and all rights thereunder shall cease, terminate, and become null and void, provided that said forfeiture shall not take effect until the city shall carry out the following proceedings: Before the city declares the forfeiture or revocation of a ROW Use Agreement or Franchise, it shall first serve a written notice upon the person setting forth in detail the neglect or failure complained of, and the person shall have thirty (30) days thereafter, or such other reasonable period established by the Director of Public Works, in which to cure the default by complying with the conditions of the such ROW Use Agreement or Franchise and fully remedying any default or violation. If at the end of such period, the city determines that the conditions have not been complied with and that the person did not reasonably and in the public interest require more than the established time to cure the default, the city shall take action by an affirmative vote of the city council present at the meeting and voting to terminate the ROW Use Agreement or Franchise, setting out the grounds upon which said authorization is to be forfeited or revoked. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from invoking any other remedy or from declaring immediate forfeiture where the default is incapable of being cured by the ROW user, including where such defaults or violations have repeatedly occurred. (Ord. 4469, §1)
 



Sec. 36-27. Application for Franchise or ROW Use Agreement.
a. Application Form. An application for a Franchise or ROW Use Agreement shall be provided to the city on city forms and shall include all such information as is required by Articles III-VI and as determined necessary by the Director of Public Works. The ROW user shall be responsible for accurately maintaining the information in the application during the term of any Franchise or ROW Use Agreement and shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the city due to the failure to provide or maintain as accurate any application information required herein.

Application Deposit Fee. An application deposit of $500.00, or such other amount determined to be required, shall be submitted with the application, which shall be utilized to at least partly offset the city’s costs in reviewing and issuing an agreement, consistent with applicable law provided that no costs shall be included if such inclusion is prohibited by applicable law as to that person; any amount not used by the city for its actual lawfully reimbursable costs will be refunded upon request after execution of a ROW Use Agreement or Franchise. If applicable, the applicant shall be obligated to reimburse the city for its reasonable expenses associated with the review, negotiation, and adoption of an appropriate ROW Use Agreement or Franchise that may exceed the application deposit.

Standard for Approval or Renewal. In reviewing an application for a new or renewal ROW Use Agreement or Franchise, the city may consider prior conduct of the person in performance of its obligations or compliance with the city's ordinances in the past, or the existence of any outstanding violations or deficiencies. The city may deny or condition any ROW Use Agreement outstanding violations or deficiencies. The city may deny or condition any ROW Use Agreement or Franchise where the proposed use would interfere with the public use of the rights-of-way or otherwise conflict with the legitimate public interests of the city to fulfill the requirements and objectives of Articles III-VI or as otherwise provided by law. All ROW Use Agreements or Franchises may be approved by ordinance or resolution of the city council after receipt of an executed copy from applicant, and applications shall be decided on a non-discriminatory basis and shall be approved, conditioned or denied based on compliance with all applicable requirements herein, and conformance with applicable law and the public interest. The city may, if appropriate, notwithstanding the provisions herein approve form agreements that may be executed by the Director of Public Works in substantially the form approved.

(Ord. 4469, §1)


Sec. 36-28. General Row obligations.

Compliance with Laws. Each ROW user shall comply with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations and rules as well as all city ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations heretofore and hereafter adopted or established.

Zoning, Safety, and Building Code Compliance.  ROW users shall at all times be subject to the lawful exercise of the police powers of the city, including but not limited to all police powers regarding zoning, supervision of the restoration of the rights-of-way, building and safety regulations, and control of the rights-of-way currently in effect or as may be amended.  Installation of all facilities in the rights-of-way are subject to and must be in compliance with all applicable zoning and safety and building code requirements. For applications for installation of any facility in the rights-of-way, the most restrictive adjacent underlying zoning district classification shall apply unless otherwise specifically zoned and designated on the official zoning district map.

No Warranties. The city makes no express or implied representation or warranty regarding its rights to authorize the installation or construction of facilities on any particular segment of rights-of-way and shall not be liable for any damages therefrom. The burden and responsibility for making all such determinations in advance of construction or installation shall be entirely upon the ROW user. The ROW user shall be solely liable for any damages to facilities or other property due to excavation, facilities maintenance, or other work performed prior to obtaining the location of all facilities that have been properly identified prior to such work. The ROW user shall not make or attempt to make repairs, relocation, or replacement of damaged or disturbed facilities without the approval of the owner of the facilities.

No Waiver.  No action or omission of the city shall operate as a future waiver of any rights of the city under Articles III-VI. Except where rights are expressly granted or waived by a ROW Permit, ROW Use Agreement, Franchise, or License they are reserved, whether or not expressly enumerated.

No Cause of Action Against the City. As a condition for use of the rights-of-way, a ROW user shall have no damages, remedy, or monetary recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost, expense, or damage arising from any of the provisions or requirements of any ROW Use Agreement, Franchise, or License, or because of the enforcement thereof by the city, or from the use of the rights-of-way.  Nothing herein shall preclude the ROW user from seeking injunctive or declaratory judgment relief against the city where such relief is otherwise available, and the requirements therefor are otherwise satisfied.

Maintenance of Facilities.  Each ROW user shall maintain its facilities in good and safe condition and in a manner that complies with all applicable federal, state, and local requirements.

Subordinate Use. The ROW user’s use shall be, in all situations, subordinate and subject to public municipal use.

Responsible for Subcontractors. If excavation or facilities maintenance is being done for the ROW user by another person, a subcontractor or otherwise, the ROW user shall be responsible for ensuring that the excavation or facilities maintenance of said person is performed consistent with its ROW Permit and applicable law (including that the contractor shall be properly licensed under the State of Missouri and local ordinances) and shall be responsible for promptly correcting acts or omissions by said person.

Insurance; Exceptions. Except as provided in this section, each ROW user shall provide, at its sole expense, and maintain during the term of any ROW Use Agreement or Franchise or anytime the ROW user has facilities in the ROW, commercial general liability insurance with a reputable, qualified, and financially sound company licensed to do business in the State of Missouri, and unless otherwise approved by the city, with a rating by Best of not less than "A", that shall protect the ROW user, the city, and the city's officials, officers, and employees, from claims which may arise from such use of the ROW, whether such operations are by the ROW user, its officers, directors, employees, and agents, or any contractors or subcontractors of the ROW user. This liability insurance shall include, but shall not be limited to, protection against claims arising from bodily and personal injury and damage to property, resulting from all ROW user’s operations, products, services, or use of automobiles or construction equipment. The amount of insurance for single limit coverage applying to bodily and personal injury and property damage shall be in no event less than the individual and combined sovereign immunity limits established by § 537.610 RSMo. for political subdivisions; provided that nothing herein shall be deemed to waive the city's sovereign immunity. An endorsement which states that the city as an additional insured with full and equivalent coverage as the insured under the insured’s policy and stating that the policy shall not be cancelled or materially modified so as to be out of compliance with the requirements of this section, or not renewed without thirty (30) days' advance written notice of such event being given to the Director or Public Works.  If the person is self-insured, it shall provide the city proof of compliance regarding its ability to self-insure and proof of its ability to provide coverage in the above amounts. The insurance requirements in this section or otherwise shall not apply to a ROW user to the extent and for such period as the ROW user is exempted from such requirements pursuant to § 67.1830(6)(a) RSMo. and has on file with the city clerk an affidavit certifying that ROW user has twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00) in net assets and does not have a history of permitting noncompliance with the City. Additionally, in accordance with § 67.5121(3), a self-insured ROW user shall not be required to obtain insurance naming the city as an additional insured solely to the extent such ROW user is utilizing “Small Wireless Facilities” as defined in the Uniform Small Wireless Facility Deployment Act within the ROW. This exception to the city’s insurance requirements shall only apply as related to “Small Wireless Facilities” and shall not otherwise alter the obligations of a ROW user to provide appropriate insurance to the city for any other activities or operations.  The city may waive any and all requirements under this subsection when deemed to be lawful and in the public interest.

Performance and Maintenance Bonds.

Bond Required.  Prior to any work, a ROW user shall establish in the city's favor a performance and maintenance bond in an amount to be determined by the Director of Public Works to guarantee the restoration of the rights-of-way as more fully provided in Section 36-77. The bond shall continue in full force and effect for a period of forty-eight (48) months following completion of the work. The Director may waive this requirement when the work involves, as determined in the sole discretion of the Director, no or only minor disruption or damage to the rights-of-way.

Failure to Satisfactorily Complete Restoration.  If a ROW user fails to complete the restoration work in a safe, timely, and competent manner or if the completed restorative work fails without remediation within the time period for the bond (as determined by the Director of Public Works), then after notice and a reasonable opportunity to cure, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the ROW user and the cost of completing work in or restoring the rights-of-way, up to the full amount of the bond. The city may also recover against the bond any amount recoverable against a security fund or letter of credit where such amount exceeds that available under a security fund or letter of credit.

Bond Terms.  The bond shall be issued by a surety with an "A" or better rating of insurance in Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition, shall be subject to the approval of the city's attorney and shall contain the following endorsement: "This bond may not be cancelled or allowed to lapse until sixty (60) days after receipt by the city, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice from the issuer of the bond of intent to cancel or not to renew."

Exception.  The city may waive any and all requirements under this subsection when deemed to be lawful and in the public interest.   Further, in lieu of the bond required herein, the ROW user may establish in the city's favor such other security as the Director of Public Works may determine to be commensurate with the noted bonding requirements including, but not limited to, an annual bond to be maintained in the minimum amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). The bond requirements in this section or otherwise shall not apply to a ROW user to the extent and for such period as the ROW user is exempted from such requirements pursuant to § 67.1830(6)(a) RSMo. and has on file with the city clerk an affidavit certifying that ROW user has twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00) in net assets and facts otherwise demonstrating the ROW user is exempted, unless otherwise provided by a ROW Use Agreement or Franchise or the city determines such exemption has not been adequately shown. Additionally, in accordance with § 67.5121(4), the bonds required for “Small Wireless Facilities” as defined in the Uniform Small Wireless Facility Deployment Act shall not exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per “Small Wireless Facility” or more seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) for all “Small Wireless Facilities” within the ROW of a ROW user. This exception to the city’s bonding requirements shall only apply as related to such “Small Wireless Facilities” and shall not otherwise alter the obligations of a ROW user to provide appropriate bonds to the city for any other activities or operations.

Indemnification. Any person performing excavation or a ROW user as a condition of use of the rights-of-way shall at its sole cost and expense fully indemnify, protect, defend (with counsel acceptable to the city), and hold harmless the city, its municipal officials, officers, employees, and agents, from and against any and all claims, demands, suits, proceedings, and actions, liability, and judgment by other persons for damages, losses, costs, and expenses, including attorney fees, arising, directly or indirectly, in whole or in part, from the action or inaction of the person performing excavation or ROW user, its agents, representatives, employees, contractors, subcontractors, or any other person for whose acts the person performing excavation or ROW user may be liable, in constructing, operating, maintaining, repairing, restoring, or removing facilities or other structures, or use of the rights-or-way or the activities performed, or failed to be performed, by the person performing excavation or ROW user under Articles III-VI or applicable law, or otherwise, except to the extent arising from or caused by the sole or gross negligence or willful misconduct of the city, its elected officials, officers, employees, agents, or contractors. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the city, or any agent from participating in the defense of any litigation by their own counsel at their own expense. Such participation shall not under any circumstances relieve the person from the duty to defend against liability or its duty to pay any judgment entered against the city or its agents. This indemnification shall survive the expiration or termination of any ROW Use Agreement, Franchise, License, or ROW Permit.  Provided however, that in accordance with § 67.5121(2), a ROW user which is a Wireless Provider,  for and in relation to that the Wireless Provider’s  operation of a “Small Wireless Facility” as defined in the Uniform Small Wireless Facility Deployment Act within the ROW, shall only indemnify and hold the city, its officers and employees, harmless against any damage or personal injury caused by the negligence of the ROW user, its employees, agents, or contractors.

ROW User Responsible for Costs. The ROW user shall be responsible for all reasonable costs borne by the city that are directly associated with ROW user's installation, maintenance, repair, operation, use, and replacement of its facilities in the rights-of-way that are not otherwise accounted for as part of the ROW Permit fee established pursuant to Article IV, or other applicable application fee with respect to a ROW user’s request to place facilities in the ROW, to the extent permitted by law. All such costs shall be itemized, and the city's books and records related to these costs shall be made available upon request of the ROW user.  (Ord. 4469, §1)
 


Sec. 36-29. Facility location requirements.

Exclusion of Certain Locations/Facilities. To the extent permitted by applicable law, the Director of Public Works may designate certain locations or facilities in the rights-of-way to be excluded from use by the ROW user, including but not limited to, ornamental or similar specially-designed street lights or other facilities or locations which, in the reasonable judgment of the Director of Public Works cannot safely bear the weight or wind loading thereof, or any other facility or location that in the reasonable judgment of the Director of Public Works would be rendered unsafe or unstable by the installation; provided, however, that pursuant to R.S.Mo. 67.5112(6), a wireless provider shall be permitted to replace decorative poles when necessary to collocate a Small Wireless Facility so long as any such replacement pole reasonably conforms to the design aesthetics of the decorative poles being replaced. The Director of Public Works may further exclude certain other facilities that have been designated or planned for other use or are not otherwise available for use by the ROW user due to engineering, technological, proprietary, legal, or other limitations or restrictions as may be reasonably determined by the city. In the event such exclusions conflict with the reasonable requirements of the ROW user, the city will cooperate in good faith with the ROW user to attempt to find suitable alternatives, if available, provided that the city shall not be required to incur financial cost nor require the city to acquire new locations for the ROW user.

Location, Type, and Design of Facilities Subject to Approval.

Review Required.  The design, location, and nature of all facilities shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director of Public Works. Such review shall be on a non-discriminatory basis in application of city policy and approvals shall not be unreasonably withheld. City height limitations, applicable zoning restrictions, and general city policies with regard to all users of the rights-of-way shall be applicable to all facilities. The Director of Public Works may establish regulations or policies as may be deemed necessary or appropriate to affect this provision.

Underground and Collocation of Facilities Required; Exceptions.  Except as provided herein or where prohibited by applicable law, no person may erect, construct, or install new poles or other facilities above the surface of the rights-of-way without the written permission of the city based on good cause established by applicant and found by the city. In addition, all new fiber optics, coaxial, and similar cable facilities shall be located within existing conduit, trenches, or other facilities to minimize unnecessary use of rights-of-way space, reduce potential existing or future interference and obstructions, and to reduce the cost to the public or others therefrom, and to maximize the public’s ability to use and license appropriate private or public uses of the rights-of-way in the public interest except where preempted by law or where good cause is established and written permission granted by the city.  Such permission may be granted by the city council when other similar facilities exist above-ground and conditions are such that underground construction is impossible, impractical or unfeasible, as determined by the city, and when in the city's judgment the above-ground construction has minimal aesthetic impact on the area where the construction is proposed. Where reasonable and appropriate and where adequate rights-of-way exists, the ROW user shall place above-ground facilities underground in conjunction with city capital improvement projects and/or at specific locations requested by the city provided that such placement is practical, efficient, and economically feasible. New utility poles and related ground mounted equipment shall be permitted to be installed above ground; provided, however, that to ensure unobstructed pedestrian use and city maintenance of the ROW and minimize visual obstructions for vehicular traffic, a new utility pole and any ground mounted equipment related to that utility pole or the equipment thereon shall not be installed within one hundred and fifty feet (150’) of another utility pole or other ground mounted equipment on the same side of the ROW.  A replacement utility pole that is installed in lieu of an existing utility pole and is installed within ten feet (10’) of the existing utility pole, shall not be considered a new utility pole subject to the spacing requirements herein. Such spacing regulations as applied to that specific site may be altered by the City Administrator upon good cause shown by the applicant including: (1) when and where nearby utility poles exist that are spaced closer than one hundred and fifty feet (150’) apart; (2) when conditions are such that no existing structure is available for placement of facilities; and (3) the utility pole can be placed to be minimally visually intrusive.

Wireless Antennas and Facilities.  Pursuant to city authority, including Section 67.1830 RSMo. and the Uniform Small Wireless Facility Deployment Act (§§ 67.5110 et seq. RSMo.), and to properly manage the limited space in the city’s rights-of-way, minimize obstructions and interference with the use of the rights-of-way by the public and to ensure public safety, while also seeking to facilitate delivery of broadband technologies to city residents and businesses, wireless facilities shall be permitted in the rights-of-way in compliance with the requirements applicable to other facilities and users in the rights-of-way, and the additional requirements set forth in the Uniform Small Wireless Facility Deployment Act and this subsection for wireless antennas and facilities. 

General Conditions.  Except as prohibited by law, any wireless facility in the rights-of-way shall be subject to conditions relating to the location (including prohibited or limited locations), design, height, appearance, safety, radio-frequency interference, and other interference issues as may be lawfully imposed by the city where necessary or appropriate to protect the public, and to conform to policies and interests of the public as may be set forth in special district plans, historic areas, or other policies as may be reasonably adopted by the Director of Public Works to address changing infrastructure, technology, and uses of the rights-of-way and/or city facilities.  A wireless facility shall not be located or installed in a manner that results in interference with or impairs the operation of existing utility facilities or city or third-party attachments. Wireless antennas or facilities shall further comply with (1) all applicable requirements for installation of any facilities in the rights-of-way as set forth in Articles III-V including a ROW Permit, (2) the applicable requirements of this section; and (3) requirements for installation of wireless antennas and facilities set forth in the Uniform Wireless Communications Infrastructure Deployment Act (§§ 67.5090 et seq. RSMo.), Uniform Small Wireless Facility Deployment Act (§§ 67.5110 et seq. RSMo.), applicable zoning, building, and other regulations and approvals, specifically including Chapter 42.

Specific Conditions.

Small Wireless Facilities. Any small wireless facility meeting the requirements for small wireless facility as defined by Section 42-397 and as provided in Section 42-400 shall be authorized to be located in the rights-of-way with approval of the Director of Public Works subject to the following additional requirements:

If proposing to install a new authority pole as defined by Section 42-397, compliance with the spacing requirements herein;

Compliance with § 67.5113.3(9) RSMo. to the satisfaction of the city;

For collocations on city authority poles, all make-ready estimates for the authority pole, including replacement costs where necessary for the safety and reliability of the utility pole, as determined by the city;

Attestation that the proposed small wireless facility meets the volumetric requirements to meet the definition of a small wireless facility in Section 42-397; and

Any other requirements which may be applicable to the proposed small wireless facility pursuant to the Uniform Small Wireless Facility Deployment Act (§§ 67.5110 et seq. RSMo.).

"Fast-Track" Small Wireless Collocation.  Any wireless facility meeting the requirements of a fast-track as defined by Section 42-397, and as provided in Section 42-401, may be authorized to be located in the rights-of-way with approval of the Director of Public Works subject to the following additional requirements:

Attestation that the proposed facilities meet the volumetric requirements to meet the definition of fast-track in Section 42-397;

No ground equipment shall be authorized;

If the proposed structure the applicant proposes to locate its fast-track is not structurally sound, but the Director finds such to be a desired location, the Director of Public Works can require the applicant to install a new substantially similar structure at its cost; and

Compliance with the spacing requirements herein if granted a waiver under the fast-track zoning procedure to install a new structure.

All other Wireless in ROW.  Any wireless facility located on a utility pole, authority pole, or existing structure as defined by Section 42-397 but not meeting the requirements of (a) Small Wireless Facilities or (b) Fast-Track Small Wireless Collocation above, may be approved, subject to reasonable and nondiscriminatory conditions as may be imposed consistent with the purposes of this section, only upon approval by the City Administrator upon a determination by the City Administrator, to the extent the same considerations apply to requests for placements of other types of infrastructure deployments, that such wireless facility: (1) does not negatively impact appearance or property values in light of the location, design, and circumstances to be approved, (2) does not create any reasonable safety risk, and (3) complies with all applicable and reasonable zoning, rights-of-way, and other applicable requirements.

Wireless Facility Compensation.  If the small wireless facility or fast track is to be located on a city owned structure or authority pole, but not including the assets of Rolla Municipal Utilities (“RMU”) an annual payment of $150.00 per attachment shall be required. To extent permitted by applicable law, the rates for collocation of facilities on assets owned by RMU shall be established by RMU.

Application Requirements.  Any application including one or more wireless antennas or facilities shall include all applicable and lawful requirements: (1) for installation of any facilities in the rights-of-way as set forth in Articles III-IV(2) of this section; and (3) for installation of wireless antennas and facilities set forth in the Uniform Wireless Communications Infrastructure Deployment Act (§§ 67.5090 et. seq. RSMo.), city’s zoning code, and other applicable law including written proof of consent of landowner and of structure owner.

Mapping of Facilities. Upon completion of the ROW work involving installation of new facilities, the ROW user shall supply the city copies of as-built and detailed maps showing the exact location of all facilities installed in the ROW after August 28, 2001 in the electronic form that the ROW user keeps such data.  As a condition of continued ROW use, all ROW users shall, on an annual basis, provide the city with as-builts or other detailed maps of the ROW user’s current facilities in the electronic form that the ROW user keeps such data. Such annual requirement may be waived by the Director of Public Works upon written request.

Sight Triangle Maintained.  ROW users shall comply with the requirements of site triangles and nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision within the triangular area formed by the rights-of-way lines and a line connecting them at points as reasonably determined by the Director of Public Works from their point of intersection so as to ensure public safety is maintained. 

No Interference. All ROW users shall construct and maintain its facilities so as not to disrupt or interfere with other users of the rights-of-way including the city. The ROW user shall not interfere with or alter the facilities of the city or other ROW user without their consent and shall be solely responsible for such.  Except as may otherwise be provided or as determined by the Director of Public Works, the ROW user shall, prior to commencement of work, execute a city-approved resident-notification plan to notify residents affected by the proposed work. All construction and maintenance by the ROW user or its subcontractors shall be performed in accordance with industry standards. The ROW user shall, in the performance of any excavation, facilities maintenance, or other ROW work, limit such work to that necessary for efficient operation and so as not to interfere with other users of the rights-of-way. All facilities and other structures shall be installed and located to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners, ROW users, and the city. Facilities and other structures shall not be placed where they will disrupt or interfere with other facilities, structures, or public improvements or obstruct or hinder in any manner the various utilities serving the residents and businesses in the city or public improvements. If authorized, above-ground facilities shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner so as not to emit any unnecessary or intrusive noise. When reasonable and necessary to accomplish such purposes, the Director may require as alternatives to the proposed work either less disruptive methods or different locations for facilities consistent with applicable law.
(Ord. 4469, §1)



Sec. 36-30. Relocation of facilities.
City Required Relocation. The ROW user shall promptly remove, relocate, or adjust any facilities located in the rights-of-way as directed by the city when such is required by public necessity, or public convenience and security require it, or such other findings in the public interest that may require relocation, adjustment, or removal at the cost of the ROW user. Such removal, relocation, or adjustment shall be performed by the ROW user within the time frames established by the city and at the ROW user's sole expense without any expense to the city, its employees, agents, or authorized contractors and shall be specifically subject to rules, regulations, and schedules of the city pertaining to such.

Emergency Exception. In the event of an emergency or where construction equipment or facilities create or are contributing to an imminent danger to health, safety, or property, the city may, to the extent allowed by law, remove, re-lay, or relocate such construction equipment or the pertinent parts of such facilities without charge to the city for such action or for restoration or repair. The city shall attempt to notify the person having facilities in the rights-of-way prior to taking such action, but the inability to do so shall not prevent the same. Thereafter, the city shall notify the person having facilities in the rights-of-way as soon as practicable.

Abandonment Exception. Rather than relocate facilities as requested or directed, a ROW user may abandon the facilities if approved by the city as provided below in this section.

ROW User Responsible for Damage. Any damages suffered by the city, its agents, or its contractors to the extent caused by the ROW user's failure to timely relocate, remove, or adjust its facilities, or failure to properly relocate, remove, or adjust such facilities, shall be borne by the ROW user. Where the ROW user shall fail to relocate facilities as required by the city, the city may, but shall not be required to, upon notice to the ROW user remove the obstructing facilities with or without further delay and the ROW user shall bear all responsibility and liability for the consequences therefrom, and the city shall bear no responsibility to the ROW user or others for damage resulting from such removal.

No Vested Rights. No action hereunder shall be deemed a taking of property and no person shall be entitled to any compensation therefor. No location of any facilities in the rights-of-way shall be a vested interest or property right.

Abandoned Facilities; Removal. A person owning abandoned facilities in the rights-of-way must not later than thirty (30) days of notice or of abandonment remove its facilities and replace or restore any damage or disturbance caused by the removal at its own expense. The Director of Public Works may upon written application and written approval allow underground facilities or portions thereof to remain in place if the Director determines that it is in the best interest of public health, safety, and general welfare to do so. The city shall be entitled to all costs of removal and enforcement for any violation of this provision.

Nuisance. Facilities abandoned or otherwise left unused in violation of Articles III-V are deemed to be a nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, (a) abating the nuisance, (b) taking possession and ownership of the facility and restoring it to a useable function, or (c) requiring the removal of the facility by the ROW user. (Ord. 4469, §1)
Secs. 36-31 to 36-40.  Reserved.

ARTICLE IV - ROW PERMITS
Sec. 36-41.  Excavation Permit required – exceptions.
No person shall make or cause to be made any excavations nor construct, reconstruct, repair, alter, or grade any sidewalk, curb, curb cut, driveway, or street in any ROW without an Excavation Permit issued by the Director of Public Works to do so, except public work done under the authority of the city council or in the case of an emergency. The cost of said permit shall be set out by the Director of Public Works.

An Excavation Permit should be obtained for each project unless otherwise provided for by the Director of Public Works. A separate special permit or lease shall be required for excavation in or use of any real property interest of the city that is not ROW. (Ord. 4469, §1)

Sec. 36-42.  Obstruction Permit required – exceptions.
Permit Required. It shall be unlawful to occupy or obstruct any ROW or sidewalk (including to temporarily place thereon materials or rubbish from building operations or for excavation of any area under a sidewalk or for any purpose whatever in connection with the erection, removal, alteration, or repair of any building or other structures) without an Obstruction Permit or License from the Public Works Director unless such work is authorized by an existing valid Excavation Permit or is exempt herein.
Exceptions. An Obstruction Permit shall not be required for:
ROW users performing routine maintenance which does not require excavation, does not disrupt traffic or pedestrians, and requires no more than four (4) hours to complete, provided that at minimum two (2) hours' notice is provided to the Director of Public Works during normal business hours;
Emergency situations as more fully described in Section 36-47 below;
Contractors working on the construction or reconstruction of public improvements and which are operating pursuant to a contract with the city for such construction; or
Routine maintenance on previously approved small wireless facilities, as defined by Section 42-397, replacement of such small wireless facilities that are the same or smaller in size, weight, and height, or installation placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro wireless facilities, as defined by Section 67.5111 RSMo., that are strung on cables between utility poles in compliance with applicable safety and building codes, when such work will not involve excavation, affect traffic patterns, obstruct traffic in the ROW, or materially impede the use of a sidewalk, and provided the ROW user submits as-builts of the new small wireless facilities or micro wireless facilities so the city may maintain an accurate inventory of facilities installed in the ROW.
Permit Conditions. In addition to the applicable conditions and obligations set forth in Articles III-VI, conditions of an Obstruction Permit shall be as established in such Permit and shall include requirements of notice to and approval by the Public Works Director whenever traffic lanes are to be obstructed, manhole covers or safety barriers removed or altered, temporary or other barricades installed, and other events set forth in such Permit. (Ord. 4469, §1)

Sec. 36-43.  Extent of ROW Permit generally.
The extent of occupation of a ROW or sidewalk or part thereof for which a ROW Permit may be granted by the Public Works Director, shall be as follows:

The ROW Permit shall not authorize the occupation of any sidewalk or ROW or part thereof, other than that immediately in front of or in the rear of the premises for the building upon which the ROW Permit is issued.

Earth taken from the excavation and rubbish taken from buildings must not be scattered upon sidewalks or the ROW and must be removed from day to day as rapidly as produced and where dry rubbish, likely to produce dust, is being handled, it must be kept wet so as to prevent being blown about by the wind. (Ord. 4469, §1)

Sec. 36-44.  ROW Permit application.
The Director of Public Works is authorized to draft an application form consistent with the requirements of Articles III-V.  An applicant for an ROW Permit hereunder shall file with the Director of Public Works an application showing at minimum:

The name and address of the owner or agent in charge of the property abutting the proposed work area.
The name and address of the party doing the work.
The location of the work area.
The duration and dates of the closure or restriction.
If Excavation is proposed, statement that applicant has complied with Missouri One Call.
Such other information as the Director of Public Works shall find reasonably necessary to the determination of whether a permit should be issued hereunder. (Ord. 4469, §1)


Sec. 36-45. Fee.
An application for ROW Permits shall be accompanied by a fee established by the Director of Public Works. An applicant whose ROW Permit application has been withdrawn, abandoned, or denied for failure to comply with Articles III-VI shall not be refunded the application fee. (Ord. 4469, §1)



Sec. 36-46. Issuance.
Issuance Determinations.  The Director of Public Works shall issue a ROW Permit hereunder when he has determined:

That a sufficient application has been made, accompanied by payment of the appropriate fee.

That the work will be done according to the standard plans and specifications on file in the office of the Director of Public Works.

That the operation will not unreasonably interfere with the vehicular and pedestrian traffic, the demand and necessity for parking space, and the means of egress to and from the property involved and adjacent properties.

That the health, welfare, and safety of the public will not be unreasonably impaired.

That the applicant agrees to follow all rules and regulations for sidewalk closures issued by the Director of Public Works.

Renewal.  ROW Permits will be allowed to be renewed once; provided that the time granted in the original ROW Permit plus the time granted in such renewal Permit shall not exceed thirty (30) days. Additional renewals will require the applicant to make application to the city council.

Transferability.  Unless otherwise provided or as otherwise required by law, no ROW Permit may be transferred or assigned without the written application to and consent of the Director of Public Works based on the requirements and policies of Articles III-V.

Condition Imposition.  The Director of Public Works may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of a ROW Permit and the performance of work in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, to ensure the structural integrity of the rights-of-way, to protect the property and safety of other users of the rights-of-way, and to minimize the disruption and inconvenience to the traveling public. Installation and collocation of small wireless facility, as defined by Section 42-397, shall be completed within one (1) year of issuance of the ROW Permit or the ROW Permit shall become null and void and shall no longer authorize installation or collocation such small wireless facility. (Ord. 4469, §1)


Sec. 36-47. ROW Permit requirements
ROW Permit Conditions.  Every ROW Permit issued hereunder shall incorporate the applicable requirements and terms of Articles III-VI, agreements, and all applicable ordinances, to the extent permitted by law.  The ROW user shall perform such work in accordance with the issued permit and applicable provisions of Articles III-VI and any subsequent ordinances or regulations that may be adopted by the city regarding excavation or obstruction work in effect at the time such permit issues. In addition, all ROW users shall be subject to all technical specifications, design criteria, policies, resolutions, and ordinances now or hereafter adopted or promulgated by the city in the reasonable exercise of its police power relating to ROW Permits and fees, sidewalk and pavement cuts, facility location, construction coordination, surface restoration, and other requirements on the use of the rights-of-way. A ROW user shall perform all excavations or obstruction work in full compliance with all applicable engineering codes adopted or approved by the city, and in accordance with applicable statutes of the State of Missouri, and the rules and regulations of the Public Service Commission, Federal Communications Commission, and any other local, state, or federal agency having jurisdiction over the parties. The ROW user shall comply with the excavation requirements established by §§ 319.010 et. seq. RSMo., as amended. A ROW user shall be responsible for all excavations or obstruction work done in the rights-of-way on its behalf, regardless of by whom the work is done.

Emergency Exception.  In the event of an emergency requiring immediate attention to remedy defects, and in order to avoid loss of damage to person or property, it shall be sufficient that the person conducting the work shall as soon as practicable notify the city of the location of the work and shall apply for the required permit as soon as practicable following the commencement of the work, not to exceed the third (3rd) business day thereafter, or as otherwise directed by the Director of Public Works. In the event the city becomes aware of an emergency requiring facilities work the Director of Public Works shall attempt to contact a representative of each ROW user affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency work.  If no response is received by a particular ROW user to whom contact is attempted, the Director of Public Works may take whatever action he/she deems necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the person whose action or inaction occasioned the emergency or by the ROW user if the emergency was occasioned by an act of nature.

Displayed. At all times during the work, ROW Permits shall be conspicuously displayed at the work site and shall be available for inspection by the Director of Public Works or other city official.

ROW Permit Modification.  If at any time it appears that the duration or scope of the work is or will become materially different from that allowed by the ROW Permit, the ROW user shall inform the Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works may issue a waiver, an extension, or revised ROW Permit, or require that the ROW user reapply for a ROW Permit in accordance with all requirements of Articles III-V. (Ord. 4469, §1)



Sec. 36-48.  ROW Permit denial and revocation.
Denial.  The Director of Public Works may deny an application for a ROW Permit if:

To the extent permitted by law, the person does not have a current Franchise, License, or ROW Use Agreement, or other authorization with the city.

The ROW user, or any persons acting on the behalf of the ROW user, fails to provide all the necessary information requested by the city for managing the rights-of-way.

The ROW user, or any persons acting on the behalf of the ROW user, including contractors or subcontractors, has a history of noncompliance or permitting noncompliance within the city. For purposes of this section, "history of noncompliance or permitting noncompliance within the city" shall include where the ROW user, or any persons acting on the behalf of the ROW user, including contractors or subcontractors, has failed to return the rights-of-way to its previous condition under a previous ROW Permit, or has violated terms, or is in violation of terms of the ROW users' Franchise, ROW Use Agreement, License, or other authorization with the city.

The city has provided the ROW user with a reasonable, competitively neutral, and nondiscriminatory justification for requiring an alternative method for performing the excavation or facilities maintenance identified in the ROW Permit application, or a reasonable alternative route that will not result in additional installation expense of more than ten (10) percent to the ROW user or a declination of service quality. This shall not apply with respect to ROW Permits related to installing Small Wireless Facilities or Utility Poles for collocation of Small Wireless Facilities.

Any other violations or noncompliance caused by or through the ROW user of any applicable city, state, or federal law or regulation, except where such violation is prohibited by applicable law for being a basis for denial. 

Revocation.  The Director may, after reasonable notice and an opportunity to cure, revoke a ROW Permit without fee refund, but only in the event of a substantial breach of the terms and material conditions of the ROW Permit.  A substantial breach by a ROW User includes but is not limited to:

A material violation of a provision of the ROW Permit;

An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the ROW Permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens;

A material misrepresentation of fact in the ROW Permit application;

A failure to complete work by the date specified in the ROW Permit, unless a ROW Permit extension is obtained, or unless the failure to complete the work is due to reasons beyond the ROW user's control;

A failure to correct, within the time specified by the city, work that does not conform to applicable national safety codes, industry construction standards, or local safety codes, upon inspection and notification by the city of the faulty condition; or

Such other lawful reasons. (Ord. 4469, §1)

Secs. 36-49 to 36-66. Reserved.


ARTICLE V - EXCAVATIONS IN ROW
Sec. 36-67.  Keeping ROW clean during operations.
It is the duty of any person carrying on any building operations, obstruction work, or excavations to keep the ROW and sidewalks where the operations are conducted in a clean and orderly condition during such operation. At the expiration of the time stipulated in the Excavation Permit, or whenever ordered by the Director of Public Works, the person to whom the Excavation Permit may be issued shall remove all materials and rubbish from the ROW and sidewalks operations and shall leave the same in a clean and orderly condition. (Ord. 4469, §1)



Sec. 36-68.  Right of city to clean ROW on failure of ROW user to do so – recovery of costs from tax bill or bond.
The Public Works Director is authorized to clean the ROW or where the operations are being carried on, whenever the same may be found in an unclean or disorderly condition and he shall remove or repile any building materials or rubbish or obstructions which may be found outside the spaces authorized by the Excavation Permit to be occupied, or within ten feet of any fire plug. He shall cause a voucher for the payment of the costs of such cleaning or removal to be issued which shall be charged against the property as outlined in Section 36-8 or the ROW user's performance bond. (Ord. 4469, §1)



Sec. 36-69.  Restoration of ROW by city if ROW user fails to restore – recovery of costs.
Restoration.  The ROW user shall restore the rights-of-way and surrounding areas and shall comply with other reasonable conditions of the Public Works Director.  In the event that the rights-of-way is not restored to its original condition (including placement of sod to restore any grassy areas unless such requirement is waived by the Director in his/her sole discretion based on area disturbed and weather conditions), as determined by the inspection of the Public Works Director, within a period of thirty days from and after the date when such excavation shall have begun, then such ROW shall be restored to its original condition by the city and the costs and expenses to which the city may be put, on account of such or any violations of the conditions or regulations under which the same is done, shall be paid from the performance bond made with the city, including a twenty-five dollar inspection fee.

Violation.  If any person fails to contact the Director for an inspection within a reasonable time, as determined by the Excavation Permit issued for the excavation, after completion of the work, to ensure that the rights-of-way or other public place has been restored to as good a condition as it was previous to such excavation being made, the excavation shall not be deemed complete and the ROW user shall be in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 4469, §1)



Sec. 36-70.  Excavation Standards and Specification Requirements.
Specifications Generally.  Every person who shall make any excavation in or adjoining any ROW or public place, shall conform to the requirements of the ROW Permit and to conduct such work in accordance with standard plans and specifications on file in the office of the Director of Public Works. During any work, the person doing the work shall protect from damage any and all existing structures and property belonging to the city and any other person. Any and all rights-of-way, public property, or private property disturbed or damaged during the work shall be repaired or replaced by the person doing the work or the person on whose behalf the work is being done and such person shall immediately notify the owner of the fact of any damaged property. Such repair or replacement shall be completed within a reasonable time specified by the Director of Public Works and to his/her satisfaction.

Excavation Specifications.  The person making an excavation shall abide by the following conditions:

The initial cut in a street pavement shall be equal to the width of the trench with the option of being jack hammered or saw cut. The final cut in an asphaltic concrete street pavement shall be one (1) foot wider than the trench width and shall be made only by saw cutting of the pavement.

For cuts in concrete paved streets, concrete pavement replacement shall be full slab length (joint-to-joint) and full slab width (curb or gutter to street centerline) unless specifically authorized otherwise by the Director of Public Works.

Select backfill materials shall be required. "Select back-fill materials" shall mean those materials as established by the ROW Permit requirements and in accordance with the standard plans and specifications on file in the office of the Director of Public Works. All trenches shall be filled in their entirety with such select back-fill materials. All excess earth or dirt removed in the process of such excavation shall be removed from right-of-way by such person or his agent holding permit for such excavation.

Compaction shall meet or exceed the most current version of the standards and conditions of the city and the ASTM International (American Society for Testing and Materials).  If inspections were not requested or a valid Excavation Permit obtained, the city may require compaction testing by a registered professional engineer licensed in the State of Missouri at the ROW user's expense.

Erosion Control.  Before new excavation or construction is commenced and until sodding, planting, concreting, paving, or other final surfacing is in place, which will avoid washing or spreading of dirt and mud onto other property, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, streets, and the rights-of-way, the ROW user shall erect and maintain approved temporary erosion control measures to prevent such washing or spreading of materials. At the end of each day and as required throughout the day during the course of excavating or construction, dirt and mud on the sidewalks, curbs, gutters, streets, and the rights-of-way resulting from work must be removed.

Alteration of Public Structures.  Any alteration to the existing water mains, sewerage or drainage system, or to any city, state, or other public structures or facilities in the rights-of-way required on account of the construction, installation, repair, or maintenance of facilities in the rights-of-way shall be made at the sole cost and expense of the owner of such facilities.

Barricades.  The ROW user assumes the sole responsibility for maintaining proper barricades, plates, safety fencing, and/or lights as required from the time of opening of the ROW until the excavation is surfaced and opened for travel. All excavations and obstruction work that disturb traffic or pedestrian travel shall be barricaded in such a manner as to protect both pedestrians and vehicular traffic. Such excavations, obstruction work, and barricades shall be lighted at night with danger signals in such a manner that all traffic may be warned of the existence and location of such.

Traffic Control.  Whenever there is an excavation or obstruction work by the ROW user, the ROW User shall be responsible for providing adequate traffic control to the surrounding area as determined by the Director. All traffic control devices shall be in compliance with the current version of the standard specifications and the Manual of Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), unless otherwise agreed to by the city. All surplus excavation materials, tools, or supplies at the site of the excavation or obstruction work shall be barricaded and lighted at night in the manner described in this section. In the event the excavation or obstruction work is not completed in a reasonable period of time, the ROW user may be liable for actual damages to the city for delay caused by the ROW user pursuant to this Articles III-V. (Ord. 4469, §1)
 



Sec. 36-71.  Closing streets, etc., temporarily for repair work.
The Public Works Director is authorized to close any ROW, public place, or highway and withdraw the same from public use temporarily and during such period as work on such ROW, public place, or highway shall make such action necessary. No person shall use or attempt to use such ROW, public place, or highway withdrawn from public use, or drive or attempt to drive any vehicle on such ROW, highway, or public place. (Ord. 4469, §1)



Sec. 36-72. Manner of performing work - generally.
In excavating in any ROW, all material for paving or macadamizing must be removed with the least possible injury or loss of the same, and together with the excavated materials from the trenches must be placed where they will cause the least possible inconvenience to the public. The width of the excavation shall be no greater than is necessary for doing the work and whenever it shall be deemed necessary by the Public Works Director, sheeting and bracing shall be used to keep the sides of the trenches perpendicular and prevent unnecessary caving. The ROW must be opened in the manner which will cause the least inconvenience to the public and admit the uninterrupted passage of water along the gutters, and every precaution must be taken to protect the trench so as to insure the public safety. (Ord. 4469, §1)



Sec. 36-73. length of excavation limited - exception.
No excavation shall be made in any ROW or highway more than two blocks in length at any one time except by special permit from the Public Works Director. (Ord. 4469, §1)



Sec. 36-74. Temporary driveways.
In all cases where excavations are made entirely across the ROW or public highway, a substantial driveway shall be maintained by the party making the excavation across such ROW or highway, until such excavation is refilled, and at all times be subject to the approval of the Public Works Director. (Ord. 4469, §1)



Sec. 36-75. Duty to protect public, etc.
No person shall make an excavation in any ROW, highway, or thoroughfare without protecting such excavation so as to prevent persons, animals, or vehicles from falling into such excavation. (Ord. 4469, §1)



Sec. 36.76. Hours of work.
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform excavation work within the city at any time other than from 7:00 A.M. to 9:00 P.M. Monday through Friday without prior approval from the city, except in the case of an emergency.  No work shall be performed during city holidays, except in the case of an emergency.  (Ord. 4469, §1)



Sec. 36.77. Guarantee of work.
Every ROW user in restoring the rights-of-way, shall guarantee its work and shall maintain it for forty-eight (48) months following its completion and in accordance with § 67.1834 RSMo. During the forty-eight (48) months, the ROW user shall, upon notification from the Director of Public Works, correct all restoration work to the extent necessary, using any method as required by the Director of Public Works. Said work shall be completed within a reasonable time, not to exceed thirty (30) calendar days, of the receipt of notice from the Director (not including days during which work cannot be done because of circumstances constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonable or unreasonable). In the event the ROW user is required to perform new restoration pursuant to the foregoing guarantee, the Director of Public Works shall have the authority to extend the guarantee period for such new restoration for up to an additional forty-eight (48) months, or other greater period allowed by law, from the date of the new restoration requirements. The guarantee period shall be applicable to failure of the pavement surface as well as failure below the pavement surface. (Ord. 4469, §1)



Sec. 36.78. Jurisdiction, inspection, stop work orders, appeals, and penalties.
Inspections.  All work and facilities shall be subject to inspection by the city and the supervision of all federal, state, and local authorities having jurisdiction in such matters to ensure compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances, departmental rules, and regulations, and the ROW Permit.

Stop Work Orders. The Director of Public Works shall have full access to all portions of the work and may issue stop work orders and corrective orders to prevent unauthorized work or substandard work as established herein. Except in cases of an emergency or with approval of the Director of Public Works, no work may be done in violation of a stop work order issued by the Director of Public Works.

Repairs when Defective.  All violations of the standards and requirements herein shall be corrected within the time specified in the issuance of a written notice to correct.  Action to correct violations which require immediate action shall be taken upon notification to the person by the city.  Every person failing to comply with the oral or written notice shall be deemed in violation of this chapter.  If the action is not taken within the time period specified by notice and in addition to any other remedy, the Director of Public Works may have the violation, including but not limited to, the existence of mud or debris on the rights-of-way, immediately remedied and the city's costs shall be reimbursed by the ROW user through the surety or otherwise.  Nothing in this subsection shall prevent prosecution of violation of this chapter in the absence or in addition to the issuance of notice of violation. 

Appeals.  Unless otherwise provided herein or by any other governing ordinance or law, any person aggrieved by a decision, fee, or requirement established or made pursuant to Articles III-VI shall, prior to seeking any judicial or statutory relief, if any, file a written appeal of any such decision, fee, or requirement with the city council within fifteen (15) days of such decision or imposition of such fee or requirement specifying this provision and including specific details of the alleged claim or grievance, and an evidentiary hearing shall be held on such appeal by the city council or its designee to render a final decision. Nothing herein shall deny or preclude any additional applicable appeal remedy that may be granted and required by federal or state law after such decision.

Enforcement; Attorneys' Fees. The city shall be entitled to enforce any provision of this code through all remedies lawfully available, and any person determined to have violated the terms of Articles III-VI shall further be liable to pay the city's costs and attorneys' fees in enforcing such provisions.  Additionally, any user of city services, rights-of-way, or other city facilities or property, shall, as a condition of such use or continued use, to the full extent permissible by law, be liable to pay the city's costs and attorneys' fees incurred in enforcing any lawful requirement applicable to such use, whether arising in contract, statute, ordinance, or other enforceable duty as to such use.

Penalties.  In addition to any other penalties and remedies for violations that may exist in law or equity, any person that violates any provision of Articles III-VI shall be subject to such penalties as set forth in Section 1-7 of the city code per day for each and every day the violation exists or continues. (Ord. 4469, §1)



Sec. 36.79. Reservation of Rights.
In addition to any rights specifically reserved to the city by this chapter, the city reserves unto itself every right and power which is required to be reserved by a provision of any ordinance under any registration, ROW Permit, or other authorization granted under this chapter, and as may be authorized by Chapter 67 RSMo. and other authority applicable to regulation of the use of the rights-of-way.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth herein, the provisions of this chapter shall not infringe upon the rights of any person pursuant to any applicable state or federal statutes, including, but not limited to any right that may exist to occupy the rights-of-way. (Ord. 4469, §1)



Secs. 36-80 to 36-90. Reserved.
 


Secs. 36-86 to 36-90. Reserved.


ARTICLE VI - TREES
Sec. 36-91. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare by providing for the regulation of planting, maintenance and removal of trees and other woody vegetation located on all property owned or maintained by the city. (Ord. 4004, §1; Ord. 4469, §1)



Sec. 36-92. Duties and responsibilities.
Responsibility.  Responsibility for management of trees on property owned or maintained by the city shall be vested with the Public Works Department, Rolla Municipal Utilities, and the parks and recreation department as set forth in this Article and other sections of this Code.

Trimming Trees.  Upon ten (10) days' written notice and with the supervision of the Public Works Director or as otherwise provided by law or agreement, the city may permit a ROW user to trim trees that overhang the rights-of-way of the city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with facilities in the ROW, at its own expense, subject to the supervision and direction of the Public Works Director. Nothing in this section shall authorize the trimming of trees on private property without permission of the property owner. All cut materials shall be properly disposed. Unless otherwise approved in writing by the Public Works Director, a ROW user shall not remove, cut, or damage any trees or their roots in the rights-of-way. In reviewing any ROW Permit application, the City may require the applicant to directionally bore around or otherwise avoid disturbance to any tree or landscaping in the rights-of-way. (Ord. 4469, §1)



Sec. 36-93. Interference with city employees.
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with any employee or agent of the city while such employee or agent is engaged in the planting, cultivating, pruning, spraying or removal of any tree or other woody vegetation as authorized in this article. (Ord. 4469, §1)



Sec. 36-94 to 36-99. Reserved
 

ARTICLE VII
BICYCLE PEDESTRIAN ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Sec. 36-100.  Duties.
There is hereby established the Bicycle Pedestrian Advisory Committee of the City of Rolla (also known as the BPAC).

The duties of the BPAC shall include, but are not limited to, the following:

Promote the development and maintenance of the City's bikeway and pedestrian facilities by maintaining existing street pavements, removing sidewalk trip hazards, connecting missing links in the sidewalk network, achieving ADA compliance, developing a Street Bicycle Route Network, and expanding the Multi-Use Path Network,

Promote, through education, bicycling and walking as an alternative means of transportation; and

Ensure sensitivity to bicycle, pedestrian, and disabled transportation issues in the design and implementation of public works projects which impact bicycles and pedestrians.

(Ord. 4400, §1)

Sec. 36-101.   Members.
Bikepath Pedestrian Advisory Committee Members.

The BPAC shall consist of eight (8) voting members representing various departments and organizations (i.e. city, law enforcement, schools, community, etc.).

The Public Works Director will act as an ex officio, non-voting member of the BPAC. Other members shall be approved by consent of the City Council. The Public Works Director shall transmit no less than annually to the Mayor and City Council all pertinent information regarding committee meetings.

All eight (8) voting members of the BPAC shall cast votes. In case of a tie, the Chairperson shall cast the deciding vote. A quorum is defined as a majority of the voting membership.

An annual meeting of the BPAC shall be held in the month of January, and the officers of the committee shall be elected at that meeting.

Members shall be appointed for three (3) year terms except upon initial formation two members shall serve for 1 year, three members shall serve for 2 years, and three members shall serve 3 years.

The failure to support BPAC through active participation at its meetings may be cause for removal. (Active participation is defined as attending all scheduled meetings with an allowance of three (3) meetings missed per year). The Chairman shall contact those missing three (3) scheduled meetings. At the next meeting, the Chairman shall report to the BPAC and may recommend removal from the committee of such a member.

When a vacancy occurs, the Chairperson shall notify the committee that a vacancy does exist. In case of a vacancy due to death, resignation or disqualification, the unexpired term shall be filled by an appointment by the Mayor with approval of the City Council.

(Ord. 4401, §1)

Sec. 36-102.   Officers.
The Bicycle Pedestrian Advisory Committee shall elect its own officers in accordance with the following guidelines:

Officers elected shall include:

Chairperson: Duties are to preside at all meetings of the BPAC.  He or she shall be a member ex-officio of all Standing and Special Committees except in the event of a tie, in which case the Chairperson will have the deciding vote.  In case a vacancy occurs in the office of the Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson shall become Chairperson and a new Vice Chairperson shall be elected.

Vice-Chairperson: The Vice-Chairperson shall fulfill the duties of the Chairperson when the latter, for any reason, is unable to act in his/her capacity as Chairperson.

Ex Officio Director: The Public Works Director for the City of Rolla shall be the ex officio Director and shall be a non-voting member.

Committee Coordinator: The Committee Coordinator shall be a staff member of the City of Rolla Engineering Department and shall provide information, plans, documentation, and support services as needed by the committee.  The Committee Coordinator shall record attendance, service hours, and voting and election results.  City personnel shall assist the Committee Coordinator in this task as requested.

The BPAC may form subcommittees for designated periods of time to work on specific projects.  Such subcommittees shall report their findings and recommendations to the BPAC, which shall make any final recommendations.  Each said subcommittee shall be dissolved when work on the assigned project is determined to be completed by the BPAC.
(Ord. 4400, §1)

Sec. 36-103.   Meetings.
The regular meeting place shall be at City Hall.  A notice and tentative agenda of all meetings must be posted on the Public Notice Bulletin Board at City Hall.  All meetings are open to the public.

The committee shall meet six (6) times per year at a designated time and date, or special meetings on the call of the Chairperson. 

A notice and tentative agenda of all meetings will be provided to each BPAC member. Members are expected to attend meetings. If a member will be absent, they should contact an officer, the Ex Officio Director or the committee coordinator no less than 24 hours before the meeting to avoid an unexcused absence.
(Ord. 4400, §1)

Sec. 36-104.   Ordinances pertaining to the Bicycle and Pedestrian activities.
No ordinance pertaining to the Bicycle or Pedestrian facilities shall be considered by the City Council without first referring same to the Bicycle Pedestrian Advisory Committee and receiving its recommendation with reference thereto; provided, however, that if no recommendation is received from the BPAC within a period of thirty (30) days after the matter is referred to the committee, then the City Council may take action without such recommendation.
(Ord. 4400, §1)

Sec. 36-105. Limitations.
The BPAC shall be a recommending body only and shall make its recommendations to the Mayor who in turn will report recommendations to the City Council for the operation and maintenance of the park and outdoor recreation system consisting of bikeways, pedestrian/bicycle bridges, bike parking facilities, intersection and traffic signals and walkways, or multi-use trails owned or used by the City for its final determination as to what action should be taken.  The City Council may from time to time delegate certain authority and responsibilities to the BPAC as deemed necessary and appropriate.
(Ord. 4400, §1)

Chapter 37 - Taxation
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter


Chapter Contents:
Article I - In General
§ 37-1 Generally.
§ 37-2 Tax levy for general revenue.
§ 37-3 Tax levy to fund an emergency telephone service.
§ 37-4 Extension of tax levy to fund emergency telephone service.
§ 37-5 When taxes delinquent; penalty.
§ 37-6 Repealed.
§ 37-7 Abolishment of ad valorem tax.
§ 37-8 Abolishment of personal property tax.
§ 37-9 Municipal telecommunications taxes.
§ 37-10 Approving settlement agreement with U.S. Cellular.
§ 37-11 Approving settlement agreement with AT&T Mobility.
§ 37-12 Approving settlement agreement with Sprint.
Article II - Repealed by Ord. 3168, §1
§§ 37-13 to 37-19 Reserved.
Article III - City Sales Tax
§ 37-20 Generally.
§ 37-21 One-half cent transportation sales tax.
§ 37-22 1/2 Cent Public Works Capital Projects Sales Tax.
§ 37-23 One Quarter (¼) Cent Local Parks Sales Tax.
§§ 37-24 to 37-25 Reserved.
Article IV - Cigarette Sales, Licensing and Taxation
§ 37-26 Definitions.
§ 37-27 Intent.
§ 37-28 Payment of tax required.
§ 37-29 Tax levy.
§ 37-30 Monthly payment.
§ 37-31 Rules and regulations - Records.
§ 37-32 Refunds.
§ 37-33 Subpoenas.
§ 37-34 Penalty for violation.
§ 37-35 Accruing revenue.
§ 37-36 Term of Ordinance.
§§ 37-37 to 37-45 Reserved.
Article V - Property Tax Abatement In Enterprise Zone
§ 37-46 Level of property tax abatement available within designated enterprise zone.
§§ 37-47 to 37-51 Reserved.
Article VI - Hotel/Motel "Lodging" Tax
§ 37-52 Definitions.
§ 37-53 Levy of tax.
§ 37-54 Convention, visitors and tourist promotion funding.
§ 37-55 Use of fund.
§ 37-56 Licenses; payment of tax.
§ 37-57 Reports required.
§ 37-58 Examination of books, records.
§ 37-59 Penalties for nonpayment.
§§ 37-60 to 37-70 Reserved.
(Article VII, Section 37-65 was repealed and has been deleted)

Article I - In General
Sec. 37-1. Generally
The city assessor shall make such assessments as may be required by law, this Code or other ordinances of the city. He shall keep appropriate records reflecting the property assessed and the owners of such assessed property. (Ord. 881, §3.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 37-2. Tax levy for general revenue
There is hereby levied a tax on each and every one hundred dollars ($100.00) assessed valuation of all taxable real property within the corporate limits of the City of Rolla, Missouri, made taxable by law, for the year 2018, the following sums and amounts:  

General Municipal Purposes	$0.4598
Public Library Purposes	$0.1919
Park Purposes	$0.1132
TOTAL	$0.7649
(Ord. 2631, §1; Ord. 2696, §1; Ord. 2697, §1; Ord. 2754, §1; Ord. 2798, §1; Ord. 2867, §1; Ord. 2939, §1; Ord. 3003, §1; Ord. 3075, §1; Ord. 3145, §1; Ord. 3201, §1; Ord. 3258, §1; Ord. 3325, §1; Ord. 3390, §1; Ord. 3470, §1; Ord. 3523, §1; Ord. 3571, §1; Ord. 3641, §1; Ord. 3693, §1; Ord. 3747, §1; Ord. 3761, §1; Ord. 3819, §1; Ord. 3875, §1; Ord. 3928, §1; Ord. 3965, §1; Ord. 4015, §1; Ord. 4049, §1; Ord. 4108 §1; Ord. 4156, §1; Ord. 4221, §1; Ord. 4294, §1; Ord. 4356, §1; Ord. 4435, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 37-3. Tax levy to fund an emergency telephone service
(a) Pursuant to the provisions of Section 190.305 of the Revised Statutes of the State of Missouri, there is hereby established an emergency telephone service.

(b) The mayor of the City of Rolla, Missouri is hereby authorized and directed to execute in behalf of the City of Rolla, Missouri a certain agreement with the United Telephone Company for the leasing and use of equipment to implement and operate such emergency telephone service, a copy of said agreement being attached hereto and made a part hereof as if more specifically set forth herein.

(c) There is hereby levied and imposed a tax in the amount of .5 percent of the tariff, as defined in Section 190.300 RSMo, 1978 upon each service user as defined in said Section for a period of one year beginning September 1, 1982.

(d) The city clerk is directed to notify every service supplier of the tax rate herein levied. (Ord. 2344, §§1 to 4.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 37-4. Extension of tax levy to fund emergency telephone service
(a) That the special tax levy for emergency telephone service approved by the voters in September of 1982 be continued in force until September 1989 and further that the council does hereby ratify and approve the continuance of said levy during the period of 1983 through 1987.

(b) That the mayor of the City of Rolla, Missouri be and he is hereby authorized to execute on behalf of the City of Rolla, Missouri a certain agreement in which the City of Rolla, Missouri and United Telephone Company are parties and which has as its subject matter the furnishing of emergency telephone service, a copy of which agreement is attached hereto and made a part hereof and marked "Exhibit A". (Ord. 2579, §§1-2.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 37-5. When taxes delinquent; penalty
All city taxes shall become delinquent on the first day of January. A penalty of eighteen percent of each year's delinquency shall be charged in addition to the amount of tax delinquent on each tract of land. Provided, however, that the penalty on lands redeemed prior to sale shall not exceed two percent per month or fractional part thereof. (Ord. 881, §5; Ord. 2632, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 37-6. When taxes delinquent
(Ord. 271, §1.) (Repealed by Ord. 2702, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 37-7. Abolishment of ad valorem tax
From after February 10, 1975, the city shall not levy and collect and no merchant shall be required to pay an ad valorem tax.

Pursuant to Section 144.030. (23) Revised Statutes of Missouri, the tax shall not apply to sales of metered water service, electricity, electrical current, natural, artificial or propane gas, wood, coal, or home heating oil sold for domestic use. "Domestic use" means that portion of metered water service, electricity, electrical current, natural, artificial or propane gas, wood, coal, or home heating oil which an individual purchaser uses for nonbusiness, noncommercial or nonindustrial purposes. (Ord. 1887, §1; Ord. 2309, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 37-8. Abolishment of personal property tax
(a) That as of the effective date of this Ordinance, the City of Rolla, Missouri shall cease levying and collecting personal property taxes from the owners of personal property within the City of Rolla, Missouri for taxes assessed for the year 1987 and thereafter.

(b) Nothing contained in this Ordinance shall in any way affect, alter, modify or change the authority or ability of the City of Rolla, Missouri to levy and collect real property taxes, nor does it in any way prevent or impair the lawful right of the City of Rolla, Missouri to collect personal property taxes assessed for the year 1986 and all prior years. (Ord. 2554, §§1-3; Ord. 3060, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 37-9. Municipal telecommunications taxes.
(a) That the City Council of Rolla, Missouri hereby adopts pursuant to the Municipal Telecommunications Business License Simplification Act (hereinafter referred to as “HB 209”) and more particularly the requirement of Section 92.086.6, RSMo, two and two-tenths percent (2.2%) of gross receipts as its effective telecommunication tax rate, from and after July 1, 2006 unless HB 209 is declared to be invalid by the Missouri Supreme Court or other Court of competent jurisdiction, or HB 209 is amended to change the rate a city is to use, or the Missouri Department of Revenue informs the City that a different tax rate should be used. In the event a different tax rate may be used under state law whether determined by the Missouri Department of Revenue or as a result of an amendment to HB 209 or such legislation being declared invalid, than that adopted herein, such different tax rate shall be utilized by the Director of Finance in collection of said tax from and after July 1, 2006, or other date if applicable.

(b) Should this Section be repealed as a result of HB 209, or any part thereof, being declared invalid by a court of law, or repealed in whole or in part in any other manner relating to said tax rate, or for any other reason HB 209 is no longer applicable to the City of Rolla, Missouri, all provisions of Section 16-84 and 16-126 of the Rolla City Code shall remain in force and effect.

(c) Savings Clause. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding now pending in any court or any rights acquired or liability incurred nor any cause or causes of action occurred or existing, under any act or ordinance repealed hereby. Nor shall any right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired, or affected by this section.

(d) The City Council hereby authorizes the City Administrator and the City Counselor to take all steps deemed necessary in their respective opinions and discretion to protect the interests of the City with respect to this Section and HB 209 as presently codified and the validity of any action of this Council pursuant thereto.

(e) The City Council finds and declares that this section constitutes an emergency because it pertains to the fixing and levying of a tax rate. Therefore this section shall be in full force and effect on April 29, 2006. (Ord. 3735, §§1-5)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 37-10. Approving settlement agreement with U.S. Cellular.
(a) The City of Rolla, Missouri hereby approves, accepts, and adopts all terms and provisions of the Settlement Agreement as a binding and enforceable agreement between the City of Rolla, Missouri and US Cellular, and as if the City of Rolla, Missouri was an original signatory thereto.

(b) The City of Rolla, Missouri further approves the Total Past Tax Consideration of $584.79 as shown on the U.S. Cellular Municipal Tax Settlement Claim Form, along with the other relief provided in the Settlement Agreement, as adequate consideration for the release of claims by the City of Rolla, Missouri against US Cellular as provided for in the Settlement Agreement.

(c) The City of Rolla, Missouri further assigns to the Municipal League $11.70 (2%) of its Total Past Tax Consideration, which amount shall be used for the public purpose of reimbursing the League for revenues expended in its legislative and settlement efforts relating to the Lawsuit and to fund future services performed on behalf of the League’s member municipalities.

(d) The Mayor of the City of Rolla, Missouri, on behalf of the Plaintiff, is hereby authorized and directed to execute the U.S. Cellular Municipal Tax Settlement Claim Form and any other documents necessary under the Settlement Agreement.

(e) The City of Rolla, Missouri, reserves the right to conclude settlement agreements with other wireless telecommunications service providers in the Lawsuit depending upon the circumstances of each case. (Ord. 3847, §§1-5)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 37-11. Approving settlement agreement with AT&T Mobility.
(a) The City of Rolla, Missouri hereby approves, accepts, and adopts all terms and provisions of the Settlement Agreement as a binding and enforceable agreement between the City of Rolla, Missouri and AT&T Mobility, and as if the City of Rolla, Missouri was an original signatory thereto.

(b) The City of Rolla, Missouri further approves the Total Past Tax Consideration of $429,165.07 as shown on the AT&T Mobility Municipal Tax Settlement Claim Form, along with the other relief provided in the Settlement Agreement, as adequate consideration for the release of claims by the City of Rolla, Missouri against AT&T Mobility as provided for in the Settlement Agreement.

(c) The City of Rolla, Missouri further assigns to the Missouri Municipal League $4,291.65 or one (1%) percent of its Total Past Tax Consideration, which amount shall be used for the public purpose of reimbursing the League for revenues expended in its legislative and settlement efforts relating to the Lawsuit and to fund future services performed on behalf of the League’s member municipalities.

(d) The Mayor of the City of Rolla, Missouri, on behalf of the Plaintiff, is hereby authorized and directed to execute the AT&T Mobility Municipal Tax Settlement Claim Form and any other documents necessary under the Settlement Agreement.

(e) The City of Rolla, Missouri, reserves the right to conclude settlement agreements with other wireless telecommunications service providers in the Lawsuit depending upon the circumstances of each case. (Ord. 3848, §§1-5)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 37-12. Approving settlement agreement with Sprint.
(a) The City of Rolla, Missouri hereby approves, accepts, and adopts all terms and provisions of the Settlement Agreement as a binding and enforceable agreement between the City of Rolla, Missouri and Sprint, and as if the City of Rolla, Missouri was an original signatory thereto.

(b) The City of Rolla, Missouri further approves the Total Past Tax Consideration of $29,741.42 as shown on the Sprint Municipal Tax Settlement Claim Form, along with the other relief provided in the Settlement Agreement, as adequate consideration for the release of claims by the City of Rolla, Missouri against Sprint as provided for in the Settlement Agreement.

(c) The City of Rolla, Missouri further assigns to the Missouri Municipal League $594.83 or two (2%) percent of its Total Past Tax Consideration, which amount shall be used for the public purpose of reimbursing the League for revenues expended in its legislative and settlement efforts relating to the Lawsuit and to fund future services performed on behalf of the League’s member municipalities.

(d) The Mayor of the City of Rolla, Missouri, on behalf of the Plaintiff, is hereby authorized and directed to execute the Sprint Municipal Tax Settlement Claim Form and any other documents necessary under the Settlement Agreement.

(e) The City of Rolla, Missouri, reserves the right to conclude settlement agreements with other wireless telecommunications service providers in the Lawsuit depending upon the circumstances of each case. (Ord. 3849, §§1-5)

(Return to Contents)



Article II
Repealed by Ord. 3168, Sect. 1

Secs. 37-13 to 37-19. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



Article III - City Sales Tax
Sec. 37-20. Generally
Pursuant to the authority granted by and subject to the provisions of Sections 94.500 to 94.570, Revised Statutes of Missouri, a tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon all sellers for the privilege of engaging in the business of selling tangible personal property or rendering taxable services at retail to the extent and in the manner provided in Sections 144.010 to 144.510, Revised Statutes of Missouri, and the rules and regulations of the director of revenue issued pursuant thereto. The rate of the tax shall be one percent on the receipts from the sale at retail of all tangible personal property or taxable services at retail within the city if such property and services are subject to taxation by the state under the provisions of Sections 144.010 to 144.510, Revised Statutes of Missouri. The tax shall become effective as provided in subsection 4 of Section 94.510, Revised Statutes of Missouri, and shall be collected as provided in Section 94.510. (Ord. 1794, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 37-21. One-half cent transportation sales tax
(a) That effective July 1, 1987 and continuing thereafter there is hereby imposed upon all persons in the City of Rolla, Missouri who are engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property and taxable services subject to sales tax under the provisions of Sections 144.010 to 144.510 RSMo (Revised Statutes of Missouri), a sales tax at the rate of one-half of cent in the manner and to the extent provided in Sections 144.010 to 144.510 RSMo (Revised Statutes of Missouri) and the rules and regulations of the Director of Revenue of the State of Missouri issued pursuant thereto.

(b) The sales tax hereby imposed shall be at the rate of one-half of one percent on the receipts from the sale at retail of all tangible personal property or taxable services at retail which are subject to sales tax under the provisions of Sections 144.010 to 144.510 RSMo (Revised Statutes of Missouri) within the City of Rolla, Missouri.

(c) That the city clerk is hereby directed to forward a certified copy of this Ordinance to the Director of Revenue of the State of Missouri within ten days of the effective date of this Ordinance together with a map of the City of Rolla that clearly shows the boundaries thereof. (Ord. 2533, §§1-3.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 37-22. 1/2 Cent Public Works Capital Projects Sales Tax
(a) That effective October 1, 1996, and continuing thereafter there is hereby imposed upon all persons in the City of Rolla, Missouri, who are engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property and taxable services subject to sales tax under the provisions of Sections 144.010 to 144.510 and 94.577 RSMo (revised statutes of Missouri), a sales tax at the rate of 1/2 of one percent in the manner and to the extent provided in Sections 144.010 to 144.510 and 94.577 RSMo (revised statutes of Missouri) and the rules and regulations of the Director of Revenue of the State of Missouri issued pursuant thereto.

(b) The sales tax hereby imposed shall be at the rate of 1/2 of one percent on the receipts from the sale at retail of all tangible personal property or taxable services at retail which are subject to sales tax under the provisions of Sections 144.010 to 144.510 and 94.577 RSMo (revised statutes of Missouri) within the City of Rolla, Missouri.

(c) That the city clerk is hereby directed to forward a certified copy of this ordinance to the Director of Revenue of the State of Missouri within ten (10) days of the effective date of this ordinance together with a map of the City of Rolla that clearly shows the boundaries thereof. (Ord. 3124)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 37-23. One-quarter (¼) Cent Local Parks Sales Tax
That effective October 1, 2015, there shall be a one quarter of one cent local Park sales tax for eight years, then reduced to three-sixteenths of one percent beginning October 1, 2023, hereby imposing upon all persons in the City of Rolla, Missouri, who are engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property and taxable services subject to sales tax under the provisions of Sections 644.032, 144.010 to 144.525 RSMo (revised statutes of Missouri) and the rules and regulations of the Director of Revenue of the State of Missouri issued pursuant thereto.

That the city clerk is hereby directed to forward a certified copy of this ordinance to the Director of Revenue of the State of Missouri within ten (10) days of the effective date of this ordinance together with a map of the City of Rolla that clearly shows the boundaries thereof.

(Ord. 3333; Ord. 4209, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 37-24 to 37-25. Reserved
(Return to Contents)



Article IV - Cigarette Sales, Licensing and Taxation
Sec. 37-26. Definitions
When used in this Article the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:

(a) "Cigarette" means a roll of tobacco or any substitute thereof wrapped in paper and used for smoking.
(b) "Consumer" means a person who comes into possession of tobacco for the purpose of consuming it, giving it away or disposing of it in any way.
(c) "Dealer" means any person dealing directly with the manufacturer of cigarettes in their purchase and in the business of selling cigarettes as a first seller.
(d) "First seller" means and includes all persons who make the initial or first sale or distribution of cigarettes within the City.
(e) "Package" means the individual package, box or other container from which sales of cigarettes are normally made or intended to be made.
(f) "Person" means any individual, partnership, society, association, joint stock company, corporation, estate, receiver, trustee, assignee, referee or other person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by a court or otherwise, or any combination of individuals.
(g) "Retailer" includes persons other than a dealer or wholesaler as defined in this section, who is engaged in the business of selling cigarettes at retail, who shall sell or offer for sale cigarettes, irrespective of quantity, number of sales, giving the same away or exposing the same where it may be taken, or purchased, or otherwise acquired.
(h) "Sale" means any transfer of title or possession or both, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, for a consideration, or any agreement therefore.
(l) "Vending machine operator" includes all persons engaged in the distribution or sale of cigarettes by means of coin-operated vending machines.
(j) "Wholesaler" includes persons whose principal business is that of a wholesale jobber and who is known to the trade as such, who sells cigarettes for only the purpose of resale or giving them away, or exposing the same where they may be taken or purchased or otherwise acquired by the retailer. (Ord. 2174, §1; Ord. 3168, §2)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 37-27. Intent
It is intended that the tax set forth herein constitute the only tax paid by cigarette dealers or wholesalers to the City of Rolla, Missouri, for the sale of cigarettes. Nothing herein contained shall eliminate said dealers' or wholesalers' obligation to the City for taxes, licenses, fees or assessments not directly related to the sale of cigarettes. (Ord. 2174, §2; Ord. 3168, §3)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 37-28. Payment of tax required
The tax herein set forth shall be paid by the dealer or wholesaler as defined in Section 37-26, selling cigarettes or offering cigarettes for sale. (Ord. 2174, §3; Ord. 3168, §4)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 37-29. Tax levy
Every dealer or wholesaler engaged in the business of selling cigarettes or offering or displaying the same for sale within the City shall pay an occupation tax at the rate of $2.50 per thousand for all cigarettes sold or offered or displayed for sale. This tax shall be paid but once, as provided for in Section 37-30, and only by the dealer selling cigarettes or displaying or offering them for sale. The intent and meaning of this Article is that the same shall levy an occupation tax based upon and pursuant to the methods provided for by Section 92.040, Revised Statutes of Missouri, 1986, as amended. (Ord. 2174, §4; Ord. 3168, §5)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 37-30. Monthly payment
It shall be the duty of every dealer or wholesaler, as defined in Section 37-26, selling, offering or displaying for sale any package of cigarettes, to remit the monthly cigarette tax reporting form and full payment by the 15th day of each following month. The canceled check, accompanied by the monthly cigarette tax reporting form, shall be proof of payment. (Ord. 2174, § 5; Ord. 3168, §6)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 37-31. Rules and regulations - Records
For the purpose of enabling the Director of Finance to enforce the terms of this Article, the following provisions are enacted:

(a) Each dealer in the City and those wholesalers and retailers as defined in Section 37-26 shall procure and retain invoices showing the amount and value of the shipment of cigarettes received by him, the date thereof, and the name of the shipper, and shall retain this invoice for a period of three years subject to the use and inspection of the City of Rolla.

(b) All dealers, wholesalers and retailers as defined in Section 37-26 within the City of Rolla shall maintain and keep for a period of three years such other records of cigarettes received, sold or delivered within the City as may be required by the Director of Finance.

(c) The Director of Finance or his duly authorized representatives, are authorized to examine the books, papers, invoices and other records, stock of cigarettes in and upon any premises where they are placed, stored or sold, and equipment of any said dealer, wholesaler or retailer pertaining to the sale and delivery of cigarettes taxable under this Article.

(d) To verify the accuracy of the occupation tax imposed and assessed by this Article, each person, as defined in Section 37-26, is directed and required to give the Director of Finance or his duly authorized representatives, the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination as are herein provided for and required.

(e) In addition to the powers herein granted to the Director of Finance, he is authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to the delegation of his powers to a deputy or other employee of his office and any other matter or thing pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the provision of this Article.

(f) Cigarette tax reporting information received from the State of Missouri shall be held in confidence and used solely for verifying cigarette tax payments. (Ord. 2174, §6; Ord. 3168, §7)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 37-32. Refunds
The Director of Finance is authorized to adopt, prescribe and promulgate rules and regulations including a monthly cigarette tax reporting form with regard to the presentation and proof of claim for refunds and credits as he may deem advisable. (Ord. 2174, §7; Ord. 3168, §8)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 37-33. Subpoenas
The Director of Finance shall have power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and documents to secure information pertinent to the enforcement of this Article and to examine them in relation thereto. (Ord. 2193, §1; Ord. 3168, §9)

(Return to Contents)



Sec, 37-34. Penalty for violation
Any person violating this Article by failing to file a report and make the payment provided for in Section 37-30 hereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment for not more than ninety days or be punished by both such fine and imprisonment. Failure to file each monthly report and make each monthly payment shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 2174, §9; Ord. 3168, §10)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 37-35. Accruing revenue
The revenue accruing to the City from the permits and occupation licenses provided for in this Article shall go to the general fund of the City. (Ord. 2174, §10; Ord. 3168, §11)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 37-36. Term of Ordinance
This Article shall become effective January 1, 1997, and continue in force and effect unless repealed by action of the City Council. (Ord. 2174, §11 to §14; Ord. 2193, §2; Ord. 2609, §1; Ord. 3168, §12)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 37-37 to 37-45. Reserved
(Return to Contents)



Article V - Property Tax Abatement In Enterprise Zone
Sec. 37-46. Rolla Enhanced Enterprise Zone (EEZ)
Creation of EEZ Board.  The City Council hereby ratifies and confirms the creation of the EEZ on June 1, 2009, Resolution No. 1687.

Authority of EEZ Board.  The seven member EEZ Board, pursuant to RSMo. 135.957, shall lead the Rolla Enhanced Enterprise Zone.  The Board shall serve the following role:

Advise the local governing authority on the designation of the enhanced enterprise zone and any other advisory duties as determined by the governing authority.

The Board shall be responsible for review and assessment of zone activities.

The Board is responsible for submitting an annual report to the Director of Economic Development regarding the status of the zone and business activity.

Qualifying Industries by NAICS Code.  That the following industries, when locating or expanding within the Enhanced Enterprise Zone, to be known as the Rolla Enhanced Enterprise Zone, so designated by the State of Missouri, will be considered eligible for a reduction in ad valorem taxes, per criteria stated below and pursuant to Chapter 135, RSMo and subsequent amendments:

Qualifying Industries by NAICS Code:

22—Utilities
23—Construction
31-33—Manufacturing
42—Wholesale
48-49—Transportation and Warehousing
51—Information
54—Professional, Scientific and Technical Services
55—Management of Companies and Enterprises
56—Administrative and Support and Waste Management and Remediation Services
71—Arts, Entertainment and Recreation, excluding gaming operations
72—Accommodation except Food and Drinking places
81—Other services except Religious organizations
Value-added agricultural products

"Enhanced business enterprise", an industry, or one of a cluster of industries that is either:

Identified by the department as critical to the state's economic security and growth; or

Will have an impact on industry cluster development, as identified by the governing authority in its application for designation of an enhanced enterprise zone and approved by the department; but excluding gambling establishments, retail trade , educational services, religious organizations, public administration, and food and drinking places, however, notwithstanding provisions of this section to the contrary, headquarters or administrative offices of an otherwise excluded business may qualify for benefits if the offices serve a multistate territory. Service industries may be eligible only if a majority of its annual revenues will be derived from out of the state.

Any business enterprise within the above-itemized NAICS codes, located within the proposed zone and meeting requirements of Chapter 135 RSMo. as amended, will receive a minimum of 50 percent reduction of real ad valorem tax abatement on new improvements, or more based on private investment, job creation, and paid wages.
(Ord. 4328, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 37-47 to 37-51. Reserved
(Return to Contents)



Article VI - Hotel/Motel "Lodging" Tax
Sec. 37-52. Definitions
The terms used in this Article shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this Section and shall be construed as indicated in this Section.

Tax Rate - The term tax rate or Lodging Tax is that amount of tax levied on a hotel, motel, inn or lodge based on charges made by the hotel, motel or inn for sleeping accommodations.

Gross Receipts - is based upon the applicable revenue received by the hotel/motel for rental of guest rooms or lodgings.

Hotel, lodge, inn and motel - Any structure, or building, under one management, which contains rooms furnished for the accommodation or lodging of guests kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the public as a place where sleeping accommodations are sought for pay or compensation to transient guests.

Transient guest - Any person who occupies a room in a hotel or motel for 31 days or less. (Ord. 2929, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 37-53. Levy of tax
There is hereby levied a license tax on hotels and motels in an amount equal to three (3) percent of gross receipts derived from transient guests for sleeping accommodations. This tax shall be in addition to all other taxes which are applicable to hotels and motels. (Ord. 2929, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 37-54. Convention, visitors and tourist promotion funding
All revenues received from the three (3) percent Lodging Tax shall be utilized by the City for promoting the City as a convention, visitor and tourist center. (Ord. 2929, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 37-55. Use of fund
The proceeds from the Lodging Tax shall be used by the City solely for funding a convention and visitors bureau which is established for the purpose of promoting the city as a convention, visitor and tourist center. (Ord. 2929, §1; Ord. 3786, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 37-56. Licenses; payment of tax
No person shall operate a hotel, motel, lodge or inn without a current City business license. Application for such license shall be made to the City Finance Office on forms prescribed. Licenses issued under this Article shall be issued on a calendar year basis. Applications for license renewals shall be filed in December of each year. The Lodging Tax due under this Article shall be paid to the City Finance Office quarterly and shall be payable on or before the thirtieth day of the following month of the quarter ending. (Ord. 2929, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 37-57. Reports required
Every person engaged in the business of operating a hotel, motel, lodge or inn shall file with the City Finance Office prescribed forms, giving such information as may be necessary to determine the amounts to which the license tax shall apply for the monthly period, to be submitted with monthly payments. (Ord. 2929, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 37-58. Examination of books, records
The City Finance Director or an authorized representative shall have the right at all reasonable times during business hours to make such examination and inspection of the books and records of the licensee as may be necessary to determine the correctness of the reports required by this Article. (Ord. 2929, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 37-59. Penalties for nonpayment
For each month, or part thereof, any Lodging Tax provided for under this Article remains unpaid after the same shall be due and payable, there shall be added to such Lodging Tax as a penalty and interest, three (3) percent of the amount of such Lodging Tax for the first month or part thereof the same is unpaid, and for each and every month thereafter three (3) percent of the amount of such Lodging Tax and penalty shall be added until the same is fully paid. In addition to the penalties provided herein, any person subject to the provisions of this Article who fails to obtain a license, file a statement or pay the Lodging Tax or files a false or fraudulent statement, required by this Article or within the time required by this Article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding three (3) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any licensee failing to pay the City Lodging Tax for one full quarter (three months) past the due date shall have their City business license revoked. (Ord. 2929, §1; Ord. 3319, §1)

Section 37-55 of this Code notwithstanding, the City of Rolla reserves the right to retain fifty (50) percent of any amounts collected as penalty and/or interest for nonpayment, or late payment, of the hotel/motel lodging tax provided for in this Article. (Ord. 3319, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 37-60 to 37-70. Reserved

Chapter 38 - Taxicabs and Limousines
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter


§ 38-1. Definitions.
§ 38-2. Insurance - Amount required.
§ 38-3. Taxicab driver's license.
§ 38-4. Taxicab owner's license.
§ 38-5. Condition of equipment of taxicabs.
§ 38-6. Operating rules and regulations.
§ 38-7. Penalty.
§§ 38-8 to 38-12. Reserved.


Chapter 38 - Taxicabs and Limousines
Sec. 38-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the specific meanings prescribed herein, except as the context may otherwise require:

Driver – The term “driver” shall mean and include every person in physical charge or custody of and operating any taxicab or limousine, as the case may be, for hire whether as owner, agent, employee or otherwise operated in whole or in part on the streets and public ways in the City of Rolla or on any property owned by the City of Rolla.

Limousine – The term “limousine” shall mean and include any vehicle regularly used in the business of carrying passengers for hire, not having a fixed route or schedule, operated in whole or in part on the streets and public ways in the City of Rolla, or on any property owned by the City of Rolla. Limousine seating capacity shall be restricted to the seating capacity as designated by the manufacturer’s trade rating for each vehicle. The term “limousine” shall not, however, mean and include any such vehicle operated by a governmental body. For all guidelines contained in this Chapter, the terms “taxicab” and “limousine” shall be synonymous.

Owner – The term “owner” shall mean and include every person, firm or corporation who or which has the bona fide legal title, control, direction, operation, maintenance, leasing or collection of revenues derived from any taxicab or limousine, as the case may be, operated in whole or in part on the streets and public ways in the City of Rolla or on any property owned by the City of Rolla.

Taxicab – The term “taxicab” shall mean a motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire, having a maximum passenger seating capacity of seven (7) persons or less and not operated on a fixed route. (Ord. 3740, §1; Ord. 4000, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 38-2. Insurance - Amount required.
No license to engage in the public taxicab business shall be issued to the applicant therefore by the Finance Department until and after such applicant has filed with the Finance Department, and the same has been approved by the Finance Director, a liability insurance policy or bond in some insurance company or association or other insurer authorized to transact business in the state, which liability insurance shall bind the obligors thereunder to make compensation for damage to or destruction of any property of one or more persons to a maximum amount of fifty thousand ($50,000) dollars by reason of the applicant's legal liability for damages in consequence of any one accident resulting from the negligent operation or use of any public taxicab used in such public taxicab business, and which liability insurance shall bind the obligors thereunder to make compensation for bodily injuries, including death at any time resulting there from to one person to a maximum amount of fifty thousand ($50,000) dollars by reason of the applicant's legal liability from damages in consequence of any one accident resulting from the negligent operation or use of any public taxicab used in such public taxicab business, and subject to that limit of a maximum amount of fifty thousand ($50,000) dollars for each person, which liability insurance shall bind the obligors thereunder, to more than one person, to a total maximum of one hundred thousand ($100,000) dollars by reason of the applicant's legal liability for damages in consequence of any one accident resulting from the negligent operation or use of any public taxicab business. Such insurance policies shall provide that the City of Rolla, Missouri, be given thirty days notice prior to the lapse, cancellation, or other termination of said policies. (Ord. 2327, §1; Ord. 3740, §2; Ord. 4000, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 38-3. Taxicab driver’s license.
(a) Taxicab driver’s license required. No person shall drive or operate a taxicab, and no owner of a taxicab shall hire or permit any person to drive or operate a taxicab, on any of the streets, any public ways in the City of Rolla, or on any property owned by the City of Rolla, unless such person shall have secured a taxicab driver’s license from the City of Rolla as provided herein.

(b) Taxicab driver’s license application. A verified application for a taxicab driver’s license shall be made in writing to the Chief of Police, or his designate, upon terms prescribed and provided for such purpose by the Chief of Police. Such application shall include at a minimum:

(1) Name: The full name of the applicant and any alias names;
(2) Address: The applicant’s residence address and residence addresses of the three (3) years next preceding such application;
(3) Length of residence: The length of residence of the applicant in the City of Rolla;
(4) Description: The applicant’s physical description;
(5) Birth information: The applicant’s date and place of birth;
(6) Citizenship: The applicant’s national citizenship;
(7) Chauffeur’s license: The applicant’s chauffeur’s license number;
(8) A signed authority to release form:
(9) Criminal history check: A criminal history check must be made to the State of Missouri at the applicant’s expense.
(c) Qualifications of taxicab drivers. No taxicab driver’s license shall be issued to any person who does not meet the following minimum qualifications:

(1) Age: Such person must have attained the age of twenty-one (21) years;
(2) Chauffeur’s license: Such person must be properly licensed for the purpose of driving a motor vehicle for hire designed to carry passengers by the State of Missouri;
(3) Other offenses: Such person shall not have been convicted of any felony sex offense, as defined in Chapter 566 RSMO. Furthermore, such person shall not have any convictions of any offense involving drugs, reckless driving, driving while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs, or similar violations, or be on parole or probation for any such offense during the three (3) years next preceding the making of the applications.
(d) Issuance of license. Upon being notified of the approval of an applicant by the Chief of Police, or his designate, the City of Rolla Finance Department shall forthwith issue a taxicab driver’s license to such person upon payment of the required license fee.

(1) License year: All taxicab drivers licenses shall expire on June 30th of each year irrespective of the date of issuance.
(2) License fee: The City of Rolla Finance Department shall charge a fee of $20.00 for each taxicab driver’s initial license. Such fee shall not be pro-rated for a fractional part of the year.
(e) Renewal of license. Any taxicab driver’s license issued hereunder may be renewed from year to year provided the driver continues to meet the minimum qualifications of taxicab drivers established hereunder and pays the required fee of $10.00. A request for renewal shall be filed with the Chief of Police, or his designate, prior to renewing any taxicab driver’s license. The request shall be denied unless the Chief of Police, or his designate, approves such renewal after reviewing whether the driver continues to meet the minimum qualifications of taxicab drivers established hereunder.

(f) Display and use of license. The taxicab driver’s license issued hereunder shall be in the personal possession of the holder thereof at all times while serving as a taxicab driver. Such taxicab driver’s license shall be displayed in plain view of the passenger(s) within the cab. No driver shall cause or permit another person to use such driver’s taxicab driver’s license, for any purpose whatsoever.

(g) Revocation or suspension of license. In emergency situations, any taxicab driver’s license may be revoked or suspended by the Chief of Police forthwith provided an opportunity to be heard by City Council is provided within thirty (30) days following such emergency action. Any person whose taxicab driver’s license shall have been revoked shall return the same immediately to the City of Rolla Finance Director. Any person whose taxicab driver’s license shall have been revoked may at any time apply for a taxicab driver’s license so long as such person shall then qualify for such license.

(h) Duplicate license: In the event that a taxicab driver’s license becomes lost or stolen, a duplicate license may be obtained by filing for a lost or stolen license with the City of Rolla Finance Department. There shall be a $5.00 fee associated with obtaining a duplicable license. (Ord. 3740, §1; Ord. 4000, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 38-4. Taxicab owner’s license.
(a) Taxicab owner’s license required. No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of operating a taxicab in whole or in part on the streets and public ways in the City of Rolla or on any property owned by the City of Rolla without first having secured a taxicab owner’s license as provided herein.

(b) Taxicab owner’s license application. A verified application for a taxicab owner’s license shall be made in writing to the City of Rolla Finance Director, or his/her designate, upon forms prescribed and provided for such purpose by the City of Rolla Finance Director. Such application shall include at a minimum:

(1) Name: The full name of the applicant and any alias name;
(2) Address: The applicant’s residence address, if an individual, or the applicant’s principal place of business, if a firm or corporation;
(3) Place of business: The intended place of business;
(4) Number of taxicabs: The maximum number of taxicabs to be operated, the make and type of each vehicle to be used in connection with such business, the factory number of each such vehicle, the State license number of each such vehicle, and the seating capacity of each such vehicle according to its trade rating;
(5) Corporation: If the applicant is a corporation, the applicant’s state of incorporation, the domestic or foreign corporation number issued by the Office of the Missouri Secretary of State, and the names and addresses of all directors, officers and shareholders;
(6) Firm: If the applicant is a firm, the names and addresses of all members of participants thereof;
(7) Felony: If such applicant, or any director, officer or shareholder thereof in the case of a corporation, or any member of participant in the case of a firm, has ever been convicted of a felony, the date of such conviction, the nature thereof, and the place of such conviction.
(8) Criminal history check: A criminal history check must be made to the State of Missouri at the applicant’s expense.
(c) Issuance of license.

(1) The City of Rolla Finance Department shall issue a taxicab owner’s license if:

(a) The applicant provides proof to the City of Rolla Finance Director that such applicant has obtained and filed with the Missouri Department of Revenue an insurance policy issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Missouri, providing insurance coverage for each and every taxicab owned, operated or leased by applicant with such minimums as are provided by the laws of the State of Missouri;
(b) The Chief of Police, or his designate, certifies and reports that each vehicle to be used as a taxicab complies with the provisions of this Chapter; and
(c) The applicant has paid required fees.
(2) Contents of license. Each taxicab owner’s license issued hereunder shall contain the name of the holder of the taxicab owner’s license, the owner’s residence address, the owner’s business address, the number of taxicabs to be operated and an assigned number for each taxicab, the make the type of each vehicle to be used, the factory number thereof, and the state license number thereof. The number assigned hereunder to the owner and each taxicab shall in each case be the same as that assigned to the owner and such taxicab for the previous year if a previous license has been issued hereunder.

(3) License year. All taxicab owner’s license shall expire on June 30th of each year, irrespective of the date of issuance.

(4) License fee: The City of Rolla Finance Department shall charge a fee of $10.00 per year for each taxicab operated by the taxicab owner to whom or to which a taxicab owner’s license has been issued hereunder. Such fee shall not be pro-rated for a fractional part of a year. The fee includes the cost of inspections and processing.

(d) Renewal of license. Any taxicab owner’s license issued hereunder may be renewed from year to year provided the owner continues to meet the minimum qualifications of taxicab owners established hereunder and pays the required fee per taxicab. A request for renewal shall be filed with the City of Rolla Finance Director and reviewed by the Chief of Police or his designate prior to renewing any taxicab owner’s license. The request shall be denied unless the Chief of Police, or his designate, approves such renewal after reviewing whether the owner continues to meet the minimum qualifications of taxicab owners established hereunder.

(e) Amendment of license. A taxicab owner’s license may be amended from time to time as to the individual taxicabs owned or used by the owner upon making application therefore to the Chief of Police, or his designate. The same shall be so amended prior to utilizing any taxicab not specifically listed on the taxicab owner’s license. The Chief of Police, or his designate, shall certify and report to the City of Rolla Finance Director whether such vehicle proposed for use complies with the provisions of this Chapter. If the vehicle is in conformity, the Finance Clerk shall appropriately amend the taxicab owner’s license issued upon payment of a transfer fee of $5.00. The number of taxicabs cannot, however, be so increased. The permitted maximum number of taxicabs under any license can be increased only upon making application to the City Finance Director.

(f) Transfer. A taxicab owner’s license issued hereunder shall be nonassignable and nontransferable.

(g) Revocation. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to revoke any taxicab owner’s license issued hereunder for violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter regulating the licensing of taxicabs, for knowingly permitting a driver of such owner’s taxicab to violate any traffic laws or any provisions hereunder regulating the conduct of such drivers or a failure to continue to meet the minimum qualifications of taxicab owners. The Chief is further authorized to suspend any taxicab owner’s license as to any individual taxicab found to be in an unsafe condition or in poor state of repair, with respect to appearance, cleanliness or mechanical operation. The Chief shall provide an opportunity to the license holder to be heard in an appeal before City Council within thirty (30) days following such action. Such suspension shall be effective until such taxicab shall be put in satisfactory condition, after inspections by the Chief of Police or his designate.

(h) Register. The City of Rolla Finance Director shall keep a register of the name of each taxicab owner licensed hereunder, together with the license number and description of each taxicab. The name and address of the insurance carrier or bonding company of such owner shall also be registered. Such information, together with all matters not private by nature pertaining to the application, issuance, renewal, suspension, or revocation of any license issued hereunder shall be available to public inspection. (Ord. 3740, §1; Ord. 4000, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 38-5. Condition of equipment of taxicabs.
(a) Inspections. Every taxicab operating pursuant to this Chapter shall be inspected by the Chief of Police, or his designate. Such inspections shall be for the purpose of determining whether such licensed taxicab is in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter. Each taxicab shall be so inspected at least once every year, but may be inspected more often in the discretion of the Chief of Police, or his designate. Any taxicab owner or driver shall promptly make available the taxicab sought to be inspected for such inspection and otherwise cooperate with the Chief of Police, or his designate, in any inspection performed hereunder. In the event any taxicab to be inspected hereunder is unavailable for inspection or out-of-service at the time the Chief of Police, or his designate, desires to inspect the same, such taxicab shall not be further operated as a taxicab hereunder until made available and actually inspected by the Chief of Police, or his designate, provided that such inspection shall be conducted within seven (7) days after the Chief of Police, or his designate, receives notice that such taxicab is available for inspection. If the Chief of Police, or his designate, is not able or not qualified to make an inspection, such inspection shall be made by an appropriate party selected by the taxicab owner and approved by the Chief of Police, or his designate, at the cost of the taxicab owner. The owner of a taxicab or his agent shall be entitled to be present while any inspection is made hereunder. The owner, upon written request, shall further be entitled to a written summary of the results of such inspection.

(b) Disclaimer. The City of Rolla, or itself and its agents and employees, specifically disclaims that the City of Rolla, its agents and employees necessarily certify that taxicabs licensed hereunder are in any specific condition. Rather, such inspections are made solely for the purposes of this Chapter and not for reliance by the public as to the condition of such taxicabs. Neither the City of Rolla, nor its agents and employees, shall be held liable for any damages on account of any such inspection.

(c) General condition of taxicabs. All taxicabs operated pursuant to this Chapter shall, at a minimum, satisfy the following conditions:

(1) Sanitary. Each such taxicab shall be in clean and sanitary condition for the transportation of passengers.
(2) Safe. Each such taxicab shall have a current and valid safety inspection certificate. The City will inspect for visual defects and properly functioning signaling, lighting and warning devices.
(3) Identification. Before any vehicle shall be operated as a taxicab in the city (limousines not included), there shall be on each side door, in painted or affixed signage, the name and phone number of the company in letters of not less than four (4) inches and not more than six (6) inches in height. Near the top front fender of each taxicab shall be displayed the number of said taxicab. The signage shall be of a color sharply contrasting to the color of the taxicab.
(4) Color scheme. Each taxicab shall have an exterior single color scheme. Any such color scheme shall be approved by the Chief of Police, or his designate.
(Ord. 3740, §1; Ord. 4000, §1)

(e) Display of License. The current inspection license decal issued by the City is to be clearly displayed in the lower left corner of the rear windshield of the taxicab. (Ord. 4000, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 38-6. Operating rules and regulations.
(a) Generally. No taxicab shall be operated, or permitted to operate, except in accordance with the rules and regulations herein established.

(b) Conduct of drivers. No driver of a taxicab while on duty shall use any profane or obscene language, shout or call to prospective passengers or to disturb the peace in any way.

(c) Issuing receipt upon demand. Upon paying his or her fare, each passenger may demand a receipt. Upon each demand, the driver of the taxicab shall give the passenger a receipt in legible type or writing showing the date and amount so paid, the trade name of the taxicab and the name and license number of the driver.

(d) Use of vehicle for crime. No person, firm or corporation shall knowingly permit any taxicab to be used in the perpetration of a crime.

(e) Alcoholic beverages/Tobacco products. No driver of any taxicab shall have in his possession, or in or about the driver’s compartment of the vehicle, any alcoholic liquor. No driver of any taxicab shall use such taxicab for the purpose of transporting or delivering any tobacco products or alcoholic liquors except any that are in the bona fide possession of, and the property of, a paying passenger. No driver of any taxicab, while on duty, shall drink any intoxicating liquor, or be in an intoxicated condition, whether within or without such taxicab.

(f) Obedience to traffic rules. Every driver of a taxicab shall obey all applicable traffic rules and regulations established by statute or ordinance.

(g) Soliciting passengers. No taxicab driver shall induce or attempt to make anyone employ such driver or his taxicab by any false statement or representation of the place or time of arrival or departure of any public conveyance or common carrier.

(h) Multi-passenger trips. No person shall be admitted to a taxicab occupied or about to be occupied by a passenger without the consent of the original passenger. Without such consent, any taxicab shall be used for only one (1) trip at a time, be there one (1) or more passengers on such trip.

(i) Direct route. The taxicab driver shall take his or her passenger to his or her destination by the most direct available route from the place where the passenger enters the taxicab.

(j) Duty to accept passengers. The driver of a taxicab shall accept as a passenger any person who seeks to so use the taxicab, provided such person conducts himself in an orderly manner.

(k) Occupancy by person not a passenger. No owner or driver of a taxicab shall permit any person except a passenger for hire to occupy or be seated in such taxicab when the taxicab is either parked or traveling to the destination of the passenger.

(l) Master log. Every taxicab owner shall maintain a legible, daily master log upon which are recorded all trips made each day, showing time and place of origin and destination of each trip and amount of fare. The forms for the master log shall be furnished by the owner and shall be in a form approved by the Chief of Police, or his designate. Every owner shall retain and preserve master logs for twelve (12) months. The master logs shall be available for inspection by the Rolla Police Department. (Ord. 3740, §1; Ord. 4000, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 38-7. Penalty.
Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter, shall, in addition to such other relief as the law may afford, be punishable as set forth by Section 1-7 of the Rolla City Code. (Ord. 3740, §1; Ord. 4000, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 38-8 to 38-12. Reserved.

Chapter 39 - Trailers and Mobile Homes
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter


Chapter Contents:
Article I - In General
§ 39-1. Definitions.
§ 39-2. Location outside of trailer park or mobile home park.
§ 39-3. Unoccupied trailer houses for demonstrations, etc.
§ 39-4. Inspections.
§ 39-5. Notices, hearing and orders.
§ 39-6. Adoption of regulations by city engineer.
§ 39-7. Penalty for violation of Chapter.
§§ 39-8 to 39-12. Reserved.

ARTICLE II. MOBILE HOME PARKS AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 39-13. Responsibilities of park management.
§ 39-14. Responsibilities of park occupants.
§ 39-15. Restrictions on occupancy.
§ 39-16. Permits.
§ 39-17. Licenses.
§§ 39-18 to 39-22. Reserved.

DIVISION 2. ENVIRONMENTAL, OPEN SPACE AND ACCESS REQUIREMENTS
Subdivision I. In General
§ 39-23. General requirements.
§ 39-24. Soil and ground cover.
§ 39-25. Site drainage.
§ 39-26. Use of park areas for nonresidential purposes.
§§ 39-27 to 39-31. Reserved.

Subdivision II. Travel Trailer Parks
§ 39-32. Required separation between travel trailers.
§ 39-33. Density requirement.
§ 39-34. Required setbacks from public streets.
§ 39-35. Recreational area.
§ 39-36. Park street system.
§§ 39-37 to 39-41. Reserved.

Subdivision III. Mobile Home Parks
§ 39-42. Required separation between mobile homes.
§ 39-43. Setbacks from public street, park street and common areas.
§ 39-44. Recreation areas.
§ 39-45. Park street system.
§ 39-46. Off-street parking areas.
§ 39-47. Walks.
§ 39-48. Mobile home stand requirements.
§§ 39-49 to 39-53. Reserved.

DIVISION 3. WATER SUPPLY
§ 39-54. General requirements.
§ 39-55. Storage facilities.
§ 39-56. Distribution system.
§ 39-57. Water supply outlets for travel trailers.
§ 39-58. Individual water service connections.
§§ 39-59 to 39-63. Reserved.

DIVISION 4. SEWAGE DISPOSAL
§ 39-64. General requirements.
§ 39-65. Sanitary stations for travel trailers.
§ 39-66. Sewer lines.
§ 39-67. Individual sewer connections.
§ 39-68. Sink wastes.
§ 39-69. Approval of proposed facilities; effluent discharge.
§§ 39-70 to 39-74. Reserved.

DIVISION 5. ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
§ 39-75. General requirements.
§ 39-76. Power distribution lines.
§ 39-77. Individual electrical connections.
§ 39-78. Grounding of all exposed noncurrent metal parts.
§ 39-79 to 39-83. Reserved.

DIVISION 6. SERVICE BUILDINGS AND OTHER SERVICE FACILITIES
§ 39-84. Generally.
§ 39-85. Central service building and sanitary facilities for travel trailer parks.
§ 39-86. Emergency sanitary facilities for mobile home parks.
§ 39-87. Structural requirements, illumination levels, etc., for buildings.
§ 39-88. Requirements for barbeque pits, fireplaces, etc.
§§ 39-89 to 39-93. Reserved.

DIVISION 7. REFUSE HANDLING IN TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS
§ 39-94. Generally.
§§ 39-95 to 39-99. Reserved.

DIVISION 8. INSECT AND RODENT CONTROL
§ 39-100. Generally
§§ 39-101 to 39-105. Reserved.

DIVISION 9. FUEL SUPPLY AND STORAGE
§ 39-106. Natural gas systems.
§ 39-107. Liquefied petroleum gas systems.
§ 39-108. Fuel oil supply systems.
§§ 39-109 to 39-113. Reserved.

DIVISION 10. FIRE PROTECTION
§ 39-114. Generally.
§§ 39-115 to 39-119. Reserved.

Sec. 39-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section:

Dependent trailer - A trailer which is dependent upon a service building for toilet and lavatory facilities.

License - A written license issued by the city clerk allowing a person to operate and maintain a mobile home park or travel trailer park under the provisions of this Chapter and regulations issued hereunder.

Mobile home - A transportable dwelling unit suitable for year-round occupancy and containing the same water supply, waste disposal and electrical conveniences as immobile housing.

Mobile home lot - A parcel of land for the placement of a single mobile home and the exclusive use of its occupants, being at least forty feet by eighty feet in dimension.

Mobile home park - A parcel of land which has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for nontransient use.

Mobile home stand - That part of an individual lot which has been reserved for the placement of the mobile home, appurtenant structures or additions.

Permit - A written permit issued by the city clerk permitting the construction, alteration and extension of a mobile home park or travel trailer park under the provisions of this Chapter and regulations issued hereunder.

Person - Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, public or private association or corporation.

Sanitary station - A facility used for removing and disposing of wastes from trailer hold tanks.

Self-contained trailer - A trailer which can operate independent of connections to sewer, water and electrical systems. It contains a water-flushed toilet, lavatory, shower and kitchen sink, all of which are connected to water storage and sewage holding tanks located within the trailer.

Service building - A structure housing toilet, lavatory and such other facility as may be required by this Chapter.

Service sink - A slop sink with a flushing rim for the disposal of liquid wastes from trailers.

Sewer connection - The connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the drain outlet of the mobile home or travel trailer to the inlet of the corresponding sewer riser pipe of the sewage system serving the mobile home park or travel trailer parking area.

Sewer riser pipe - That portion of the sewer lateral which extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at each mobile home or travel trailer space.

Trailer space - A parcel of land in a trailer parking area for the placement of a single trailer and the exclusive use of its occupants.

Trailer stand - That part of an individual space which has been reserved for the placement of a single trailer and its accessory structures.

Travel trailer - Any of the following:

Travel Trailer. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses, permanently identified "Travel Trailer" by the manufacturer of the trailer and, when factory equipped for the road, it shall have a body width not exceeding eight feet, and a body length not exceeding thirty-two feet.

Pick-up Coach. A structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation.

Motor-home. A portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel, recreation and vacation, constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle.

Camping Trailer. A canvas, folding structure, mounted on wheels and designed for travel, recreation and vacation use.
Travel trailer parking area - A parcel of land in which two or more spaces are occupied or intended for occupancy by trailers for transient dwelling purposes.

Water connection - The connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the distribution system within the mobile home or trailer.

Water riser pipe - That portion of the water supply system serving the mobile home park or travel trailer parking areas which extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a designated point at each mobile home lot or each trailer space.

Watering station - A facility for supplying water storage tanks of trailers with potable water.

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 39-2. Location outside of trailer park or mobile home park.
It shall be unlawful, within the limits of the city, for any reason to park any trailer or mobile home on any street, alley or highway, or other public place, or on any tract of land owned by a person, occupied or unoccupied, within the city, except as provided by this Chapter; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to any trailer used by the owner for recreational purposes only and not occupied or used for any purpose while so parked.

Emergency or temporary stopping or parking is permitted on any street, alley or highway for not longer than two hours subject to any other and further prohibitions, regulations or limitations imposed by the traffic and parking regulations or ordinances for that street, alley or highway. (Ord. 1421, §1.)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 39-3. Unoccupied trailer houses for demonstrations, etc.
Unoccupied trailer houses for demonstration and sales purposes only may be placed on any vacant premises within the local business district, provided in the Zoning Ordinance of the city; provided, that a certificate of occupancy has first been procured from the city engineer to do so; provided, further, that such trailer houses are located on such premises in a manner as approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 563, §3.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 39-4. Inspections.
The city engineer is hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this Chapter and regulations issued hereunder.

The city engineer shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this Chapter and regulations issued hereunder.

The city assessor shall have the power to inspect the register containing a record of all residents of the mobile home park or travel trailer park.

It shall be the duty of the owners or occupants of mobile home or travel trailer park, or of the person in charge thereof, to give the city engineer free access to such premises at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection.

It shall be the duty of every occupant of a mobile home park or travel park to give the owner thereof or his agent or employee access to any part of such mobile home park or travel trailer park or its premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with this Chapter and regulations issued hereunder, or with any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 1421, §4.)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 39-5. Notices, hearing and orders.
Whenever the city engineer determines that there has been a violation of any provision of this Chapter, or regulations issued hereunder, the city engineer shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person to whom the permit or license was issued, as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall (1) be in writing; (2) include a statement of the reasons for its issuance; (3) allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires; (4) be served upon the owner or his agent when a copy thereof has been sent by registered mail to his last known address, or when he has been served with such notice by any method authorized or required by the laws of the state; (5) contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and regulations issued hereunder.

Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this Chapter, or regulation issued hereunder, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the city council; provided, that such person file in the office of the city clerk a written petition requesting such hearings and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefore within ten days after the day the notice is served. The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the notice and of the suspension except in the case of an order issued under subsection (e) herein. Upon receipt of such petition, the city clerk shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not later than fifteen days after day on which the petition was filed; provided, that upon application of the petitioner the city council may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such fifteen-day period when in its judgment the petitioner has submitted good and sufficient reasons for such postponement.

After such hearing the city council shall make findings as to compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and regulations issued hereunder and shall issue an order in writing sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the notice which shall be served as provided in subsection (a) (4). Upon failure to comply with any order sustaining or modifying a notice, the license of the mobile home park or travel trailer park affected by the order shall be revoked.

The proceedings at such a hearing, including the findings and decision of the city council and together with a copy of every notice and order related thereto shall be entered as a matter of public record in the office of the city clerk but the transcript of the proceedings need not be transcribed unless judicial review of the decision is sought as provided by this Section. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city council may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of this state.

Whenever the city engineer finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health, he may without notice or hearing issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he may deem necessary to meet the emergency including the suspension of the permit or license. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the mayor shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. The provisions of subsection (c) and (d) shall be applicable to such hearing and the order issued thereafter. (Ord. 1421, § 5.)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 39-6. Adoption of regulations by city engineer.
The city engineer is hereby authorized to make and, after public hearing and approval of the city council, to adopt such written regulations as may be necessary for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter. Such regulations shall have the same force and effect as the provisions of this Chapter. and the penalty for violation of the provisions thereof shall be the same as the penalty for violation of the provisions of this Chapter, as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 1421, §6.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 39-7. Penalty for violation of Chapter.
Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter shall upon conviction be punished by a fine of not less than one dollar nor more than one hundred dollars; and each day's failure of compliance with any such provision shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 1421, §17.)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 39-8 to 39-12. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



ARTICLE II MOBILE HOME PARKS AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS
DIVISION I. GENERALLY
Sec. 39-13. Responsibilities of park management.
The person to whom a license for a mobile home park or travel trailer park is issued shall operate the park in compliance with this Chapter and regulations issued hereunder and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.

The park management shall notify park occupants of all applicable provisions of this Chapter and inform them of their duties and responsibilities under this Chapter and regulations issued hereunder.

The park management shall supervise the placement of each mobile home or travel trailer on its stand which includes securing its stability and installing all utility connections.

The park management shall maintain a register containing a record of all trailers and occupants. Such register shall be available to any authorized person inspecting the trailer parking area and shall be preserved for the period required by the health authority. Such register shall contain:

The names and permanent addresses of all trailer occupants;

The make, model and license number of the trailer and tow vehicle; and

The dates of arrival and departure of a trailer or its occupants.

The park management shall notify the health authority immediately of any suspected communicable or contagious disease within the park. (Ord. 1521, §16.)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 39-14. Responsibilities of park occupants.
The park occupant shall comply with all applicable requirements of this Chapter and regulations issued hereunder and shall maintain his mobile home lot, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.

The park occupant shall be responsible for proper placement of his trailer on its stand and proper installation of all utility connections in accordance with the instructions of the park management.

No owner or person in charge of a dog, cat or other pet animal shall permit it to run at large or to commit any nuisance within the limits of any lot. (Ord. 1421, §16.)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 39-15. Restrictions on occupancy.
A mobile home shall not be occupied for dwelling purposes unless it is properly placed on a mobile home stand and connected to water, sewerage and electrical utilities.

Travel trailer spaces shall be rented by the day or week only, and the occupant of a trailer space shall remain in the same travel trailer parking area not more than seven days. (Ord. 1421, §16.)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 39-16. Permits.
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or extend any mobile home park or travel trailer park within the limits of the city unless he holds a valid permit issued by the city engineer in the name of such person for the specific construction, alteration or extension proposed.

All applications for permits shall be made to the city engineer and shall contain the following:

Name and address of applicant.

Interest of the applicant in the mobile home park or travel trailer park.

Location and legal description of the mobile home park or travel trailer park.

Complete engineering plans and specifications of the proposed park showing:
The area and dimensions of the tract of land;

The number, location and size of all lots;

The location of service buildings and any other proposed structures;

The location and width of roadways and walkways;

The location of water and sewer lines and riser pipes;

Plans and specifications of the water supply, refuse and sewage disposal facilities;

Plans and specifications of all buildings constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home park or trailer park; and,

The location and details of lighting and electrical systems.

All applications shall be accompanied by the deposit of a fee of fifty dollars for mobile home parks and fifty dollars for travel trailer parks.

When upon review of the application, the city engineer is satisfied that the proposed plan meets the requirements of this Chapter and regulations issued hereunder, a permit shall be issued.

Any person whose application for a permit under this Chapter has been denied may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the city council under the procedure provided by Section 39-5 of this Chapter. (Ord. 1421, §2.)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 39-17. Licenses.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any mobile home park or travel trailer park within the limits of the city unless he holds a valid license issued annually by the city clerk in the name of such person for the specific mobile home park or travel trailer park. All applications for licenses shall be made to the city clerk who shall issue a license upon compliance by the applicant with provisions of this Chapter and regulations issued hereunder and of other applicable legal requirements, as certified by the city engineer.

Every person holding a license shall give notice in writing to the city clerk within twenty-four hours after having sold, transferred, given away, or otherwise disposed of interest in or control of any mobile home park or travel trailer park. Such notice shall include the name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of such mobile home park or travel trailer park. Upon application in writing for transfer of the license and deposit of a fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00), the license shall be transferred if the mobile home park or travel trailer park is in compliance with all applicable provisions of this Chapter and regulations issued hereunder.

Application for original licenses shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant, as to the truth of the application and by the payment of a license fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00), and shall contain the name and address of the applicant; the location and legal description of the mobile home park or travel trailer park; and a site plan of the mobile home park or travel trailer park, showing all lots, structures, roads, walkways and other service facilities.

Applications for renewals of licenses shall be made in writing by the holders of the licenses and shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) and shall contain any change in the information submitted since the original license was issued or the latest renewal granted. (Ord. 2876, §1)

Any person whose application for a license under this Chapter has been denied may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the city council, under the procedure provided by Section 39-5 of this Chapter.

Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home park or travel trailer park, the city engineer finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any provision of this Chapter or regulations issued hereunder, the city engineer shall give notice in writing in accordance with Section 39-5(a) to the person to whom the license was issued that unless such condition or practices are corrected within a reasonable period of time specified in the notice by the city engineer, the license shall be suspended. At the end of such period, the city engineer shall reinspect such mobile home park or travel trailer park and, if such conditions or practices have not been corrected, he shall suspend the license and give notice in writing of such suspension to the person to whom the license is issued. Upon receipt of notice of suspension, such person shall cease operation of such mobile home park or travel trailer park, except as provided in Section 39-5(b).

Any person whose license has been suspended, or who has received notice from the city engineer, that his license will be suspended unless certain conditions or practices at the mobile home park or travel trailer park are corrected, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the city council, under the procedure provided by Section 39-5 of this Chapter; provided, that when no petition for such hearing shall have been filed within ten days following the day on which the notice of suspension was served, such license shall be deemed to have been automatically revoked at the expiration of such ten-day period.

A temporary license, upon written request therefore, shall be issued by the city clerk for every mobile home park or travel trailer park in existence upon the effective date of this Chapter,2 permitting the mobile home park or travel trailer park to be operated during the period ending one hundred eighty days after the effective date of this Chapter in accordance with such conditions as the city may require, and if, at the end of such one hundred eighty-day period, the conditions set by the city have been met, then, in that event, an annual license shall be issued on payment of required license fee, and renewed annually under the provisions of subsection (c) (2) herein. (Ord. 1421, §3.)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 39-18 to 39-22. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



ARTICLE II MOBILE HOME PARKS AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS
DIVISION 2. ENVIRONMENTAL, OPEN SPACE AND ACCESS REQUIREMENTS
SUBDIVISION I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 39-23. General requirements.
Conditions of soil, ground water level, drainage and topography shall not create hazards to the property or the health or safety of the occupants. The site shall not be subject to unpredictable or sudden flooding, subsidence or erosion which would expose persons or property to hazards. (Ord. 1421, §7.)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 39-24. Soil and ground cover.
Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every mobile home park or travel trailer park shall be paved, or covered with stone screenings, or other solid material, or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating objectionable dust. (Ord. 1421, §7.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 39-25. Site drainage.
The ground surface in all parts of every mobile home park or travel trailer park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner. (Ord. 1421, §7.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 39-26. Use of park areas for nonresidential purposes.
No part of any park shall be used for nonresidential purposes, except such uses that are required for the direct servicing and well being of park residents and for the management and maintenance of the park. (Ord. 1421, §7.)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 39-27 to 39-31. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)


ARTICLE II MOBILE HOME PARKS AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS
DIVISION 2. ENVIRONMENTAL, OPEN SPACE AND ACCESS REQUIREMENTS
SUBDIVISION II. TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS
Sec. 39-32. Required separation between travel trailers.
Trailers shall be separated from each other and from other structures by at least ten feet. Any accessory structure such as attached awnings, carports, or individual storage facilities shall, for purposes of these separation requirements, be considered to be part of the trailer. (Ord. 1421, §7.)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 39-33. Density requirement.
The density shall not exceed twenty-five trailer spaces per acre of gross site area; except, that the city council may, under special circumstances, permit a higher density provided all other environmental, open space, and access requirements of this Chapter and regulations issued hereunder are adhered to. Any person desiring a higher density shall make application for such exemption to the city council, specifying the reasons therefore. If a higher density is permitted, the city clerk shall issue a special license specifying the location of the parking area, the expiration date of the license, and the conditions of issuance. (Ord. 1421, §7.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 39-34. Required setbacks from public streets.
All trailers shall be located at least twenty-five feet from any parking area boundary line abutting upon a public street or highway. (Ord. 1421, §7.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 39-35. Recreational area.
In all travel trailer parking areas there shall be at least one recreation area which shall be easily accessible from all trailer spaces. The size of such recreation area shall be not less than eight percent of the gross site area or two thousand five hundred square feet, which ever is greater. (Ord. 1421, §7.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 39-36. Park street System.
General requirements. All parking areas shall be provided with safe and convenient vehicular access from abutting public streets or roads to each trailer space. Alignment and gradient shall be properly adapted to topography. Surfacing and maintenance shall provide a smooth, hard and dense surface which shall be well drained.

Access. Access to travel trailer parking areas shall be designed to minimize congestion and hazards at their entrance or exit and allow free movement of traffic on adjacent streets. All traffic into or out of the parking areas shall be through such entrances and exits.

Internal streets. Surfaced roadways shall be of adequate width to accommodate anticipated traffic and in any case shall meet the following minimum requirements; One-way, with no parking, eleven feet, is acceptable only if less than five hundred feet total length and serving less than twenty-five trailer spaces. One-way, with parking on one side only, or two-way, with no parking, eighteen feet, is acceptable only if serving less than fifty trailer spaces. (Ord. 1421, §7.)
(Return to Contents)



Secs. 39-37 to 39-41. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



ARTICLE II MOBILE HOME PARKS AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS
DIVISION 2. ENVIRONMENTAL, OPEN SPACE AND ACCESS REQUIREMENTS
SUBDIVISION III. MOBILE HOME PARKS
Sec. 39-42. Required separation between mobile homes.
Mobile homes shall be separated from each other and from other buildings and structures by at least fifteen feet; provided, that mobile homes placed end-to-end may have clearance of ten feet where opposing rear walls are staggered.

An accessory structure which has a horizontal area exceeding twenty-five square feet is attached to a mobile home or located within ten feet of its window, and has an opaque top or roof that is higher than the nearest window shall, for purposes of all separation requirements, be considered to be part of the mobile home. (Ord. 1421, §7.)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 39-43. Setbacks from public street, park street and common areas.
All mobile homes shall be located at least ten feet from any park property boundary line abutting upon a public street or highway and at least fifteen feet from other park property boundary lines, except the rear property line.

There shall be a minimum distance of ten feet between an individual mobile home and adjoining pavement of a park street, or common parking area or other common areas. (Ord. 1421, §7.)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 39-44. Recreation areas.
In all parks accommodating or designed to accommodate twenty-five or more mobile homes, there shall be one or more recreation areas which shall be easily accessible to all park residents.

The size of such recreation area shall be based upon a minimum of one hundred square feet for each lot. No outdoor recreation area shall contain less than two thousand five hundred square feet.

Recreation areas shall be so located as to be free of traffic hazards and should, where the topography permits, be centrally located. (Ord. 1421, §7.)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 39-45. Park street system.
General requirements. All mobile home parks shall be provided with safe and convenient vehicular access from abutting public streets or roads to each mobile home lot. Alignment and gradient shall be properly adapted to topography.

Access. Access to mobile home parks shall be designed to minimize congestion and hazards at the entrance or exit and allow free movement of traffic on adjacent streets. The entrance road connecting the park streets with a public street or road shall have a minimum road pavement width of thirty-four feet where parking is permitted on both sides, or a minimum road pavement width of twenty-seven feet where parking is limited to one side. Where the primary entrance road is more than one hundred feet long and does not provide access to abutting mobile home lots within such distance, the minimum road pavement width may be twenty-four feet, provided parking is prohibited on both sides.

Internal streets. Surfaced roadways shall be of adequate width to accommodate anticipated traffic, and in any case shall meet the following minimum requirements:

All streets, except minor streets, twenty-four feet.

Minor streets, with no parking, eighteen feet, is acceptable only if less than five hundred feet long and serving less than twenty-five mobile homes or of any length if one-way and providing access to abutting mobile home lots on one side only.

Dead-end streets shall be limited in length to one thousand feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a turn-around having an outside roadway diameter of at least sixty feet.

Required illumination. All parks shall be furnished with lighting units so spaced and equipped with luminaries placed at such mounting heights as will provide the following average maintained levels of illumination for the safe movement of pedestrians and vehicles at night:

All parts of the park street systems: 0.6 footcandle, with a minimum of 0.1 footcandle.

Potentially hazardous locations, such as major street inter- sections and steps or stepped ramps: individually illuminated, with a minimum of 0.3 footcandle.
Street construction and design standards:

PAVEMENT. All streets shall be provided with a smooth, hard and dense surface which shall be durable and well drained under normal use and weather conditions. Pavement edges shall be protected to prevent raveling of the wearing surface and shifting of the pavement base. Street surfaces shall be maintained free of cracks, holes and other hazards.

GRADES. Grades of all street shall be sufficient to insure adequate surface drainage, but shall be not more than eight percent. Short run with a maximum grade of twelve percent may be permitted, provided traffic safety is assured by appropriate paving, adequate leveling areas and avoidance of lateral curves.

INTERSECTIONS. Within one hundred feet of an intersection, streets shall be approximately at right angles. A distance of at least one hundred fifty feet shall be maintained between center lines of offset intersecting streets. Intersections of more than two streets at one point shall be avoided. (Ord. 1421, §7.)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 39-46. Off-street parking areas.
(a) Off-street parking areas shall be provided in all mobile home parks for the use of park occupants where streets are less than thirty-four feet in width. Such areas shall be furnished at the rate of at least 1.25 car spaces for each mobile home lot.

(b) Required car parking spaces shall be so located as to provide convenient access to the mobile home, but shall not exceed a distance of two hundred feet from the mobile home that it is intended to serve. (Ord. 1421, §7.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 39-47. Walks.
General requirements. All parks shall be provided with safe, convenient, all season pedestrian access of adequate width for intended use, durable and convenient to maintain; between individual mobile homes, the park streets and all community facilities provided for park residents. Sudden changes in alignment and gradient shall be avoided.

Common walk system. A common walk system shall be provided and maintained between locations where pedestrian traffic is concentrated. Such common walks shall have a minimum width of two feet.

Individual walks. All mobile home stands shall be connected to common walks, to paved streets, or to paved driveways or parking spaces connecting to a paved street. Such individual walks shall have a minimum width of two feet. (Ord. 1421, §7.)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 39-48. Mobile home stand requirements.
The area of the mobile home stand shall be improved to provide an adequate foundation for the placement and tie-down of the mobile home, thereby securing the superstructure against uplift, sliding, rotation, and overturning.

The mobile home stand shall not heave, shift or settle unevenly under the weight of the mobile home due to frost action, inadequate drainage, vibration or other forces acting on the superstructure.

The mobile home stand shall be provided with anchors and tie-downs such as cast-in-place concrete "dead men," eyelets imbedded in concrete foundations or runways, screw augers, arrowhead anchors, or other devices securing the stability of the mobile home.

Anchors and tie-downs shall be placed at least at each corner of the mobile home stand and each shall be able to sustain a minimum tensile strength of two thousand eight hundred pounds. (Ord. 1421, §7.)
(Return to Contents)

Secs. 39-49 to 39-53. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)



ARTICLE II MOBILE HOME PARKS AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS
DIVISION 3. WATER SUPPLY
Sec. 39-54. General requirements.
An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be provided in each mobile home park or travel trailer parking area. Where a public supply of water of satisfactory quantity, quality and pressure is available, connection shall be made thereto and its supply used exclusively. When a satisfactory public water supply is not available, a private water supply system may be developed and used as approved and used as approved by the state board of health. (Ord. 1421, §8.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 39-55. Storage facilities.
All water storage reservoirs shall be covered, watertight and constructed of impervious material. Overflows and vents of such reservoirs shall be effectively screened. Manholes shall be constructed with overlapping covers so as to prevent the entrance of contaminated material. Reservoir overflow pipes shall discharge through an acceptable air gap. (Ord. 1421, §8.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 39-56. Distribution system.
The water supply system of the mobile home park or travel trailer parking area shall be connected by pipes to all buildings and other facilities requiring water.

All water piping, fixtures and other equipment shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with state and local regulations and requirements and shall be of a type and in locations approved by the health authority.

The water piping system shall not be connected with nonpotable or questionable water supplies and shall be protected against the hazards of backflow or back siphonage.

The system shall be so designed and maintained as to provide a pressure of not less than twenty pounds per square inch, under normal operating conditions, at service buildings and other locations requiring potable water supply. (Ord. 1421, § 8.)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 39-57. Water supply outlets for travel trailers.
Each travel trailer parking area shall be provided with one or more easily accessible water supply outlets for filling trailer water storage tanks. Such water outlets shall consist of at least a water hydrant and the necessary appurtenances and shall be protected against the hazards of backflow and back siphonage. (Ord. 1421, §8.)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 39-58. Individual water service connections.
The following requirements shall apply:

Riser pipes provided for individual water-service connections shall be so located and constructed that they will not be damaged by the parking of mobile homes or travel trailers.

Water riser pipes shall extend at least four inches above ground elevation. The pipe size shall be three-quarter inch.

Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service lines, valves and riser pipes.

Underground stop and waste valves shall not be installed on any water service.

Valves shall be provided near the outlet of each water service connection. They should be turned off and the outlets capped or plugged when not in use. (Ord. 1421, §8.)
(Return to Contents)

Secs. 39-59 to 39-63. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)


ARTICLE II MOBILE HOME PARKS AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS
DIVISION 4. SEWAGE DISPOSAL
Sec. 39-64. General requirements.
An adequate and safe sewerage system shall be provided in all mobile home parks or travel trailer parking areas for conveying and disposing of all sewage. Such system shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the state and local laws. (Ord. 1421, §9.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 39-65. Sanitary stations for travel trailers.
A sanitary station shall be provided consisting of at least: a tapped four-inch sewer riser pipe, connected to the travel trailer parking area sewerage system, surrounded at the inlet end by a concrete apron sloped to the drain, and provided with a suitable hinged cover; and a water outlet with the necessary appurtenances, connected to the parking area water supply system to permit periodic washdown of the immediate adjacent areas.

Each travel trailer parking area shall be provided with a sanitary station in the ratio of one for every one hundred trailer spaces or fractional part thereof.

Sanitary stations shall be screened from other activities by visual barriers such as fences, walls or natural growth and shall be separated from any trailer space by a distance of at least fifty feet. (Ord. 1421, §9.)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 39-66. Sewer lines.
All sewer lines shall be located in trenches of sufficient depth to be free of breakage from traffic or other movements and shall be separated from the water supply system at a safe distance. Sewers shall be a grade which will insure a velocity of two feet per second when flowing full. All sewer lines shall be constructed of materials approved by the health authority, shall be adequately vented and shall have watertight joints. (Ord. 1421, §9.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 39-67. Individual sewer connections.
If facilities for individual sewer connections are provided, the following requirements shall apply:

The sewer riser pipe shall have at least a four-inch diameter, shall be trapped below the ground surface and shall be so located on the trailer space that the sewer connection to the trailer drain outlet will approximate a vertical position.

The sewer connection (see definition) shall have a nominal inside diameter of at least three inches, and the slope of any portion thereof shall be at least one-fourth inch per foot. The sewer connection shall consist of one pipe only without any branch fittings. All joints shall be watertight.

All materials used for sewer connections shall be corrosive resistant, nonabsorbent and durable. The inner surface shall be smooth.

Provision shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when a trailer does not occupy the space. Surface drainage shall be diverted away from the riser. (Ord. 1421, §9.)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 39-68. Sink wastes.
No liquid wastes from sinks shall be discharged onto or allowed to accumulate on the ground surface. (Ord. 1421, §9.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 39-69. Approval of proposed facilities; effluent discharge.
Where the sewer lines of the mobile home park or travel trailer parking area are not connected to a public sewer, all proposed sewage disposal facilities shall be approved by the health authority prior to construction. Effluents from sewage treatment facilities shall not be discharged into any waters of the state except with prior approval of the health authority. (Ord. 1421, §9.)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 39-70 to 39-74. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)


ARTICLE II MOBILE HOME PARKS AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS
DIVISION 5. ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
Sec. 39-75. General requirements.
Every park shall contain an electrical wiring system consisting of wiring, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances which shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations governing such systems. (Ord. 1421, §10.)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 39-76. Power distribution lines.
Main power lines not located underground shall be suspended at least eighteen feet above the ground. There shall be a minimum horizontal clearance of three feet between overhead wiring and any mobile home or travel trailer, service building or other structure.

All direct burial conductors or cable shall be buried at least eighteen inches below the ground surface and shall be insulated and specially designed for the purpose. Such conductors shall be located not less than one foot radial distance from water, sewer, gas or communication lines. (Ord. 1421, §10.)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 39-77. Individual electrical connections.
Each mobile home lot shall be provided with an approved disconnecting device and over current protective equipment. The minimum service per outlet shall be 120/240 volts AC, 50 amperes.

If individual travel trailer spaces are connected to the electrical wiring system, an approved type of disconnecting device and over current protective equipment shall be provided. The service per outlet shall be 120 volts AC, 15 amperes or 30 amperes.

Outlet receptacles at each trailer stand shall be located not more than twenty-five feet from the over current protective devices in the trailer and a three-pole, four-wire grounding type shall be used. Receptacles shall be of weatherproof construction and configurations shall be in accordance with American Standard Outlet Receptacle C-73.1.

The mobile home or travel trailer shall be connected to the outlet receptacle by an approved type of flexible cable with connectors and a male attachment plug.

Where the calculated load of the mobile home is more than 50 amperes either a second outlet receptacle shall be installed or electrical service shall be provided by means of permanently installed containers. (Ord. 1421, §10.)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 39-78. Grounding of all exposed noncurrent metal parts.
All exposed noncurrent carrying metal parts of mobile homes or travel trailers and all other equipment shall be grounded by means of an approved grounding conductor with branch circuit conductors or other approved method of grounded metallic wiring. The neutral conductor shall not be used as an equipment ground for mobile homes or travel trailers or other equipment. (Ord. 1421, §10.)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 39-79 to 39-83. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)


ARTICLE II MOBILE HOME PARKS AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS
DIVISION 6. SERVICE BUILDINGS AND OTHER SERVICE FACILITIES
Sec. 39-84. Generally.
The requirements of this division shall apply to service buildings, recreation buildings and other service facilities such as:

Management offices, repair shops and storage areas.

Sanitary facilities. (Ord. 1421, § 11.)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 39-85. Central service building and sanitary facilities travel trailer parks.
A central service building containing the necessary toilet and other plumbing fixtures specified shall be provided in travel trailer parking areas which provide parking spaces for dependent trailers. Service building shall be conveniently located within a radius of approximately three hundred feet to the spaces to be served.

(Suggested Sanitary Facilities)
# of Parking
Spaces (a)	Toilets	Urinals	Lavatories	Showers	Other
Fixtures (b)
 	Men	Women	Men	Men	Women	Men	Women	1 Service
sink with a flushing rim (c)
1-15	1	1	1	1	1	1	1
16-30	1	2	1	2	2	1	1
31-45	2	2	1	3	3	1	1
 	2	3	2	3	3	2	2
 	3	4	2	4	4	2	2
 	3	4	2	4	4	3	3

NOTE:
Parking spaces for dependent trailers.
Additional fixtures including laundry trays, clothes washing machines (one for every 30 sites) and an ice making machine may be provided.
A service sink with a flushing rim shall be provided for disposal of liquid wastes unless a sanitary station is conveniently accessible for this purpose.

Where a travel trailer parking area is designed for and exclusively limited to use by self-contained trailers, only the following minimum emergency sanitary facilities shall be required: For each one hundred trailer spaces, or fractional part thereof, there shall be one flush toilet and one lavatory for each sex.

When a travel trailer parking area requiring a service building is operated in connection with a resort or other business establishment, the number of sanitary facilities for such business established shall be in excess of those required by the schedule for trailer space and shall be based on the total number of persons suing such facilities.

Any person desiring to furnish temporary facilities for accommodating a travel rally, or other group of trailers assembled for the purpose of traveling together, shall make application for such activity to the mayor. The requirements for a service building and other sanitary and physical facilities may be waived by the health authority on the determination that the public health will not be endangered; but the location of the site, the facilities which are provided, and the method of conduction of such rally shall be acceptable to the health authority before a special license shall be issued specifying the location of the site, the period of operation not to exceed ten days, and any conditions of issuance. (Ord. 1421, §11.)
(Return to Contents)



Sec. 39-86. Emergency sanitary facilities for mobile home parks.
Every park shall be provided with the following emergency sanitation facilities: For such one hundred mobile home lots, or fractional part thereof, there shall be one flush toilet and one lavatory for each sex. (Ord. 1421, §11.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 39-87. Structural requirements, illumination levels, etc., for buildings.
All portions of the structure shall be properly protected from damage by ordinary use and by decay, corrosion, termites and other destructive elements. Exterior portions shall be of such materials and be so constructed and protected as to prevent entrance or penetration of moisture and weather.

All rooms containing sanitary or laundry facilities shall:

Have sound resistant walls extending to the ceiling between male and female sanitary facilities. Walls and partitions around showers, bathtubs, lavatories and other plumbing fixtures shall be constructed of dense, nonabsorbent, waterproof material or covered with moisture resistant material.

Have at least one window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum aggregate gross area of windows for each required room shall be not less than ten percent of floor area served by them.

Have at least one window which can be easily opened or a mechanical device which will adequately ventilate the room.

Toilets shall be located in separate compartments equipped with self-closing doors. The shower stalls shall be of the individual type. The rooms shall be screened to prevent direct view of the interior when the exterior doors are open.

Illumination levels shall be maintained as follows:

general seeing tasks-five footcandles;

laundry room work area-forty footcandles;

toilet room, in front of mirrors-forty footcandles.

Hot and cold water shall be furnished to each lavatory, sink, bathtub, shower and laundry fixture, and cold water shall be furnished to every water closet and urinal. (Ord. 1421, §11.)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 39-88. Requirements for barbeque pits, fireplaces, etc.
Cooking shelters, barbeque pits, fireplaces, wood-burning stoves and incinerators shall be so located, constructed, maintained and used as to minimize fire hazard and smoke nuisance both on the property on which used and on neighboring property. No open fire shall be left unattended. No fuel shall be used and no material burned which emits dense smoke or objectionable odors. (Ord. 1421, §11.)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 39-89 to 39-93. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)


ARTICLE II MOBILE HOME PARKS AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS
DIVISION 7. REFUSE HANDLING IN TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS
Sec. 39-94. Generally.
The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in travel trailer parking area shall be so conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards, or air pollution.

All refuse shall be stored in fly tight, watertight, rodent-proof containers, which shall be located not more than one hundred fifty feet from any trailer space. Containers shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to properly store all refuse.

Refuse collection stands shall be provided for all refuse containers. Such container stands shall be so designed as to prevent containers from being tipped, to minimize spillage and container deterioration and facilitate cleaning around them.

All refuse containing garbage shall be collected at least twice weekly. Where suitable collection service is not available from the city, the owner or operator of the trailer parking area shall provide this service. All refuse shall be collected and transported in covered containers.

Where municipal disposal service is not used, the owner or operator of the trailer parking area shall dispose of the refuse by transporting to a disposal site approved by the health authority. (Ord. 1421, §12.)
(Return to Contents)



Secs. 39-95 to 39-99. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)
ARTICLE II MOBILE HOME PARKS AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS
DIVISION 8. INSECT AND RODENT CONTROL
Sec. 39-100. Generally.
Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect and rodent harborage and infestation. Extermination methods and other measures to control insects and rodents shall conform with the requirements of the health authority.

Parking areas shall be maintained free of accumulations of debris which may provide rodent harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and other pests.

Storage areas shall be so maintained as to prevent rodent harborage; lumber, pipe and other building material shall be stored at least one foot above the ground.

Where the potential for insect and rodent infestation exists, all exterior openings in or beneath any structure shall be appropriately screened with wire mesh or other suitable materials.

The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled to prevent harborage of ticks, chiggers and other noxious insects. Parking areas shall be so maintained as to prevent the growth of ragweed, poison ivy, poison oak, poison sumac and other noxious weeds considered detrimental to health. Open areas shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth of any description. (Ord. 1421, §13.)
(Return to Contents)



Secs. 39-101 to 39-105. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)


ARTICLE II MOBILE HOME PARKS AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS
DIVISION 9. FUEL SUPPLY AND STORAGE
Sec. 39-106. Natural gas systems.
Natural gas piping systems (when natural gas shall be available) shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations governing such systems.

Each mobile home or travel trailer lot provided with piped gas shall have an approved manual shutoff valve installed upstream of the gas outlet. The outlet shall be equipped with an approved cap to prevent accidental discharge of gas when the outlet is not in use. (Ord. 1421, §14.
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 39-107. Liquefied petroleum gas systems.
Liquefied petroleum gas systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations governing such systems.

Systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve excessive pressures and shall be arranged so that the discharge terminates at a safe location.

Systems shall have at least one accessible means for shutting off gas. Such means shall be located outside the mobile home and shall be maintained in an effective operating condition.

All LPG piping outside of the mobile homes or travel trailers shall be well supported and protected against mechanical injury. Undiluted liquefied petroleum gas in liquid form shall not be conveyed through piping equipment and systems in mobile homes or travel trailers.

Liquefied petroleum gas containers installed on a mobile home or travel trailer lot shall be securely but not permanently fastened to prevent accidental overturning. Such containers shall not be less than twelve nor more than sixty U.S. gallons gross capacity.

No liquefied petroleum gas vessel shall be stored or located inside or beneath any storage cabinet, carport, mobile home or any other structure, unless such installations are approved by the health authority. (Ord. 1421, §14.)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 39-108. Fuel oil supply systems.
All fuel oil supply systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations governing such systems.

All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to mobile homes shall be permanently and securely fastened in place.

All fuel oil storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely fastened in place and shall not be located inside or beneath any mobile home or less than five feet from any mobile home exit.

Storage tanks located in areas subject to traffic shall be protected against physical damage. (Ord. 1421, §14.)
(Return to Contents)



Secs. 39-109 to 39-113. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)


ARTICLE II MOBILE HOME PARKS AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS
DIVISION 10. FIRE PROTECTION
Sec. 39-114. Generally.
The trailer park area shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the city prevention authority.

Trailer parks shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other flammable materials.

Portable fire extinguishers of a type approved by the fire prevention authority shall be kept in service buildings and at all other locations designated by such fire prevention authority and shall be maintained in good operating condition.

Fires shall be made only in stoves and other equipment intended for such purposes.

Fire hydrants shall be installed in mobile home parks if the park water is capable to serve them in accordance with the following requirements:

The water supply system shall permit the operation of a minimum of two, one and one-half inch hose streams.

Each of two nozzles, held four feet above the ground, shall deliver at least seventy-five gallons of water per minute at a flowing pressure of at least thirty pounds per square inch at the highest elevation point of the park.

Fire hydrants, if provided, shall be located within five hundred feet of any mobile home, service building or other structure in the park. (Ord. 1421, §15.)

Chapter 40 - Urban Renewal
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter


Chapter Contents:
Article I - In General
§ 38-1. Powers of department of community development.
§§ 40-2 to 40-6. Reserved.
Article II - Rolla Historic Preservation Commission
§ 40-7.    Established; Purpose; Appointment; Qualifications.
§ 40-8.    Terms of members, removal from office.
§ 40-9.    Officers, Meetings.
§ 40-10.  Powers and Duties of the RHPC.
§ 40-11.  Designation of Historic Properties.
§ 40-12.  Identification of Historic Districts.
§ 40-13.  Identification of "Rolla Historic Preservation Properties."
§ 40-14.  Restriction on Properties Designated as "Rolla Historic Preservation Property".
§ 40-15.  Financial Incentive to Foster Historic Preservation
§ 40-16.  Design Guidelines.
§ 40-17.  Historic property construction permits.
§ 40-18.  Application for an historic property construction permit.
§ 40-19.  Application review.
§ 40-20.  Stop work order.
§ 40-21.  Fees and penalties.
 

Sec. 40-1. Powers of department of community development.
The mayor and city council approve of the exercise by the department of community development of the city, acting by and through the city council, of the powers, functions and duties as specified in the Land Clearance for Redevelopment Law as amended. It has been the intent of the council that from the inception of the urban renewal program that the city council be the administering authority. The previous actions of the city council with regards to the department of community development of the city, the Ber-Juan Urban Renewal Project and the urban renewal program are hereby ratified and confirmed. (Ord. 1735, §§1, 2, 3.)

(Return to Contents)


Secs. 40-1 to 40-6. Reserved.
(Return to Contents)

ARTICLE II - ROLLA HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION

Sec. 40-7.  Established; Purpose; Appointment; Qualifications.
There is hereby established a Rolla Historic Preservation Commission (RHPC), the purpose of which shall be to effect the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and use of districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects which reflect elements of the City’s historic, aesthetic, archaeological and architectural  heritage.     
The RHPC shall endeavor, as its primary mission, to encourage preservation, restoration, and rehabilitation of the City’s historic structures, districts, and neighborhoods.
The RHPC shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council and shall consist of five (5) members, residents of the City or county. Not more than two (2) members shall reside outside the City limits. In addition, a member of the council and a member of the Planning and Zoning Commission may serve as ex officio members, but shall have no vote.
To the extent feasible the Mayor and City Council will appoint to the RHPC persons with professional backgrounds in architecture, law, real estate, engineering, history, finance, and other fields relevant to historic preservation. (Ord. 4106)
(Return to Contents)


Sec. 40-8.  Terms of members, removal from office.
The members of the RHPC shall hold office for a five (5) year staggered term following the date of their appointment, excepting that the membership of the first RHPC shall serve respectively for terms of one (1) for one year; one (1) for two (2) years; one (1) for three (3) years; one (1) for four (4) years; and one (1) for five (5) years. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only.                 
Upon recommendation by the Mayor, a member of the RHPC may be removed by a vote of seven (7) City Council members. A member may also be removed by a vote of eight (8) City Council members independently of the Mayor’s recommendation.
Any RHPC member who fails to attend three (3) consecutive regular meetings shall forfeit their membership upon notification by the RHPC Chairman and approval by the Mayor.  
RHPC members serve without compensation. (Ord. 4106)
(Return to Contents)


Sec. 40-9.  Officers, Meetings.
Within fifteen (15) days after their initial appointment, the RHPC shall meet and elect one of its members as Chairman and one as Vice-Chair. The term of the Chairman and Vice-Chairman shall be one (1) year with eligibility for reelection.
The City Clerk or another person designated by the City Administrator shall be the recording secretary and shall keep a record of all votes and actions taken at the meetings. A copy of the minutes of every meeting of the RHPC shall be provided to the City Council and shall be public record. 
A quorum of the RHPC shall consist of at least three (3) voting members. All decisions or actions of the RHPC shall be made where a quorum exists. Meetings shall be held at regularly scheduled times to be determined by the RHPC annually or at any time upon the call of the Chairman.
No member of the RHPC shall vote on any matter, which may materially or apparently affect the property, income, or business interest of that member. No action shall be taken by the RHPC which could in any manner deprive or restrict the owner of a property in its use, modification, maintenance, disposition, or demolition until such owners shall first have had an opportunity to be heard at a public hearing on the matter, as provided herein. (Ord. 4106)
(Return to Contents)


Sec. 40-10.  Powers and Duties of the RHPC.
Adopt its own procedural regulations, provided that such regulations are consistent with this or any other chapter of the Rolla City Code and state or federal statutes;
Provide education to the public in historic preservation;
Develop a survey plan for Rolla to identify and document historically or architecturally significant buildings, structures, and areas that exemplify the cultural, social, economic, political, or architectural history of the nation, state, or City.
Review and recommend to the City Council the identification of significant historical, architectural, and archeological properties, sites, structures, buildings, or areas as a Rolla Historic District or as a Rolla Historic Property without attaching to those districts or properties any restrictions for receiving this designation;
Review and recommend to the City Council the designation of properties located in Rolla fulfilling the requirements, as stipulated in Sec.40-13, as a "Rolla Historic Preservation Property";
Confer recognition upon owners of a Rolla Historic property or of property or structures within a Rolla Historic District by means of letters, certificates, plaques, or markers;
Make recommendation for the design and implementation of specific markings of the streets, and routes for a Rolla Historic District, or as a Rolla Historic property;
Keep a register of all districts and properties which have been designated as historic or as a "Rolla Historic Preservation Property", including all information and photos used for each designation and to determine if changes are being proposed;
Periodically review designated properties to insure continued compliance; 
Advise and assist owners of Rolla Historic property on the physical and financial aspects of preservation, restoration, rehabilitation, and reuse; 
Advise interested parties on procedures for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places, provide relevant forms, review and comment on applications as requested by the owner;
Review applications for a permit for construction, alteration removal, or demolition affecting a property designated by the City Council as a Rolla Historic Preservation Property;
Hold public hearings as determined necessary;
 Develop, interpret, and apply design guidelines contained in  this ordinance as they relate to a "Rolla Historic Preservation Property";
Review and comment on proposed amendments or variances to Rolla’s planning and zoning code pertaining to a "Rolla Historic Preservation Property" prior to any action by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Board of Adjustment;
Advise the City Council, the Planning and Zoning Commission, and the Board of Adjustment on any matter affecting historically, architecturally, archaeologically significant properties, structures, and areas;
Make recommendations to the Mayor concerning the application for and use of any federal, state, or private grant, grant-in-aid, gift, or bequest awarded to the City to further the purposes of this Chapter; and
Coordinate actions with the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO); 
To make recommendations to the City Council concerning budgetary appropriations to further the general purposes of this Chapter.
Undertake appropriate action necessary for the implementation of the powers and duties and purpose of this Chapter. (Ord. 4106)
 (Return to Contents)


Sec.  40-11. Designation of Historic Properties.
Identification of a Rolla Historic District and historic properties and designation of properties earning the title "Rolla Historic Preservation Property" does not require either federal or state historic register certification before local designation may take effect nor does it confer any federal or state historic designations.

Rolla Historic Property identification.

Criteria to qualify for identification as an historic property. To qualify for identification as an historic property, each property described in the application must meet at least one  of the following criteria:

Its value as part of the heritage or culture of Rolla;
Its location as a site of a significant event;
Its identification with a person or persons who made a significant contribution to the development of the community, state, or nation;   
Its distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style or method of construction
Its identification as the work of a master designer, architect, landscape architect, or builder whose work influenced the development of Rolla, state, or nation
Its elements of design, detailing, materials or craftsmanship renders it significant
Its design elements make it structurally innovative;                      
Its unique location or physical characteristics that make it a familiar visual structure in Rolla
Its character as a particularly fine or unique example of a utilitarian structure with a high level of integrity or architectural significance; and/or
Its suitability for preservation or restoration.  

Application procedures for identifying an historic property.

Applications for identification as a Rolla Historic Property may be obtained from the City Clerk or Chairman of the RHPC.
A completed application for identification as a historic property must be submitted to the City Clerk or the Chairman of the RHPC by the owner(s) of the property. (Ord. 4106)
  (Return to Contents)


Sec. 40-12.  Identification of Historic Districts.
Criteria to qualify for designation as a district.
At least five (5) properties lying within the proposed district boundaries must be identified as eligible to be designated as a Rolla Historic Property.
A majority of properties lying within the proposed district boundaries must also be identifiable as potential Rolla Historic Property.

Application procedures for identification as an historic district.
Applications for designation as a Rolla Historic District may be obtained from the City Clerk or the Chairman of the RHPC.
When completed, the application materials shall be returned to the RHPC or City Clerk by a group of five (5) or more property owners, whose properties are located in close proximity to each other may collectively seek to have their properties included in the historic district.

Application review seeking designation as a Rolla Historic Property or as a Rolla Historic District.  
The Chairman of the RHPC shall add each completed application to the agenda of the next regular meeting for review, providing each member of the RHPC shall have at least seven (7) days to review the application before the meeting.
Review of all completed applications will be concluded within the thirty (30) days following the RHPC meeting at which the application was first reviewed, unless the RHPC concludes that additional information will be necessary before it may make an informed decision. Upon receipt of the last requested information, the review will be concluded within thirty (30) days.
In its review, the RHPC shall be guided by the criteria set out in Section 40-16.
Recommendation of the RHPC relating to identification as a Rolla Historic Property or as a Rolla Historic District. Upon consideration of the completed application, the RHPC shall, by majority vote, decide whether to recommend or not to recommend approval of the application to the City Council.
If the vote is to recommend approval, the Chairman of the RHPC shall notify the property owner (s) and shall submit to the City Council the completed application, plus any additional information considered by the RHPC, together with the vote and the rationale behind the RHPC’s decision.  If the vote is not to recommend approval, the Chairman of the RHPC shall meet with the property owner (s) and shall explain the RHPC rationale for its decision. If the property owner(s) then wish to ask the City Council to reject the recommendation of the RHPC, they may do so. In such case, the property owner(s) shall formally notify the Chairman of the RHPC, in writing, of his/her intent to appeal the recommendation of the RHPC to the City Council. Upon receipt of that notice, the Chairman shall forward the completed application to the City Council, plus any additional data considered by the RHPC, together with the vote and rationale of the RHPC.     
The decision of the City Council to grant or to deny, identification as a Rolla Historic Property or for inclusion in a Rolla Historic District is final.
The decision of the City Council to grant these designations will be conveyed by the Community Development Director (Director) to the relevant property owner(s), the Planning and Zoning Commission, and the RHPC. (Ord. 4106)
(Return to Contents)


Sec. 40-13 "Identification of Rolla Historic Preservation Properties"

Criteria to qualify for designation as a "Rolla Historic Preservation Property". This designation is the most prestigious recognition granted in Rolla to an owner of an historic property. To qualify for this recognition requires that each property owner (s) follow the procedures outlined above to secure such designation as a historic property. Each owner must voluntarily agree, in writing, to abide by the restrictions described in Sections 40-11, 40-12, 40-13, 40-14, 40-15, 40-16, 40-17, 40-18, and 40-19.

Application for designation as a "Rolla Historic Preservation Property".
Applications for designation as a "Rolla Historic Preservation Property", together with a copy of the historic preservation ordinance relating to this designation, may be obtained from the City Clerk or the RHPC Chairman. Completed applications may be submitted to the City Clerk or to the RHPC Chairman by the owner(s) of the property seeking this designation.
Every owner of a property proposed for this designation must sign the application, which shall include the following agreement:
"The undersigned, being the owner(s) of the above described property, hereby request its designation as a "Rolla Historic Preservation Property". I/we have read and understood the Rolla Historic Preservation Ordinance. By signing this application, I/we agree that if my/our property(ies) receive this designation, I/we accept all regulations, restrictions, and protections set out in this ordinance relating to historic properties and districts."

Upon consideration of the completed application, the RHPC shall, by majority vote, decide whether to recommend or not recommend approval of the application to the City Council.
If the vote is to recommend approval, the Director shall notify the property owner (s) and shall submit to the City Council the completed application, plus any additional data considered by the RHPC, together with the vote and rationale of the RHPC.
If the vote is not to recommend approval, the Director shall notify the property owner(s) and shall explain the RHPC rationale for its decision. If the property owner(s) then wish to ask the City Council to reject the recommendation of the RHPC, they may do so. In such cases, the property owner(s) shall notify in writing the Director of their intent to appeal the recommendation of the RHPC to the City Council upon receipt of that notification, the Director shall submit to the City Council the completed application, plus any additional data considered by the RHPC, together with the vote and the rationale of the RHPC.

The decision of the City Council to grant or deny an historic property the additional designation as a "Rolla Historic Preservation Property" is final.
The decision of the City Council to grant this additional designation will be conveyed to the respective property owner(s), the Planning and Zoning Commission, the RHPC, and the Director.

The property owner (s) may, upon notice to the RHPC, request that the subject property may have its designation as a "Rolla Historic Preservation Property" terminated by City Council. (Ord. 4106)
(Return to Contents) 

Sec. 40-14.  Restriction on Properties Designated as "Rolla Historic Preservation Property".
Property owners who voluntarily seek this designation and who sign the statement/agreement stipulated in Section 40-13, contractually accept all regulations and protections provided in Sections 40-11 through 40-19.

Property owner(s) also acknowledge that these regulations, restrictions, and protections shall apply to the designated property in the future, regardless of the transfer of ownership. Current property owner(s) also agree that, before transferring their property to a new owner, they will notify that subsequent owner, in writing, with a copy sent to the City Clerk, of the property(s) designation as a “Rolla Historic Preservation Property” and shall provide the new owner with a copy of the current historic preservation ordinance, a copy of which may be obtained from the City Clerk.

Restrictions on properties designated as a “Rolla Historic Preservation Property” may be removed or modified only by action of the City Council. (Ord. 4106)
(Return to Contents)


Sec. 40-15.  Financial Incentive to Foster Historic Preservation.
Should the City Council establish financial incentives to foster historic preservation, excluding recognition by means of letters, certificates, plaques, or markers, only those properties designated as a “Rolla Historic Preservation Property” shall be eligible. (Ord. 4106)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 40-16.  Design Guidelines.
The following design guidelines shall apply to any alteration, demolition, or new construction to properties designated by the City Council, following the process outlined in this Article, as a Rolla Historic Preservation Property", so that properties will be compatible with their original style and character as well as to surrounding historic structures:

Height: The height of any proposed alteration or construction should be compatible.
Doors and windows proportions: The proportions and relationships between doors and windows should be compatible.
Relationship between building masses and spaces: The relationship of a structure within a historic district to the open space between it and adjoining structures should be compatible.
Roof type and material: The design of the roof should be compatible in terms of type and materials used.
Building scale: The scale of the building after alteration, construction, or partial demolition should be compatible.
Building facades: Facades in historic areas should blend with other structures – and should not be significantly higher or wider.
Architectural details:
Architectural details and materials should be treated so as to make an historic property compatible with its original design or its predominant architectural style.
The removal of historic materials or alteration of features and spaces that characterize a property should be avoided.
Changes that create a false sense of historic architecture should not be undertaken. Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired historic significance in their own right may be retained and preserved or the property may be restored to its original period.
Deteriorated historic features should be repaired rather than replaced. When replacement is required, the new feature shall match the old design and, where economically feasible, materials.
Chemical or physical treatments for surface cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means possible. Sandblasting is not recommended.
Archaeological resources: Significant archaeological resources affected by a project should be protected and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures should be undertaken.
Signage: The character of signs should be in compliance with City regulations and in keeping with historic or architectural character of the individual property and the surrounding district. The RHPC shall recommend approval or denial prior to any installation assuming the sign code is met.
Minimum maintenance: The minimum maintenance standards shall be those outlined in the Property Maintenance Code adopted and updated by the City Council.
Ordinary maintenance: Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior element of any building or structure. Ordinary maintenance is defined as work, for which a building permit is not required, where the purpose and effect of such work is to correct any deterioration or decay of or damage to a structure and to restore the same to its condition prior to the occurrence of such deterioration, decay, or damage.
Exclusion: This article shall not be construed to prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration, or demolition of any such elements, which the authorized municipal officers shall consider as necessary for the health, safety, or community welfare. (Ord. 4106)
(Return to Contents)


Sec. 40-17.  Historic property construction permits.
The guidelines for the issuance of an historic property construction permit are:

An historic property construction permit will be required for any construction, structural alteration, removal, or demolition effecting the exterior of a "Rolla Historic Preservation Property", in whole or in part, and requiring a City building permit.
In addition to exterior work, an historic property construction permit will be required for other work, which includes, but is not limited to, the addition, alteration, or removal of architectural or decorative details as well as signage.
 A construction permit involving historic properties will not be required for ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior element of any building or structure. Ordinary maintenance is defined in Section 40-16 (11).
An historic property construction permit will not be required for:
 Landscaping;
 Paint color;
 Mailboxes;
 Light fixtures;
 Sculpture:
 Unenclosed patios;
 Gazebos under 100 square feet in area;
 Arbors;
 Pergolas.
 (Ord. 4106)

(Return to Contents)


Sec. 40-18.  Application for an historic property construction permit.
When an historic property permit is required, the applicant shall:

Contact the Director and/or the Codes Administrator to discuss the work and to determine the need for an historic property construction permit and/or a building permit.
If an historic property construction permit is needed, the application should be made to the Community Development Department. The Director shall forward the completed permit application, along with current photograph of the property, to the RHPC. Applicants may also be required to submit plans or other detailed information as may be required for review as a historic property.
Make every effort to attend the RHPC meeting during which the application is reviewed. (Ord. 4106)
(Return to Contents)


Sec. 40-19.  Application review.
When a completed application for an historic property construction permit has been submitted to the RHPC, the commission shall:

Add the application to the next regular meeting for review. The commission may call a special meeting to review routine applications when delay might become an unnecessary inconvenience to the applicant. 
Review of all applications will be completed within 15 days. If the commission cannot meet the time frame specified for lack of a quorum, and the applicant desires a decision, the Chairman of the RHPC shall have the authority to recommend the approval or denial of the permit.
The review period may be extended an additional 15 days if more information is required before a vote can occur.
Upon recommendation of approval by the commission, the Codes Administrator shall issue the permit.
Any recommendation of denial shall be accompanied by a statement of the reasons for that recommendation. The RHPC shall also include recommendations, which would cause the commission to reconsider its recommendation. The RHPC Chairman, the Codes Administrator, and Director, shall meet with the applicant as soon as possible, to resolve the differences. The applicant may submit a petition for a variance to the Board of Adjustment if an appeal is desired. In this case, the provisions of Chapter 42 pertaining to variances shall be followed. The applicant may amend the application at any time during the review process or reapply at a later date.
If the RHPC fails to recommend approval or denial of the application within 30 days of its submission, the application will be automatically approved.
Once an historic property construction permit has been issued any minor changes, as determined by the Director, may be approved without the submission of a new application. All major changes must be reviewed by the RHPC. (Ord. 4106)
(Return to Contents)


Sec. 40-20.  Stop work order.
When the Codes Administrator has reason to believe that an action for which an historic property construction permit is required has been initiated, or is about to be initiated, he shall make every effort to contact the property owner, occupant, contractor, or subcontractor and inform them of the necessity of submitting an application for an historic property construction permit. If the Codes Administrator determines it is a necessity to issue a stop work order, he shall make every attempt to serve the same on the property owner, occupant, contractor, or subcontractor in person and by certified mail. (Ord. 4106)

(Return to Contents)


Sec. 40-21.  Fees and penalties.
Fees shall coincide with existing permit applications. Penalties shall be those set out under the existing penalty provisions in the Code as adopted by City Council. (Ord. 4106)

(Return to Contents)

Chapter 41 - Weapons
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Chapter


Chapter Contents:
Article I - In General
§ 41-1. Discharging firearms - Prohibited.
§ 41-2. Concealed weapons - Carrying, etc., prohibited.
§ 41-3. Same - Sale to minors prohibited; exception.
§ 41-4. Same - Exception for certain officers, etc.
§ 41-5. Discharge of air rifles, etc., prohibited.
§ 41-6. Discharge of bows and arrows and crossbows prohibited within the City Limits of Rolla, Missouri; exceptions.
§§ 41-7 to 41-10. Reserved.

Sec. 41-1. Discharging firearms - Prohibited.
No person shall fire any gun, pistol, revolver or other firearm or air rifle within the City of Rolla, Missouri except as hereinafter provided.

The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the firing of firearms within the bounds of gun clubs, skeet shoots or target ranges as authorized by the chief of police under the permit obtained in accordance with this Section.

The chief of police is hereby authorized to issue permits for special one day shooting events to be held at such places as, in the opinion of the chief of police, shall provide maximum safety for all persons concerned, and under the direct supervision and control of such persons as the chief of police shall deem competent for such purposes.

Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the use of firearms for hunting purposes in such areas where hunting is permitted by law. (Ord. 2021, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 41-2. Concealed weapons - Carrying, etc., prohibited.
(a) No person shall knowingly carry concealed on or about his person, any firearm, knife, blackjack or other weapon readily capable of lethal use provided, however, that legally-qualified sheriffs, police officers, and other law enforcement officers, persons whose bona fide duty is to execute process, civil or criminal, make arrests, or aid in conserving the public peace may carry concealed weapons in the performance of their duties; persons traveling in a continuous journey peaceably through the city may carry a weapon in their automobile as well as instructors or students of the martial arts traveling to or from classes of instruction, or demonstration, so long as the travel to or from the classes of instruction or demonstration are that of a continuous trip peacefully through the city, nor shall this Section apply to any person who has a valid concealed carry endorsement issued pursuant to Sections 571.101 to 571.121, Revised Statutes of Missouri, or a valid permit or endorsement to carry concealed firearms issued by another state or political subdivision of another state.

(b) No person shall possess or discharge any firearm while intoxicated, nor shall any person carry a firearm or other weapon readily capable of lethal use in any church or any school building or in any school grounds or to any election precinct or in any agency of the federal, state or local government, or to any public assemblage of any persons for any lawful purpose except a legally qualified sheriff, police officer or other law enforcement officer in the performance of their duty.

(c) For the purpose of this Section, the term "firearm" means any weapon that is designed or adapted to expel or eject a projectile by the action of an explosive.

(d) For the purpose of this Section, "knife" means any dagger, dirk, stiletto, butterfly knife, throwing darts, knuckle knife or bladed hand instrument that is readily capable of inflicting serious physical injury or death by cutting or stabbing a person. For the purpose of this Section, "knife" does not include any ordinary pocket knife with a blade less than three and one-half (3 ½) inches in length. (Ord. 51, 58; Ord. 1754, §1; Ord. 2454, §1; Ord. 2484, §1; Ord. 3788, §2)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 41-3. Same - Sale to minors prohibited; exception.
No person shall directly or indirectly sell, deliver, loan or barter to any minor any weapon of the type described in Section 41-2 without the written consent, or in the presence of, the parent or guardian of such minor. (Ord. 51, §8.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 41-4. Same - Exception for certain officers, etc.
Sections 41-2 and 41-3 shall not apply to officers of the United States, state, county, or police officers, nor to soldiers of the United States. (Ord. 51, §9.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 41-5. Discharge of air rifles, etc., prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge an air rifle or BB gun within the city. (Ord. 867, §1.)

(Return to Contents)



Sec. 41-6. Discharge of bows and arrows and crossbows prohibited within the City Limits of Rolla, Missouri; exceptions.
(a) Definitions:

Bow and arrows shall mean a bow and arrow combination that requires completely manual operation without any means to cock the weapon. This definition excludes bow and arrow combinations considered as toys and intended to release arrows incapable of penetrating a target or other surface.

Crossbow shall mean a traditional crossbow utilizing a mechanism wherein the weapon can be cocked and left in a stable state until it is subsequently released or fired at a later time via a trigger mechanism.

(b) It shall be unlawful for any person within the City Limits to discharge any bow and arrow or crossbow unless that person complies with the following regulations and in either subsections 41-6 (c) and 41-6(d).

(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any type of bow and arrow or crossbow within Rolla's City Limits in a manner that endangers persons or property.

(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any type of bow and arrow or crossbow in such a manner that causes the arrow or bolt to land on any property other than the property on which the arrow or bolt was discharged, unless written permission is granted by the impacted property owner(s).

(3) It shall be unlawful to use and/or discharge any type of bow and arrow or crossbow on public property unless authorized by the City Council.

(c) The use of any type of bow and the discharge of target arrows is permitted within Rolla's City Limits for the purpose of target shooting. Any person who participates in target shooting pursuant to this subsection shall abide by subsection 41-6 (b) and the following rules:

(1) It shall be unlawful for any person fifteen (15) years of age or younger to participate in target shooting unless under the supervision of a parent or legal guardian.

(2) It shall be unlawful for any person who participates in target shooting pursuant to this subsection to discharge a broadhead or any type of hunting arrow.

(d) The use of longbow, recurve and/or compound bows, or crossbows, and the discharge of broadhead or other hunting arrows or bolts is permitted within Rolla's City Limits for the purpose of taking game as regulated by the Missouri Department of Conservation and with the written permission of the property owner. Hunting using bows and arrows or crossbows shall only be permitted on land zoned "R-R" (Rural Residential) pursuant to Chapter 42, Article III, Zoning, and subject to the provisions of subsection 41-6 (b). (Ord. 3387, §1)

(Return to Contents)



Secs. 41-7 to 41-10. Reserved.

Chapter 42 - Planning & Zoning: Article I - Planning & Zoning Commission
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Article



Chapter Contents:
§ 42-1. Established; appointment; duties.
§ 42-2. Recommendations as to district boundaries.
§ 42-3. Composition; qualifications and appointment of members.
§ 42-4. Commission officers; rules, records.
§ 42-5. Comprehensive plan.
§ 42-6. Preparation of comprehensive plan.
§ 42-7. Commission procedure prior to adoption of the plan.
§ 42-8. Recommendations; powers.
§ 42-9. Approval of improvements.
§ 42-10. Annexation.
§ 42-11. Regulations governing subdivision of land, contents - Public hearing.
§ 42-12. Commission to approve plats, when - Effects.
§ 42-13. Approval of plats required for recording.
§ 42-14. Use of unapproved plat in sale of land - Penalty - Vacation or injunction of transfer.
§ 42-15. Public improvements, how approved after adoption of Major Thoroughfare Plan.
§ 42-16. No building permitted on streets not conforming to major street plan.
§ 42-17. Limitations on Rezoning Requests.
§ 42-18. Development Review Committee.
§ 42-19. Adopting the Rolla 2020 Comprehensive Plan Update, 2005.
§ 42-20. Adopting an amended Major Thoroughfare Plan in the Rolla 2020 Comprehensive Plan Update 2005.
§ 42-21. Adopting the Rolla West Master Plan as an amendment to the Rolla 2020 Comprehensive Plan Update, 2006.


Article I - Planning & Zoning Commission
Sec. 42-1. Established; appointment; duties.
There is hereby established a planning and zoning commission for the city as provided by Section 89.010 to 89.140, Revised Statutes of Missouri.

The commission shall consist of members appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council and such other members as may be provided by city ordinance.

The city council may request and shall receive from the commission recommendations on specific problems or questions concerning planning and zoning within a reasonable period of time. (Ord. 2122-A, § 1, 12-11-78)



Sec. 42-2. Recommendation as to district boundaries.
It shall be the duty of the commission to recommend the boundaries of the various original districts and appropriate regulations to be enforced therein. It shall be the duty of the commission to study and investigate all proposed changes or amendments to the basic zoning ordinance of the city council as provided herein.

The commission shall make a preliminary report and hold a public hearing when necessary before submitting its final report and the city council shall not hold its public hearing or take action until it has received the final report of the commission. (Ord. 2122-A, § 1. 12-11-78)



Sec. 42-3. Composition; qualifications and appointment of members.
The commission shall consist of nine members. Eight of such members shall be citizens and residents of the city and shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. One councilman shall be appointed annually to the commission. The Mayor shall serve as an ex-officio member of the commission with no voting authority. All members of the commission shall serve without compensation. The term of each of the citizen members shall be for four years. Any vacancy in a membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by appointment as aforesaid.

The council may remove any member for cause stated in writing and after a public hearing. Such removal shall require approval by a majority of all members elected to the city council. (Ord. 2122-A, § 1; Ord. 2224, § 1; Ord. 3374, §1)



Sec. 42-4. Commission officers; rules, records.
The commission shall elect a chairman, vice-chairman, and secretary- treasurer from among the appointed members of the commission. The terms of each officer shall be one year with eligibility for re-election.

The chairman shall have no vote, unless there is a tie vote on any matter considered by the commission.

The mayor and city engineer shall not be voting members, and shall not be counted in the number of members to constitute a quorum. A quorum shall require five members of the commission. All motions or questions being voted upon by the commission shall require an affirmative vote by a majority of the voting members present. Members may abstain from voting by casting their vote as "present" and that said vote shall not be tallied as a negative or an affirmative vote.

The commission shall hold regular meetings and special meetings as it may provide by rule and shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and keep a record of its proceedings. These records shall be open to the public for inspection.

The commission shall appoint the employees and staff necessary for its work, and may contract with city planners and other professional persons for the services it requires.

The expenditures of the commission, exclusive of grants and gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for such purpose by the council.

The commission may appoint committees or subcommittees for study and recommendations to be presented to the commission.

The commission shall adopt a budget for each fiscal year as approved by the council. (Ord. 2122-A, § 1, 12-11-78)



Sec. 42-5. Comprehensive plan.
The commission shall assist the council in making and adopting a comprehensive plan for the physical development of the city.

The comprehensive plan, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts and descriptive and explanatory materials, shall show the commission's recommendations for the physical development of the city and may include, among other things, the general location, character and extent of streets and other public ways, grounds, places and spaces; the general location and extent of public utilities and terminals, whether publicly or privately owned, the acceptance, widening, removal, extension, relocation, narrowing, vacation,abandonment, or change of use of any of the foregoing; the general character, extent and layout of the replanning of blighted districts and slum areas. The commission may also prepare such comprehensive plan to show regulation of height, area, bulk, location and use of private, non-profit and public structures and premises, and of population density, but the adoption, enforcement, and administration of the zoning plans contained in the comprehensive plan shall conform to the provisions of Sections 89.010 to 89.140 of the Revised Statutes of Missouri and the ordinances of the city. (Ord. 2122-A, § 1, 12-11-78)



Sec. 42-6. Preparation of comprehensive plan.
In the preparation of the comprehensive plan for the city, the commission shall make careful and comprehensive studies and surveys of the existing conditions and probable future growth of the city. The plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated development of the city which will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote the general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy of the city in the process of development. The commission shall be responsible for the periodic review of the comprehensive plan. (Ord. 2122-A, § 1, 12-11-78)



Sec. 42-7. Commission procedure prior to adoption of the plan.
Prior to the adoption of the comprehensive plan by the city council, the commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon. The commission shall hold such public hearing prior to any amendment or extension of such plan as adopted by the council. Notice of such public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least fifteen (15) days in advance. Such notice shall indicate the time, place, and date of such hearing. The hearing may be adjourned from time to time. The adoption of the plan by the commission requires a majority vote of the full membership of the commission. The resolution shall refer expressly to the maps, descriptive matter, and other matters intended by the commission to form the whole or part of the plan and the action taken shall be recorded on the adopted plan or part thereof by the identifying signature of the secretary and chairman of the commission, identified properly by file number, and a copy of the plan or part thereof shall be certified to the council and municipal clerk. A copy of the plan shall be made available in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds and the Municipal Clerk. (Ord. 2122-A, §1; Ord. 3732, §1)



Sec. 42-8. Recommendations; powers.
In general, the commission shall have the power necessary to enable it to perform its functions and promote municipal planning.

The commission may make reports and recommendations relating to the comprehensive plan of the city and the development of the city to public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, and other organizations and citizens.

It may recommend to the executive or legislative officials of the city such programs for public improvements and the financing thereof as it deems appropriate.

All public officials shall, upon request, furnish to the commission, within a reasonable time, all available information it requires for its work.

The commission, its members and employees, in the performance of its functions, may enter upon any land to make examinations and surveys with permission of owner/occupant.

The commission shall have and perform all of the functions of the zoning commissions as provided for in Sections 89.010 to 89.140 of the Revised Statutes of Missouri. (Ord. 2122-A, §1, 12-11-78)



Sec. 42-9. Approval of improvements.
The city of Rolla Council has adopted a comprehensive plan of the City of Rolla, therefor, no street or other public facilities, and no public utility, whether publicly or privately owned, and the location, extent, and character thereof having been included in the comprehensive plan, shall be constructed or authorized in the city until the location, extent, and character thereof has been submitted to and approved by the commission.  In case of disapproval, the commission shall communicate the reasons for such disapproval to council.  The council may overrule the action of the commission by a vote of not less than two-thirds of the elected members of the council.  Upon the overruling, the council or the appropriate board or officer may proceed, except that if the public facility or utility is one the authorization or financing of which does not fall within the province of the council, then the submission to the commission shall be by the board having jurisdiction, and the planning and zoning commission's disapproval may be overruled by that board by a vote of not less than a two-thirds vote of its entire membership.  The acceptance, widening, removal, extension, relocation, narrowing, vacation, abandonment, change of use; acquisition of land for sale or lease of any street or other public facility is subject to similar submission and approval, and the failure to approve may be similarly overruled.   The failure of the commission to act within sixty days after the date of official submission to it shall be deemed approval.  (Ord. 4157 §1)



Sec. 42-10. Annexation.
All annexation proposals shall first be submitted to the commission for its study and report to the council. Such report shall consist of recommendations concerning the needs of the municipality for such annexation and the ability of the city to provide normal municipal services to such area within a reasonable time. The commission shall make such report to the council within a reasonable time after receiving such proposal. Nothing herein shall prevent the council from acting upon such proposals either with or without the recommendations of the commission. (Ord. 2122-A, §1, 12-11-78)



Sec. 42-11. Regulations governing subdivision of land, contents - Public hearing.
The planning and zoning commission shall recommend and the council may by ordinance adopt regulations governing the subdivision of land within its jurisdiction. The regulations, in addition to the requirements provided by law for the approval of plats may provide requirements for the coordinated development of the municipality; for the coordination of streets within subdivisions with other existing or planned streets or with other features of the city plan or official map of the municipality; for adequate open spaces for traffic, recreation, light, and air; and for a distribution of population and traffic.

The regulations may include requirements as to the extent and the manner in which the streets of the subdivision or any designated portions thereto shall be graded and improved as well as including requirements as to the extent and manner of the installation of all utility facilities, and compliance with all of these requirements is a condition precedent to the approval of the plat. No plat of a subdivision of land lying within the municipality shall be filed or recorded until it has been submitted to and a report and recommendation thereon made by the commission to the city council and the council has approved the plat as provided by law. The regulations or practices of the council may provide for the tentative approval of the plat previous to the improvements and installations; but any tentative approval shall not be entered on the plat. The regulations may provide that, in lieu of the completions of the work and installations previous to the final approval of a plat, the council may accept a bond in the amount and with surety and conditions satisfactory to it, providing for and securing the actual construction and installation of the improvements and utilities within a period specified by the council and expressed in the bond; and the council may enforce the bond by all appropriate legal and equitable remedies. The regulations may provide, in lieu of the completion of the work and installation previous to the final approval of a plat, for an assessment or other method whereby the council is put in an assured position to do the work and make the installations at the cost of the owners of the property within the subdivision. The regulations may provide for the dedication, reservation or acquisition of lands and open spaces necessary for public uses indicated on the city plan and for appropriate means of providing for the compensation, including reasonable charges against the subdivision, if any, and over a period of time and in a manner as is in the public interest.

Before adoption of its subdivision regulations or any amendment thereof, a duly advertised public hearing shall be held by the commission and the council. (Ord. 2122-A, §1, 12-11-78)



Sec. 42-12. Commission to approve plats, when - Effects.
Within sixty (60) days after the submission of a plat to the commission, the commission shall approve or disapprove the plat; otherwise the plat is deemed approved by the commission, except that the commission, with the consent of the applicant for the approval, may extend the sixty (60) day period. The ground of disapproval of any plat by the commission shall be made a matter of record.

The approval of a plat by the commission does not constitute or effect an acceptance by the municipality or public of the dedication to public use of any street or other ground shown upon the plat. (Ord. 2122-A, §1, 12-11-78)



Sec. 42-13. Approval of plats required for recording.
No county recorder shall receive for filing or recording any subdivision plat required to be approved by a city council or planning and zoning commission unless the plat has endorsed upon it the approval of the city council under the hand of the clerk and the seal of the city, or by the secretary of the commission. (Ord. 2122-A, §1, 12-11-78)



Sec. 42-14. Use of unapproved plat in sale of land - Penalty - Vacation or injunction of transfer.
No owners, or agent of the owner, of any land located within the platting jurisdiction of the city, knowingly or with intent to defraud; may transfer, sell, agree to sell, or negotiate to sell that land by reference to or by other use of a plat of any purported subdivision of the land before the plat has been approved by the council or the commission and recorded in the office of the appropriate county recorder. Any person violating the provisions of this Section shall forfeit and pay to the municipality a penalty not to exceed three hundred dollars for each lot transferred or sold or agreed or negotiated to be sold, and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other documents used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from this penalty. A municipality may enjoin or vacate the transfer or sale or agreement by legal action and may recover the penalty in such action. (Ord. 2122-A, §1, 12-11-78)



Sec. 42-15. Public improvements, how approved after adoption of Major Thoroughfare Plan.
Upon the adoption of a major thoroughfare plan, the City shall not accept, lay out, open, improve, grade, pave or light any street, lay or authorize the laying of water mains, sewers, connections or other utilities in any street right-of-way within the City unless the street has received the legal status of a public street prior to the adoption of the Comprehensive Plan; or unless the street corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on a subdivision plat approved by the City Council or the Planning and Zoning Commission or if the street is shown on a street plan made and adopted by the Commission. The Council may locate and construct or may accept any street if the ordinance or other measure for determining street location, construction, or for the acceptance of a street is first submitted to the Commission for its approval. If disapproved by the Commission, the City Council may override the Commission with a two-thirds majority vote of the entire membership of the Council. (Ord. 2122-A, §1; Ord. 3128, §1; Ord. 3732, §3)



Sec. 42-16. No building permitted on streets not conforming to major street plan.
After the adoption of a major street plan, no building permit shall be issued for and no building shall be erected on any lot within the territorial jurisdiction of the commission unless the street giving access to the lot upon which the building is proposed to be placed conforms to the requirements of Section 42-15. (Ord. 2122-A, §1, 12-11-78)



Sec. 42-17. Limitations on Rezoning Requests.
(Ord. 2841, §1; Ord. 3171, §1) (Repealed by Ord. 3890, §1)



Sec. 42-18. Development Review Committee.
Establishment: There is hereby established a Development Review Committee.

Intent: It is the intent of this section to establish a method and procedure to facilitate and coordinate decision-making concerning land development and the enforcement of Chapter 42, Planning and Zoning Code.

Membership: The Development Review Committee shall consist of the following individuals or their authorized representative:

The Community Development Director;
The Codes Administrator;
The Director of Public Works;
The City Engineer;
General Manager – Rolla Municipal Utilities;
The Parks Department Director.

Additional ex-officio representatives may be added, including other City officials, public/private utilities, City departments, agencies, boards and commissions.
Function: the Development Review Committee may:

Act in an advisory capacity to the Mayor, City Council, City Administrator, and the city’s boards and commissions on matters relating to the Planning and Zoning Code and related development issues.
Review subdivision plats and rezoning applications prior to their review by the Planning and Zoning Commission, providing guidance and recommending conditions necessary to achieve the intent of these regulations.
Conduct factual investigations, as deemed appropriate by the Mayor and/or City Council, or the City Administrator, regarding matters relating to land development practice and the application of the Planning and Zoning Code.
Conduct informal hearings or meetings for the purpose of obtaining factual information and expert opinion regarding the interpretation of the Planning and Zoning Code prior to any appeals to the Board of Adjustment or the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Committee Not to Supplant Authority of Administrative Official: Nothing in this section shall be construed to supplant, modify, or limit authority expressly granted to administrative officials. Neither shall the Committee serve in any appeals capacity. (Ord. 3732, §2)



Sec. 42-19. Adopting the Rolla 2020 Comprehensive Plan Update, 2005.
That the Rolla 2020 Comprehensive Plan Update, 2005, is hereby adopted in its entirety, as required by Section 42-7 of the Rolla City Code, and attached hereto as EXHIBIT A and incorporated herein by reference thereto.

That by enacting the Rolla 2020 Comprehensive Plan Update, 2005 for the physical development of the City, the 1996 Comprehensive Plan is hereby amended. A copy of said Rolla 2020 Comprehensive Plan Update, 2005 is on file in the office of the City Clerk, City Hall, Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 3717, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-20. Adopting an amended Major Thoroughfare Plan in the Rolla 2020 Comprehensive Plan Update 2005.
That the amended Major Thoroughfare Plan is hereby adopted and shall be included as part of the Rolla 2020 Comprehensive Plan Update, 2005 as required by Section 42-7 of the Rolla City Code, and attached hereto as EXHIBIT A and incorporated herein by reference thereto.

That by adopting the amendments to the Major Thoroughfare Plan as a part of the Rolla 2020 Comprehensive Plan Update, 2005 for the physical development of the City, a copy of said Rolla 2020 Comprehensive Plan Update, 2005 shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk, City Hall, Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 3845, §§1-2



Sec 42-21. Adopting the Rolla West Master Plan as an amendment to the Rolla 2020 Comprehensive Plan Update, 2006.
That the Rolla West Master Plan is hereby adopted as an amendment to the Rolla 2020 Comprehensive Plan Update, 2006 in its entirety, as required by Section 42-7 of the Rolla City Code, and attached hereto as Exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference thereto.

That by enacting this ordinance the Rolla 2020 Comprehensive Plan Update, 2006 for the physical development of the City is hereby amended. A copy of said Rolla West Master Plan adopted as an amendment to the Rolla 2020 Comprehensive Plan Update, 2006 is on file in the office of the City Clerk, City Hall, Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 3894, §§1-2)

Chapter 42 - Planning & Zoning: Article II - Subdivisions
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page | Next Article


Division 1. General Provisions
§ 42-22 Interpretation and Purpose
§ 42-22.1 Authority and Scope.
§ 42-22.2 Conditions.
§ 42-23 Application of Regulations and Enforcement.
§ 42-24 Variances.
§ 42-24.1 Conditions of Variance Approval.
§ 42-24.2 Authority to Grant Variances.
§ 42-24.3 Variance Procedure.
§ 42-24.4 Granting a variance to Sec. 42-24 relating to sidewalks and streets. (Scott Family Investments, LLC.)
§ 42-25. Subdivision Application Procedure and Approval Process.
§ 42-25.1 Procedure for Minor Subdivision Approval.
§ 42-25.2 Procedure for Major Subdivision Approval.
§ 42-25.3 Phasing of Major Subdivision Plats Permitted.
§ 42-25.4 Resubdivision of Minor or Major Subdivisions.
§ 42-25.5 Cluster Subdivisions.
§ 42-26. Requirements for Improvements, Reservation and Design.
§ 42-26.1 Subdivision Name.
§ 42-26.2 Streets.
§ 42-26.3 Alleys.
§ 42-26.4 Utility Easements.
§ 42-26.5 Blocks.
§ 42-26.6 Lots.
§ 42-27 Deeding of Public Parks; Alternative Payment in Lieu of Parkland Deeding.
§ 42-28 Flood Areas.
§ 42-29 Subdivision Improvements.
§ 42-30 Subdivision Improvement Guarantees.
§ 42-30.1 Release or Reduction of Security.
§ 42-31 Access Criteria for Major Streets.
§ 42-32 Specifications for Documents to be Submitted.
§ 42-32.1 Sketch Plats.
§ 42-32.2 Preliminary Plats.
§ 42-32.3 Final Plats.
§ 42-33 Definitions.
§§ 42-34 - 42-44. Reserved.


Division 1A - Closed Streets
§ 42-45 Closing of the First and State Streets Bridge.
§§ 42-46 to 42-48 Reserved.


Division 2 - Acceptance of Plats
§ 42-49 Forum Commercial Resubdivision in the Forum Addition.
§ 42-50 Sylvan Hills Subdivision One.
§ 42-51 Eastmeadow Addition.
§ 42-52 Presbyterian Manor Tract.
§ 42-53 Forum Lakes Subdivision.
§ 42-54 Brookridge Estate Addition, Tract No. 3.
§ 42-55 Ponzer Addition.
§ 42-56 Plat of Fox Creek.
§ 42-57 The Plat of Vienna Woods.
§ 42-58 Ledgerwood Estates.
§ 42-59 Pershing Village - Plat No. 1.
§ 42-60 Poe Subdivision.
§ 42-61 Harvest Fields Subdivision.
§ 42-62 Harvest Fields Resubdivision.
§ 42-63 Fox Creek Resubdivision.
§ 42-64 Oak Knoll Estates Subdivision.
§ 42-65 Newcastle Place Subdivision.
§ 42-66 Steeplechase Hill Resubdivision.
§ 42-67 Ponzer Second Addition Subdivision.
§ 42-68 Woodcrest Estates Resubdivision.
§ 42-69 Brookridge Estates Resubdivision.
§ 42-70 Eastmeadow, Tract A, Resubdivision.
§ 42-71 Forum Lakes, Tract No. 2, Resubdivision.
§ 42-72 Cowan's Addition, Lots 5 and 6, Block 6, Resubdivision.
§ 42-73 Hess Addition, Lot 24, Resubdivision.
§ 42-74 Lakeview Resubdivision.
§ 42-75 Forum Lakes, Tract No. 10, Resubdivision.
§ 42-76 Contel Subdivision.
§ 42-77 Forum Commercial Resubdivision, Lot "F", Resubdivision.
§ 42-78 East Meadow, Tract B, Resubdivision.
§ 42-79 Woodcrest Estates, Lots 21 thru 42, Lots 61 thru 80, Lot 87, Resubdivision.
§ 42-80 Dogwood Trail No. 1.
§ 42-81 Bishop's Subdivision, Block 91, Resubdivision.
§ 42-82 Rolla Park No. 2 - Resubdivision of Lot 47, a resubdivision of Lots 39-47.
§ 42-83 Stone Ridge Estates - Resubdivision of Brookridge Estates Tract 3, Lots 1-43.
§ 42-84 Ramsey Place Plat No. 1.
§ 42-85 Forum Lakes, Tract 9, Resubdivision.
§ 42-86 Ponzer Third Addition Subdivision.
§ 42-87 Newcastle Place, Plat 1, Resubdivision.
§ 42-88 Cowans Addition - Resubdivision of Lots 19 and 20, Block 12.
§ 42-89 Forum Lakes Addition - Resubdivision of Tracts 1 and 4.
§ 42-90 Maggi Place Addition.
§ 42-91 Ramsey Place Plat No. 2.
§ 42-92 10th Street Medical Center Subdivision.
§ 42-93 Old Towne Place.
§ 42-94 Eastmeadow - Resubdivision of Tract "A-4" of the Resubdivision of Tract "A" of Eastmeadow.
§ 42-95 Chasteen Subdivision.
§ 42-96 Franklin-Schweiss Addition.
§ 42-97 Southview and Winchester Drives.
§ 42-98 Scottsvale Subdivision.
§ 42-99 Lots 16, 17, 18, 23 and 24 of Maggi Place.
§ 42-100 Huntington Estates No. 1, a resubdivision of Brookridge Estates No. 2.
§ 42-101 A portion of Tract 12, Forum Lakes.
§ 42-102 A portion of Tract 5, Forum Lakes.
§ 42-103 Huntington Estates No. 2, a resubdivision of Brookridge Estates No. 2.
§ 42-103.1 Tract 7 Forum Lakes, a Resubdivision of Tract 7 Forum Lakes.
§ 42-103.2 Tract No. 1 Silverleaf Subdivision, a Resubdivision of Ramsey Place.
§ 42-103.3 Approving the plat of Richfountain Place.
§ 42-103.4 Approving the plat of the Division of Tract "B" of resubdivision of Lots 16, 17, 18 Maggi Place Subdivision.
§ 42-103.5 Approving the plat of the resubdivision of a part of Tract 1 of Heritage Heights.
§ 42-103.6 Approving the plat of the resubdivision of a portion of Tract 12, Forum Lakes.
§ 42-103.7 Approving the plat of the resubdivision of a portion of Lots 82 and 83, Railroad Addition.
§ 42-103.8 Approving the plat of the Wal-Mart Supercenter Plaza.
§ 42-103.9 Approving the plat of Lots G & H (now called I & J), of the resubdivision of Lot 1 of the resubdivision of a portion of Tract 12, Forum Lakes Addition.
§ 42-103.10 Approving the plat of the Resubdivision of Tract B-2 of the Resubdivision of Tract B of the Resubdivision of Lots 16, 17, 18, 23 and 24 of Maggi Place.
§ 42-103.11 Approving the plat of the Resubdivision of Holloways First Addition, Second Plat.
§ 42-103.12 Approving the plat of the Resubdivision of Tract 3 Forum Lakes Subdivision.
§ 42-103.13 Approving the plat of the Resubdivision of Tract A, Maggi Place.
§ 42-103.14 Approving the plat of the Resubdivision of Tract 11 of Forum Lakes Subdivision
§ 42-103.15 Approving the plat of the Rolla Recycling Center Subdivision.
§ 42-103.16 Approving the plat of the Mossman Subdivision.
§ 42-103.17 Approving the plat of the Deer Crossing Subdivision.
§ 42-103.18 Approving the plat of the resubdivision of Scottsvale Subdivision.
§ 42-103.19 Approving the plat of the Hutchinson Subdivision No. 2.
§ 42-103.20 Approving the plat of the resubdivision of Tracts "B-2", "B-3" & "B-4" of the resubdivision of Tract B of the Eastmeadow Subdivision.
§ 42-103.21 Approving the final plat of the Paul Lewis Subdivision First Plat.
§ 42-103.22 Approving the final plat of the Hy Point Industrial Park South Subdivision.
§ 42-103.23 Approving the final plat of the Second Fire Station Plat No. 1 Subdivision.
§ 42-103.24 Approving the final plat of the VBC, Inc. Subdivision.
§ 42-103.25 Approving the amended plat of the resubdivision of Scottsvale Subdivision.
§ 42-103.26 Approving the plat of the Walmart Supercenter Plaza II Resubdivision.
§ 42-103.27 Approving the plat of the LDS Subdivision.
§ 42-103.28 Approving the plat of the Ashley Hill Subdivision.
§ 42-103.29 Approving the plat of the English Hills Resubdivision of the Chasteen Subdivision, a subdivision in the City of Rolla, Missouri.
§ 42-103.30 Approving the plat of the Dishman Subdivision, a resubdivision of Lots 1, 4, 5 and 8 of Block 64 of the County Addition in the City of Rolla, Missouri.
§ 42-103.31 Approving the plat of the resubdivision of Lots 12, 15-19 of the Scottsvale Subdivision, a subdivision in the City of Rolla, Missouri.
§ 42-103.32 Approving the plat of the resubdivision of part of Tracts 2 and 3 of the Heritage Heights Addition, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri.
§ 42-103.33 Approving the plat of the Marty Brown Subdivision, a subdivision in the City of Rolla, Missouri.
§ 42-103.34 Approving the plat of the M & M Subdivision, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri.
§ 42-103.35 Approving the plat of the Newcastle Place Plat No. 2 Subdivision, Phase 1, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri.
§ 42-103.36 Approving the plat of the Vienna Oaks Subdivision, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri.
§ 42-103.37 Approving the plat of the Chrysler Addition, a resubdivision of part of Lots 68 and 77 of the Railroad Addition, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri.
§ 42-103.38 Approving the plat of the Ponzer Fourth Addition, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri.
§ 42-103.39 Approving the plat of the Dogwood Trail No. 2 Subdivision, a resubdivision of Lot 1 of Dogwood Trail No. 1 subdivision.
§ 42-103.40 Approving the plat of the Raymond Bartle Subdivision.
§ 42-103.41 Approving the plat of the Newcastle Place Plat No. 3 Subdivision.
§ 42-103.42 Approving the replat of Lot 56 of the Ponzer Second Addition.
§ 42-103.43 Approving the plat of the Payne Subdivision.
§ 42-103.44 Approving the plat of the Frontier Subdivision.
§ 42-103.45 Approving the Poe's Subdivision, a subdivision of Block 9, of a part of James Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri.
§ 42-103.46 Approving the plat of the "Spring Crest" Subdivision.
§ 42-103.47 Approving the resubdivision of Lots C-1 through C-5 of the resubdivision of Tract A, B and C of the Newcastle Place, Plat No. 1.
§ 42-103.48 Approving the plat of Johns Acres Subdivision Plat No. 1.
§ 42-103.49 Approving the Old Power Plant Addition, a resubdivision of part of Block 8, Rolla Mill Addition.
§ 42-103.50 Approving a resubdivision of Lots 58, 59 and 60 of the Forum Subdivision.
§ 42-103.51 Approving the plat of Victoria Hills Subdivision Plat No. 1.
§ 42-103.52 Approving the plat of Westen Ridge Subdivision, a subdivision in Lots 24 and 25 of Railroad Addition.
§ 42-103.53 Approving the plat of Forsyth Addition.
§ 42-103.54 Approving the plat of Ware Addition, a resubdivision of part of Tract No. 4 Heritage Heights Addition.
§ 42-103.55 Approving the plat of Scottsvale Manor, a resubdivision of Lots 25-30 and 38-75 of the amended subdivision plat of Scottsvale Subdivision.
§ 42-103.56 Approving the plat of Carolyn Estates, a subdivision in part of Lot B of a resubdivision of a portion of Tract 7 of Forum Lakes, and a part of Tract 8 of Forum Lakes.
§ 42-103.57 Approving the plat of Richfountain Place Plat No. 2 (Chapman).
§ 42-103.58 Approving Blue's Lake Plat No. 1.
§ 42-103.59 Approving the plat of Rolla Federal Credit Union Subdivision, a resubdivision, in Part of Tract 2 of the Forum, and in the SE 1/4, SEC. 1, T37N, R8W, Rolla.
§ 42-103.60 Approving the plat of Victoria Hills Plat No. 2. (Snelson/Harlan)
§ 42-103.61 Approving the plat of Blue's Lake Parkway, a road in the Southwest Quarter of Section 10 and the Northwest Quarter of Section 15, Township 37 North, Range 8 West. (Dietzmann)
§ 42-103.62 Approving the plat of Habitat for Humanity Addition, a resubdivision of Lots 5 through 8, Block 3 of Hargis Addition, and part of vacated Seventh Street. (Phelps County Habitat for Humanity, Inc.)
§ 42-103.63 Approving the plat of Rhodes Subdivision No. 1. (Vernon E. Rhodes Family)
§ 42-103.64 Approving the plat of Oak Knoll South Plat No. 1 (Morgan).
§ 42-103.65 Approving the plat of Bradford Subdivision, a resubdivision of Lots 1 and 4 of Block 3 of Newmans Addition (Bradford)
§ 42-103.66 Approving the plat of Ryan's Acres, a subdivision in the SW 1/4 SW 1/4, Sec. 10, T37N, R8W Rolla Missouri.
§ 42-103.66.1 Approving the plat of Copperfield Subdivision, a resubdivision of Part of Block 42 of Bishop's Addition, Rolla (Bennish/Vessell).
§ 42-103.66.2 Approving the plat of Oak Knoll South Plat No. 2, a subdivision in the SW 1/4 SE 1/4 Sec 13, T37N, R8W, Rolla (Morgan).
§ 42-103.66.3 Approving the plat of Richfountain Place Plat No. 3, a resubdivision of Lot B of Richfountain Place Plat No. 2 (Chapman).
§ 42-103.66.4 Approving the plat of Hickory Hills Plat No. 2, a resubdivision of Lots 23, 24, 25, 26 and West 1/2 of Lot 27 of Hickory Hills, Rolla (Powell Lumber Co.).
§ 42-103.66.5 Approving the plat of Marty Brown Subdivision Plat No. 2, a resubdivision of Lots 3 and 4 of Marty Brown Subdivision (Schweiss).
§ 42-103.67 Approving the plat of Victory Acres, a subdivision in the SW 1/4 SW 1/4, Sec. 10, T37N, R8W, Rolla, Missouri.
§ 42-103.68 Approving the plat of University Park Subdivision.
§ 42-103.69 Approving the plat of Hod's Hills Resubdivision of Lot 12 of Deer Crossing and a fractional part of Railroad Lot 87.
§ 42-103.70 Approving the plat of Vienna Oaks Subdivision Phase II, a resubdivision of Tract A of Vienna Oaks Subdivision - Phase I, a Resubdivision of Lot 15 and part of Lot 2, Railroad Addition.
§ 42-103.71 Approving the plat of Wild Rose Hill.
§ 42-103.72 Approving the plat of Municipal Acres No.1. (RMU).
§ 42-103.73 Approving the plat of Municipal Acres No. 2 (RMU).
§ 42-103.74 Approving the plat of Oak Knoll South Plat No. 3.
§ 42-103.75 Approving the plat of California Hills, a resubdivision of part of Tract 3C of resubdivision of Tract 3 of Forum Lakes.
§ 42-103.76 Approving the plat of Timber Creek.
§ 42-103.77 Approving the plat of Lot 14 of Forum Lakes Subdivision, a Planned Unit Development (PUD).
§ 42-103.78 Approving the plat of Swinfard Subdivision.
§ 42-103.79 Approving the plat of Lowe's Rolla No. 1.
§ 42-103.80 Approving the plat of Pine Creek Commercial Park Plat No. 1.
§ 42-103.81 Approving the plat of Mid Missouri Credit Union.
§ 42-103.82 Approving the plat of Songbird Subdivision.
§ 42-103.83 Approving the plat of Richfountain Place Tract "C".
§ 42-103.84 Approving the plat of Country Aire Place.
§ 42-103.85 Approving the plat of Municipal Acres No. 3 (RMU).
§ 42-103.86 Approving the plat of Municipal Acres No. 4 (RMU).
§ 42-103.87 Approving the plat of Municipal Acres No. 5 (RMU).
§ 42-103.88 Approving the plat of C & M Properties Resubdivision (Kehoe).
§ 42-103.89 Approving Silverleaf Subdivision No. 2 (Sonshine Street Enterprises Inc.)
§ 42-103.90 Approving Park Place Replat (Brown).
§ 42-103.91 Approving Deer Crossing East Subdivision (Renick).
§ 42-103.92 Approving KD-S Gardens (Hall).
§ 42-103.93 Approving Robertson Subdivision No. 1 (Heartland Properties of Missouri L.L.C.)
§ 42-103.94 Approving the plat of Wild Horse Run Plat No. 1 (Sooter).
§ 42-103.95 Approving Blue's Lake Plat No. 2 (Dietzamann)
§ 42-103.96 Approving Linwood Estates Plat 1 (Holt).
§ 42-103.97 Approving Callen Subdivision (Callen).
§ 42-103.98 Approving Wild Horse Run Plat No. 2 (Sooter).
§ 42-103.99 Approving Harris Subdivision.
§ 42-103.100 Approving Country Ridge Subdivision (Huffman).
§ 42-103.101 Approving the Resubdivision of Lots 3-26 of Maxwell Subdivision (Ellis/Shanks).
§ 42-103.102 Approving Linwood Estates No. 2 (Holt).
§ 42-103.103 Approving the Resubdivision of Jordan's Pass No. 2 (Jordan).
§ 42-103.104 Approving Tri-C Subdivision II (Chapman).
§ 42-103.105 Approving Morgan's Hill (Morris).
§ 42-103.106 Approving the resubdivision of Lots 46-52 of University Park Subdivision (Hayes-Williams).
§ 42-103.107 Approving University Heights (Morris).
§ 42-103.108 Approving Leonard Sally Subdivision (Pietsch).
§ 42-103.109 Approving Shepherd Place Subdivision (Shepherd).
§ 42-103.110 Approving Hy Point Industrial Park North Plat No. 1 Subdivision (RCDC)
§ 42-103.111 Approving Rhodes Subdivision No. 2 (Rhodes).
§ 42-103.112 Approving Brewer Subdivision No. 1 (Brewer Science).
§ 42-103.113 Approving Charlotte's Acres (Barrack).
§ 42-103.114 Approving the Steak House Subdivision. (Hogan/Dietzmann)
§ 42-103.115 Approving Poe Subdivision II. (Poe)
§ 42-103.116 Approving Halifax Court Subdivision. (Moorkamp)
§ 42-103.117 Approving Blue's Lake Plat No. 3. (Dietzmann)
§ 42-103.118 Approving Hy Point Industrial Park South Plat No. 2 Subdivision. (Rolla Community Development Corporation)
§ 42-103.119 Approving Southside Plaza Subdivision. (Burrell)
§ 42-103.120 Approving Pope Place Subdivision. (Pope)
§ 42-103.121 Approving Deer Cove Subdivision. (Apostolic Pentecostal Church of Rolla)
§ 42-103.122 Approving Gracie Place Subdivision. (JRS Enterprises)
§ 42-103.123 Approving Tucker Place Subdivision. (Herrman/Voss)
§ 42-103.124 Approving Huntleigh Estates Subdivision. (Holt)
§ 42-103.125 Approving Deer Cove Subdivision amended Plat. (Apostolic Pentecostal Church)
§ 42-103.126 Approving Pope Plaza Subdivision. (Pope)
§ 42-103.127 Approving Guffey Subdivision. (Guffey Zumwalt L.L.C.)
§ 42-103.128 Approving Hy Point Industrial Park North Plat No. 2. (RCDC)
§ 42-103.129 Approving La Chateau Subdivision.
§ 42-103.130 Approving Raspberry Hill Subdivision.
§ 42-103.131 Approving Oak Knoll South Plat No. 4.
§ 42-103.132 Approving Frueh Estates (Frueh).
§ 42-103.133 Approving Stuart's Little Subdivision (Baur/Hahn).
§ 42-103.134 Approving Rolla Investments Shopping Center Subdivision (Rolla Investments LLC).
§ 42-103.135 Approving Harris Subdivision No. 2 (Harris).
§ 42-103.136 Approving Country Trace Subdivision (Chapman).
§ 42-103.137 Approving Blue's Lake Plat No. 4. (Dietzmann).
§ 42-103.138 Approving Al West Chrysler Nissan Drive-In. (Al West Chrysler Nissan).
§ 42-103.139 Approving the resubdivision of Lots 33-38 of University Park Subdivision. (H&C Investments).
§ 42-103.140 Approving Heritage Heights Addition. (Beard, Deo and Davis).
§ 42-103.141 Approving Aldi Subdivision No. 2. (Investment Realty).
§ 42-103.142 Approving Lost Acres Subdivision. (Lortz).
§ 42-103.143 Approving Poe Subdivision III. (Poe)
§ 42-103.144 Approving Investment Subdivision. (Woessner)
§ 42-103.145 Approving Paul's Addition. (Coverdell)
§ 42-103.146 Approving I-44 Center. (Real Ventures)
§ 42-103.147 Approving Meadow Brook Subdivision #2.
§ 42-103.148 Approving Habitat for Humanity Second Addition. (Habitat for Humanity).
§ 42-103.149 Approving Paul's Addition Replat of Lots 4, 6, 7, and 8. (Coverdell)
§ 42-103.150 Approving Lister Subdivision. (Lister)
§ 42-103.151 Approving John Brown Subdivision. (Brown)
§ 42-103.152 Approving Collegiate Station at Rolla. (Collegiate Station at Rolla LP Irving Texas)
§ 42-103.153 Approving Arwood Hills No. 1. (Chapman)
§ 42-103.154 Approving Brookridge South No. 1. (Chapman)
§ 42-103.155 Approving Subway Subdivision. (Banholzer)
§ 42-103.156 Approving Pebble Stone Planned Unit Development. (Forness)
§ 42-103.157 Approving Cowboy Subdivision. (James)
§ 42-103.158 Approving Mehta Estates. (Mehta)
§ 42-103.159 Approving Maxwell Subdivision. (Ellis/Shanks)
§ 42-103.160 Approving Calkins Addition. (Calkins)
§ 42-103.161 Approving Ronani Block Subdivision. (Block)
§ 42-103.162 Approving Brookridge South No. 2. (Chapman).
§ 42-103.163 Approving Basswood Subdivision. (Parkview Baptist Corporation).
§ 42-103.164 Approving Rolla Rural Fire No. 1. (Rolla Rural Fire Department)
§ 42-103.165 Approving Maxwell Subdivision Plat No. 3. (Development Contractors)
§ 42-103.166 Approving Ann Lee Estates. (Anderson)
§ 42-103.167 Approving Mid America Plat 1. (Mid America Bank & Trust Co.)
§ 42-103.168 Approving Event Center Subdivision. (Blues Lake Development LLC)
§ 42-103.169 Approving Wal-Mart Super Center Plaza III. (Wal-Mart)
§ 42-103.170 Approving Mid America Plat 2. (Mid America Bank and Trust)
§ 42-103.171 Approving Maxwell Subdivision Plat No. 4. (Development Contractors LLP)
§ 42-103.172 Approving the Resubdivision of Lot 1, Heritage Heights Addition. (Coverdell)
§ 42-103.173 Approving the Blue's Lake Plat No. 6. (Dietzmann)
§ 42-103.174 Approving I-44 Center Plat No. 2. (Real Ventures LLC)
§ 42-103.175 Approving Asher Street Dedication Plat. (City of Rolla)
§ 42-103.176 Approving Rojo Properties. (Rojo Properties LLC)
§ 42-103.177 Approving Estey Subdivision. (Brown)
§ 42-103.178 Approving Jordan Subdivision. (Jordan)
§ 42-103.179 Approving Waterman Heights. (Waterman/Skyles)
§ 42-103.180 Approving Robbie Addition. (Robertson)
§ 42-103.181 Approving RoJo Properties Subdivision Number 2. (Rojo Properties LLC)
§ 42-103.182 Approving the Re-subdivision of Lots 1, 2 & 3 of Cowboy Subdivision. (Peterman)
§ 42-103.183 Approving the plat of Summit Square. (Timberline Land Co.)
§ 42-103.184 Approving the Road Dedication Plat of St. John's Parkway. (Dietzmann)
§ 42-103.185 Approving Parson's Addition, a re-subdivision of a Fractional part of Lots 4, 5 & 6 of Block 3, Frisco Addition. (Parsons)
§ 42-103.186 Approving Deer Crossing East II. (Renick)
§ 42-103.187 Approving the subdivision plat of Parker Place. (Parker)
§ 42-103.188 Approving Oak Knoll South Plat No. 5. (City of Rolla)
§ 42-103.189 Approving Blue's Lake Plat No. 7. (St. Johns Clinic/Neenan Co.)
§ 42-103.190 Approving Manion Plat No. 1. (Manion)
§ 42-103.191 Approving Bridgeview Subdivision, a Minor subdivision in a Fractional part of Lot 3, Railroad Addition. (Chapman)
§ 42-103.192 Approving McCutchen Acres No. 1. (McCutchen Family/Mike Woessner)
§ 42-103.193 Approving Rolla Park Third Addition, a Replat of Lot 9, Rolla Park Second Addition. (Lahontan/Warren Dean)
§ 42-103.194 Approving Blue's Lake Plat No. 8, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (Dietzmann)
§ 42-103.195 An ordinance approving Belotta Trails Rolla, Phelps County Missouri, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (Woessner).
§ 42-103.196 An ordinance approving Heritage Village Subdivision, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (Woessner for Bass and Antolak).
§ 42-103.197 An ordinance approving McDonalds Addition, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (McDonalds)
§ 42-103.198 An ordinance approving Forum Hill, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (Davis)
§ 42-103.199 An ordinance approving I-44 Center Plat No. 3, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (Real Ventures LLC)
§ 42-103.200 An ordinance approving Schweiss Subdivision, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (Investment Realty)
§ 42-103.201 An ordinance approving RSRB Subdivision, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (Whitehead/Dollar General)
§ 42-103.202 An ordinance approving Chymiak Investments Plat #1, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (Watson & Huskey)
§ 42-103.203 Approving the final Plat of the Rolla Industrial Park West Subdivision, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (Rolla Public Works Department)
§ 42-103.204 Approving Blue's Lake Plat No. 9 Subdivision, a resubdivision of Lot 1 Blue's Lake Plat No. 8, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (Dietzmann)
§ 42-103.205 Approving the final plat of Blue's Lake Plat No. 10. A subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (Dietzmann).
§ 42-103.206 Approving the final plat of Bruss's 1st Addition, a minor subdivision, and part of blocks 11 and 49, of Bishop's 4th Addition, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (CVS #10280)
§ 42-103.207 Approving the final plat of Pathways Addition, a minor subdivision, being a re-subdivision of Lot 2, Pope Addition, Rolla, Missouri. (Pathways)
§ 42-103.208 Approving the replat of Arwood Hills No. 1 final plat of Rolla Skilled Nursing Facility Plat No. 1, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri. (Chapman)
§ 42-103.209 Amend a minor subdivision of Lot 2, Pope Addition, Pathways Addition, Plat No. 2 (Pathways)
§ 42-103.210 Approving a minor subdivision and re-plat of a portion of Lots 2 and 3 of Ozark Terrace Second Addition in Rolla, Missouri, thereby establishing two new lots (Lots 2A and 3A) (Taylor)
§ 42-103.211 Approving the re-plat of Lots 24 and 25 of the Wedgewood Manor Subdivision, an addition to Rolla, Missouri, by consolidating existing Lots 24 and 25, establishing a single Lot 24A. (Bowen)
§ 42-103.212 Approving the re-plat of Lots 11 and 12 of the Wild Rose Hill Subdivision, an addition to Rolla, Missouri by consolidating Lots 11 and 12, thereby establishing a single Lot 12A. (Bachman)
§ 42-103.213.  Approving the re-plat of Lot 1, Chrysler Addition, and approving the final plat of Lots 1 and 2 of Chrysler Addition No. 2 being a re-subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (West)
§ 42-103.214 Approving the re-subdivision of Belotta Trails Addition No. 1, Lots 3A, 5A, 6A and 3B, as a minor final plat of an approved subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (Baxter)
§ 42-103.215 Approving the re-subdivision of Belotta Trails Addition No. 2, Lots 11A, 12A, 13A, and 14A, as a minor subdivision final plat of an approved subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (Baxter)
§ 42-103.216 Approving the re-subdivision of McCutchen Acres No. 1, Tract B, to McCutchen Acres No. 2, Lots 1 through 4, a minor re-subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (Davis).
§ 42-103.217 Approving the re-subdivision of a fractional part of Lot 9 of the Ozark Terrace Subdivision, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri. (Ridenhour).
§ 42-103.218 Approving the re-subdivision of Lots 24 and 25 of the Meadow Brook Subdivision, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri. (Wilkerson).
§ 42-103.219 Approving the Country Hills Subdivision, Lots 1 and 2, this being a minor subdivision in a fractional part of SE ¼, Sec. 36, T38N, R8W, Rolla, Phelps County Missouri. (Harvey)
§ 42-103.220 Approving the resubdivision of a fractional part of 2100 State Route E, a fractional part of Lot 21, Gracie Place Subdivision, all in Section 3, T37N, R8W, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri (Sowers) (Claire Court PUD).
§ 42-103.221 Approving the re-subdivision (consolidation of interior lot lines) of property including Lots 1, 4, & 5 of Block 67, County Addition, Rolla, Missouri. (Wands)
§ 42-103.222 Approving the re-subdivision of Cedar Trail Planned Unit Development Plat No. 2; a minor re-subdivision of Lot 2, consisting of news lots 5, 6, 7, and 8 (Cedar Trails LLC)
§ 42-103.223 Approving the re-subdivision of Holloway’s First Addition, former lots 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12, Block 6, consisting of two new lots designated as Lots 1 and 2 (Miles).
§ 42-103.224 Approving a final plat of Blue’s Lake Plat No. II, a minor subdivision being a replat of a portion of Lot 1, Blue’s Lake Plat No. 6 and a part of W½ SW¼ Sec. 10, T37N, R8W Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri (Citizens Bank of Newburg).
§ 42-103.225 Approving the elimination of interior lot lines and the designation of a new Lot 1, a re-plat of the west half of Lots 1 and 2, the north half of Lot 6, the east 50 feet of Lot 7, in Block 18, of the Frisco Subdivision, and a fractional part of Section 1, Township 37 north, Range 8 west, Rolla, Missouri, Lot 15, a plat located in Rolla, Missouri (LIN) (Arkansas Plaza)
§ 42-103.226 Approving the final plat of Deer Crossing East III, a major subdivision in Rolla, Missouri, being a re-plat of Lot 1, Deer Crossing East II, Phelps County, Missouri. (Renick)
§ 42-103.227 Approving the final plat of Happy Jack’s Subdivision, Lot 17 in Oak Knoll Estates and a part of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 14, Township 37 north, Range 8 West. (Frost)
§ 42-103.228 Approving the re-subdivision of a minor subdivision, located at 803 W. 13th Street including Lots 1 & 2 and a fractional part of a vacated alley in Block 4 of the Townsend Addition to the City of Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri (Rome) (Spring Avenue Addition).
§ 42-103.229 Approving the final plat of Vienna Hills, a subdivision in the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 35, Township 38 North, Range 8 West, Rolla, Missouri. (Vienna Hills Subdivision)
§ 42-103.230 Approving the replat of a fractional part of Lots 73, 74, and 75, Block 3, James Addition, into Lot 1, to the City of Rolla, Missouri (407 North Olive Street) (Woolf’s Second Addition).
§ 42-103.231 Approving a minor subdivision of Lot 6, Cedar Trail Planned Unit Development (PUD), Plat No. 3, Rolla, Missouri. (Cedar Trail PUD).
§ 42-103.232 Approving the minor plat of Huffman East No. 1, consisting of new Lots 1 and 2.
(Huffman East No. 1).
§ 42-103.233 Approving Arthur’s Addition, Lot 1, being a minor subdivision and a consolidation of Lots 15, 16, 17, & 18, Block 13, Cowan’s Addition, Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri. (Arthur)
§ 42-103.234 Approving the subdivision of a 12.52 acre tract located at 2600 North Bishop Avenue, a final plat of Kingdom West, a subdivision in the Southwest Quarter of Section 36, Township 38 North, Range 8 West, Rolla, Missouri. (Kingdom West).
§ 42-103.235 Approving the preliminary plat of the Hypoint West Plat No. 1, a major subdivision, being a fractional part of the South Half of the Northeast Quarter and the South Half of Lot 1, Northwest Quarter, all in Section 30, T38N, R7W, Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri (Hypoint West).
§ 42-103.236 Approving the final plat of Hypoint East No. 1 being a minor subdivision in a fractional part of the S ½, NW ¼, NE ¼, and SW ¼ all in Section 29, T38N, R7W, Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri (Hypoint East).
§ 42-103.237 Approving the final plat of the Rolla Property LLC, No. 1, being a minor subdivision in a fractional part of W ½, SW ¼, Section 29, being fractional part of E ½ SE ¼ of Section 30, all in T38N, R7W Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri (Rolla Property).
§ 42-103.238 Approving the subdivision of the final plat of the I-44 Center Plat No. 4, a minor subdivision, being a resubdivision of a part of Lot B of the I-44 Center Plat No. 2, Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri. (I-44 Subdivision).
§ 42-103.239  Approving the re-subdivision of RSBR No. 1 Subdivision, being a minor subdivision to eliminate the interior lot lines for Lots 1 and 2 of the RSBR Subdivision, situated in the NW¼, SW¼, Section 36, T38N, R8W of the 5th P.M. City of Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri. (RSBR No. 2 Subdivision)
§ 42-103.240 Approving the re-subdivision of KDs Gardens, being a minor subdivision to eliminate the interior lot lines for Lots 1 and 2 of the KDs Gardens Subdivision No. 2, thereby creating a third lot encompassing 3.36 acres in total area. (KDs Gardens No. 2 Subdivision)
§ 42-103.241 Approving the plat of Wands Second Subdivision, a subdivision located in the Southeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 2, Township 37 North, Range 8 West, Rolla, Missouri, this plat being a minor subdivision, to consolidate existing interior property lines and to establish a single Lot 1 (.81 acre) for future development in Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri. (Wands Second).
§ 42-103.242 Approving the resubdivision of Lot 11 of the Cedar Trails Planned Unit Development (PUD), Plat Number 3, (Amended) being a minor resubdivision to establish six new lots (Lots 13 to Lot 18), to allow the construction of not more than six, two story, four-plex dwelling units in the City of Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri (Cedar Trails LLC 4).
§ 42-103.243 Approving the Westside Marketplace Subdivision, being a Major Subdivision of the Railroad Addition Lot 94 and part of Lots 93 and 95 and part of the Southwest ¼ Section 10, Township 37 North, Range 8 West in the City of Rolla. (Westside Marketplace).
§ 42-103.244 Approving the final plat of the Wild Horse Run No. 3 Subdivision, said subdivision being a minor subdivision located in the SW ¼ NW ¼ Section 24, T37N, R8W, City of Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri. (Wild Horse Run No. 3)
§ 42-103.245 Approving the final plat of Mitchell’s Consolidated Subdivision, being a minor subdivision and part of Lot 26 and part of Lot 27, Maxwell Subdivision, Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri (Mitchell).
§ 42-103.246 Approving the final plat of Sticky Forks Properties, LLC, being the sole owner(s) of all of the property shown on this plat, now desires to consolidate the land as shown on this plat, said subdivision to be named “Shrove Subdivision” Lot No. 1, Phelps County, Missouri. (Sticky Fork)
§ 42-103.247 Amending the Wands Second Subdivision, a subdivision located in the Southeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 2, Township 37 North, Range 8 West, Rolla, Missouri, this plat being a minor subdivision, to eliminate certain utility easements and replace other utility easements as shown on the Wands Third Subdivision Plat. (Wands Third).
§ 42-103.248 Approving the re-subdivision of Lots 7, 8, and 9 Block 10, of the Holloway First Addition to eliminate interior lot lines between Lots 7 and 8 and Lots 8 and 9, Holloway Addition to substitute a minor subdivision described as Lot 1, Spring Properties First Addition, City of Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri. (Spring Properties)
42-103.249 Approving Hypoint Industrial Park North Plat No. 3 a re-subdivision of a minor subdivision, being a fractional part of the Southwest Quarter Northwest Quarter, Section 29, Township 38 North, Range 7 West and all of Lot 1, Hypoint Industrial Park North Plat No. 1, Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri (Hypoint).
§ 42-103.250 Established the Welty Subdivision, a minor subdivision, being a consolidation of Lot 5, Block 2, School View Addition Number Two and all of Lot 4 and portions of adjoining vacated alleys, all in Walker’s Addition Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri (Welty).
§ 42-103.251 Established Lot 1, Chapman Addition, by eliminating Lots 1, 2, 3, and 4, Block 10 Holloway First Addition Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri. (Chapman Addition).
§ 42-103.252 Approving the final plat of The Lodges at Rolla Subdivision (The Lodges at Rolla).
§ 42-103.253 Approving the subdivision of an 11.44 acre tract of land located in a fractional part of the SW ¼ of the NW ¼, Sec. 24, T37N, R8W, consisting of Lots 1-4 and the right-of-way of the proposed Joyner Estates Subdivision, including Tract A. (Joyner)
§ 42-103.254 Approving the consolidation of Lots 5, 7, and 8 in Block 4 of Newman’s Addition Subdivision in the City of Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri, and to vacate the 16-foot-wide alley situated between the aforesaid Lots 7 and 8. (Design 4 U)
42-103.255 Approving the adjustment of the boundary lines of the parcels that are known as 2409 and 2419 North Bishop Avenue through the subdivision process. (RCP)
§ 42-103.256 Approving the reconfiguration and consolidation of numerous parcels, which are located to the North and South of the stretch of Ridgeview Road between BNSF Railroaod right-of-way and Spilman Avenue, into three right-of-way tracts and four lots through the resubdivision process. (Highway 72 Ext.)
§ 42-103.257 Approving the reconfiguration of three parcels, which are known as 515 and 521 South Bishop Avenue and 514 Fort Wyman Road, through the subdivision process. (Fort Wyman Crossing)
§ 42-103.258 Approving the consolidation of the three parcels that are known as 1601, 1603, and 1605 North Pine Street into one parcel through the resubdivision process. (Theta XI Addition)
§ 42-103.259 Approving the consolidation of the four parcels that are known as 206 and 208 East 12th street and 207 and 209 East 11th Street into one parcel through the resubdivision process. (Sigma Pi Addition)
§ 42-103.260 Approving the consolidation of Lot 1 and Lot 2 of Block 4 of Cowan's Addition into one lot through the resubdivision process. (Meyer)
§ 42-103.261 Subdivide the parcel known as 901 Oaklane Drive into two lots through the resubdivision process. (Oaklane South).
42-103.262 Consolidated all of Lots 3, 4, 5, and 6 of Block 7 of Cowan’s Addition and all of lots 4, 5, and 6 of Block 8 of Cowan’s Addition together with the vacated right-of-way that lies between the fourth, fifth, and sixth lots of Blocks 7 and 8 of the Cowan’s Addition Subdivision through the resubdivision process. (Sonic)
Sec. 42-103.263 Reconfigure Lot 1 and Lot 2 of the Rolla Skilled Nursing Facility Plat No. 1 Subdivision, which is also known as 2735 Eagleson Drive, and Lot 29 and Lot 30 of the Arwood Hills No. 1 Subdivision into four newly configured Lots. (Silverstone)
42-103.264. Reconfigure the boundary lines of the four deeded parcels, one of which is located in Joyner Estates Subdivision and two of which are within the Wild Horse Run Plat No. 1 Subdivision, that are identified by their Phelps County Assessor Account Numbers of 10954.01, 10654.47, 10954.20, 10954.19. (Moutray)
§42-103.265. Consolidate Lot 2, Lot 3, and the North 35 feet of Lot 4 of Block 5 of the Frisco Subdivision into one 0.29-acre lot. (Equinox)
§42-103.266. Approving the Final Plat of St. Maria's Tatandra, which is a major subdivision plat that divides an approximately 42-acre tract of land that is identified by the Phelps County Assessor's Account Number of 12081, into 58 lots and five outlets. (St. Maria's Tatandra)
§42-103.267. Consolidate Lots 2, 3, and part of 6 of Block 5 of Newman's Addition, which, together, currently constitute two deeded parcels that are identified by their Phelps County Assessor Account Numbers of 8200 and 8199 and by the addresses of 300/302 Rhodes Avenue and 203 South Olive Street, into two lots. (Thoennes Addition)
§42-103.268. Approving the Final Plat of Hy Point West No. 2, which is a minor subdivision plat that subdivides Lot 5 and Lot 6 of the Final Plat of Hy Point West No. 1 into four lots. (Hy Point West No. 2)
§42-103.269. Approving the Final Plat of Cottonwood Drive Addition, which is a plat that will, through the minor subdivision process, consolidate the parcels identified with the Phelps County Assessor Account Numbers of 10731, 10732, 10733, 10734, 10735, and part of 10725 into a 1.53-acre lot. (Cottonwood Dr. Add.)
§42-103.270. Approving the Final Plat of Joyner Acres, which is currently platted as Lot 4 of the Final Plat of Moutray Acres. (Joyner Acres)


Division 3 - Public Land Transfers
§ 42-104. Conveying real estate in the Rolla Industrial Park to Rolla Community Development Corporation.
§§ 42-105 to 42-106. Reserved.


Division 4. Land Acquisition
§ 42-107. Accepting a tract of land as a public right-of-way from the Rolla Lions Club.
§ 42-108. Accepting a tract of land dedicated by Glen Brown for use as a public right-of-way.
§ 42-109. Authorizing the Rolla Municipal Utilities to purchase Lot 35, Resubdivision of Harvest Fields, in the City of Rolla, for constructing water wells.
§ 42-110. Accepting a tract of land from the Briarwood Condominium Association for use as a public right of way.
§ 42-111. Accepting a tract of land from the owners of Lot 110, Wedgewood Manor, for use as a public right of way.
§ 42-111.1 Accepting a strip of land for utility purposes.
§ 42-111.2 Accepting a tract of land as a public right of way from Frank B Powell Lumber Co. for widening of Lanning Lane.
§ 42-111.3 Accepting the dedication of a tract of land for use as a public right-of-way from the owners of Aldi Subdivision.
§ 42-111.4 Accepting the dedication of a tract of land for use as a public right-of-way for the North Extension of McCutchen Drive.
§ 42-111.5 Approving the condemnation or appropriation of private property for street widening and drainage improvements which necessitate property acquisition and easements over and through properties which are needed for the construction of sidewalk, curbing, and improved drainage.
§ 42-111.6 Approving the condemnation or appropriation of private property for sanitary sewer improvements which necessitate property acquisition and utility easements over and through properties which are needed for the construction of sanitary sewer improvements.
§ 42-111.7 Approving the condemnation or appropriation of private property for sanitary sewer, water and storm sewer improvements.
§ 42-111.8 Approving the condemnation or appropriation of private property for Lion's Club Drive Street improvements, Southview Drive Street improvements, flood protection systems improvements and public park improvements.
§ 42-111.9 Approving the condemnation or appropriation of private property for Lion's Club Drive Street improvements.
§ 42-111.10 Approving dedication of certain streets and easements within Kensington Park.


Division 5. Vacated Streets & Alleys
§ 42-112. Vacating a public alley located in block 59 of County Addition.
§ 42-113. Vacating a portion of Rucker Avenue.
§ 42-114. Vacating an alley situated in Block 43 of Bishop's Addition.
§ 42-115. Vacating a public alley located in Block 9 of Holloway Addition.
§ 42-116. Vacating a portion of Pine Street (Old Rolla-Vichy Road) lying immediately south of interstate 44.
§ 42-117. Vacating a portion of Stratford Lane in Woodcrest Estates Subdivision.
§ 42-118. Vacating a portion of a public street known as Keeney Court; retaining easement rights.
§ 42-119. Vacating a portion of State Street between Fourteenth Street and Sixteenth Street.
§ 42-120. Vacating utility easement in the Forum Commercial Resubdivision.
§ 42-121. Vacating portions of Fourteenth Street and State Street at the request of the University of Mo. at Rolla in exchange for new public right of way.
§ 42-122. Vacating the alley running North-South in Block 48 of Bishop's Addition to the City of Rolla.
§ 42-123. Vacating a portion of Whitehall Road and a portion of the Greentree Road Cul-De-Sac in the Fox Creek Resubdivision.
§ 42-124. Vacating Chris Court and certain easements shown on the plat of Forum Lakes Subdivision.
§ 42-125. Vacating a portion of Maple Street in the McEntees Addition.
§ 42-126. Vacating a portion of Coventry Lane.
§ 42-127. Vacating utility easement in Ann's Acres 2nd Addition to the city.
§ 42-128. Vacating a portion of Wakefield Drive.
§ 42-129. Vacating a portion of Park Street.
§ 42-130. Vacating a utility easement in the original Lakeview Addition.
§ 42-131. Vacating a portion of the alley running north-south in Block 42 of Bishop's Addition.
§ 42-132. Vacating a portion of Sheron Street in Newcastle Place 1 Subdivision.
§ 42-133. Vacating the alley running northeast-southwest between Block 11, Bishops 4th Addition, and Block 49, Bishops Addition.
§ 42-134. Vacating a portion of a utility easement and a water line easement adjacent to Williams Road.
§ 42-135. Vacating a portion of an unnamed stub street north of Lynwood Drive located between Lot 1 in Block 2, Ridgeview Subdivision and Lot 10 in Block 1 - Ridgeview Addition.
§ 42-136. Vacating Asher Street at its present location between 10th and 11th Streets and accepting the dedication of Asher Street to be constructed 276.99 feet east of its present location.
§ 42-137. Vacating utility easement in the resubdivision of Tract No. 2 Forum Lakes Addition.
§ 42-137.1 Vacating a waterline easement along north property line of 700 South Olive Street.
§ 42-137.2 Vacating Ninth Street between the Burlington Railroad tracks and Olive Street.
§ 42-137.3 Vacating an existing sanitary sewer easement and accepting a new sanitary sewer easement.
§ 42-137.4 Vacating utility easement in Lot A of Forum Commercial Resubdivision and accepting utility easement in said Lot A.
§ 42-137.5 Vacating a portion of 5th Street from Rolla Street east to Railroad Tracks.
§ 42-137.6 Vacating an alley adjacent to Lots 8 &9, Block 1 in the Townsend Addition.
§ 42-137.7 Vacating an alley in Block 16 of the Holloway Addition.
§ 42-137.8 Vacating a portion of Park Street between 9th Street and 10th Street.
§ 42-137.9 Vacating a portion of Sharp Road.
§ 42-137.10 Vacating an easement for an alley located in Block 87, Bishops Addition.
§ 42-137.11 Vacating an alley located in Block 8, of the Newmans Addition.
§ 42-137.12 Vacating an easement for an alley located in Block 45, Bishops Addition.
§ 42-137.13 Vacating an easement across land of Frank B. Powell Lumber Company, Inc.
§ 42-137.14 Vacating an existing utility easement and accepting a new utility easement.
§ 42-137.15 Vacating an existing utility easement and accepting a new utility easement.
§ 42-137.16 Vacating utility easement on Lot 38 in the Newcastle Place Plat No. 1 Subdivision.
§ 42-137.17 Vacating existing utility and sewer easements and accepting new utility and sewer easements.
§ 42-137.18 Vacating Fourth Street between Kroger's west property line and the Missouri State Highway 63 right-of-way.
§ 42-137.19 Vacating an as-platted 60-foot street right-of-way and accepting an as-built 60-foot street right-of-way located on the Cantex property in the Rolla Industrial Park.
§ 42-137.20 Mayor is authorized to exchange property by deed.
§ 42-137.21 Vacating an alley running north and south through Block 42 in Bishop's Addition.
§ 42-137.22 Vacating an easement for an alley located in Block 89 of the Bishops Second Addition.
§ 42-137.23 Vacating a street right-of-way easement located adjacent to Lots 1 thru 10 of the Heritage Height's Subdivision.
§ 42-137.24 Vacating a 6-foot easement for an alley located in Block 89 Bishop's Second Addition and also recorded in Bishops Third Addition.
§ 42-137.25 Vacating Ninth Street between Cedar and Olive Streets.
§ 42-137.26 Vacating a drainage easement across Lot 1 of Ramsey Place Subdivision.
§ 42-137.27 Vacating a portion of Third Street between Main Street and the Burlington/Northern Railroad right of way and a portion of Main Street between Second Street and Third Street and retaining a 15-foot wide utility easement.
§ 42-137.28 Vacating an alley running east and west, bounded by 12th Street, 13th Street, Spring Avenue and Poole Avenue.
§ 42-137.29 Vacating and dedicating sanitary sewer easements located across the K-Mart/Karsch outlot.
§ 42-137.30 Vacating and dedicating utility easements crossing the Chrysler Addition.
§ 42-137.31 Vacating the remaining portion of Ashwood Circle.
§ 42-137.32 Vacating utility easement between Lots 11 and 12 of the Ponzer Addition.
§ 42-137.33 Vacating a portion of Cypress Drive right-of-way adjacent to Lot 43 of the Ponzer Second Addition.
§ 42-137.34 Vacating a portion of the right-of-way at Bishop Avenue and Pine Street and deeding same to adjoining property owners.
§ 42-137.35 Vacating the south half of an alley between Lots 5 through 8, Block 35 Bishop's Addition.
§ 42-137.36 Vacating existing utility and sewer easements.
§ 42-137.37 Vacating and dedicating easements located in the Newcastle Place Plat No. 3 Addition.
§ 42-137.38 Vacating existing utility easement between Lots 116 and 117 of Ponzer 4th Addition.
§ 42-137.39 Vacating an easement in vacated Rolla Street between Fourteenth (14th) and Sixteenth (16th) Streets.
§ 42-137.40 Vacating a portion of Richard Drive, Scottsvale Drive and all of Sherwood Drive in the amended Scottsvale Subdivision.
§ 42-137.41 Vacating existing alley between lots 1-4 and 9-12 of Townsend Addition.
§ 42-137.42 Vacating 4th Street between Kroger's West property line and the west right-of-way of Beech Street.
§ 42-137.43 Vacating an existing drainage easement and accepting a new drainage easement on lots 15, 17 and 18 in Scottsvale Subdivision, a resubdivision of lots 12, 15-19.
§ 42-137.44 Vacating an existing utility easement in the vacated right of way of 9th Street between Cedar and Olive Street (First Baptist Church).
§ 42-137.45 Vacating existing utility easements and accepting new utility easements located at 511 South Highway 63. (Applebee's).
§ 42-137.46 Vacating all of 7th Street east of Holloway Street and south of Murry 2nd Addition and north of Block 3 of the Hargis Addition. (Phelps County Habitat for Humanity)
§ 42-137.47 Vacating an alley between Oak and Olive Street, North of Highway 72 and south of Phelps Avenue.
§ 42-137.48 Vacating Olive Street between platted Hickory Hills Drive and Christy Drive in Hickory Hills Subdivision, but retaining a utility easement as described (Powell).
§ 42-137.49 Vacating a 10 foot utility easement on the west side of Lot 84 in the Ponzer 3rd Addition at 908 Mallard Square (Giustra).
§ 42-137.50 Vacating all of the right-of-way of Leslie Drive in the Parkview Third Subdivision except the south 60 feet at the intersection of Basswood Drive (Young).
§ 42-137.51 Vacating a one foot right-of-way easement on the north side of Lot 1, Block 9 of Newman/s Addition (Woessner).
§ 42-137.52 Vacating an alley in Bishops Addition at 7th Street between Bishop and State Street.
§ 42-137.53 Vacating Bishop's Alley between 2nd Street and the Railroad right of way (Phelps County Commission.
§ 42-137.54 Vacating utility easements in Lots 17, 18, 22 and 23 of the plat of Forum Lakes and approving the utility easements as shown in the attached Exhibit A.
§ 42-137.55 Vacating the portion of Olive Street south of Christy Drive (Olive Street stub) and the southernmost fifteen (15) feet be retained for a utility easement (Senne/Whitecotton).
§ 42-137.56 Vacating an alley between Lots 1 &8 and 2 &7 of Block 17 in Schuman's Addition (Town and Country Bank).
§ 42-137.57 An ordinance vacating the portion of Iowa Street from 10th Street to a point 163 feet north of 7th Street and maintaining the vacated street as a utility easement (Rolla School System and the City of Rolla).
§ 42-137.58 Vacating part of original Pine Street right-of-way and the alley adjoining between Lots 3, 4, 9 and 10 of Block 17 Schuman's Addition (Town and Country Bank).
§ 42-137.59 Vacating the alley between 5th and 6th and Cedar and Olive Streets in Block 69 of County Addition (Elgin).
§ 42-137.60 Vacating the north half of the alley between 11th and 14th and Bishop Avenue and State Street, between Townsend and Ladd Subdivisions (UMR).
§ 42-137.61 Vacating the alley running north and south between 6th and 7th Street, on the east side of Block 10 of Bishops Fourth Addition and on the west side of Lot 2 of Copperfield Subdivision and maintaining the vacated alley as a utility easement. (Denny Ford Lincoln Mercury, Inc.)
§ 42-137.62 Vacating the alley between 5th and 6th Street and Main Street and Rolla Street and retaining the vacated alley as a utility easement. (Bahr)
§ 42-137.63 Vacating part of University Drive and State Street (UMR).
§ 42-137.64 Vacating Spring Avenue from University Drive south to the existing alley, a distance of approximately 170 linear feet. (UMR)
§ 42-137.65 Vacating utility easements located at the Southeast Corner of Highway 63 and Vichy Road. (Wallis Oil)
§ 42-137.66 Vacating an unnamed street in Meadowbrook Subdivision. (City of Rolla Public Works Department)
§ 42-137.67 Vacating Duane Avenue from 11th Street to Joyce Avenue. (Phelps County Regional Medical Center)
§ 42-137.68 Vacating existing utility and sewer easements.
§ 42-137.69 Vacating existing water easement.
§ 42-137.70 Vacating the east half of the Alley in Block 2 of Townsend Addition. (Dairy Queen)
§ 42-137.71 Vacating a 15' utility easement between Lots 1 and 2 of Timber Creek Subdivision and a dedication of a 10' utility easement on the north side of Lot 2 of Timber Creek Subdivision. (Cheng)
§ 42-137.72 Vacating the utility easement in Arwood Hills Subdivision and retaining the utility easements as storm water easements. (Chapman)
§ 42-137.73 Vacating the alley in Block 21 of Schuman's Addition and retaining the alley as a utility easement. (Meramec Oil Company Inc. and Fisher Properties Inc.)
§ 42-137.74 Vacating a portion of the Northeast corner of Bishop Avenue and Elm Street. (Thompson Thrift Development Inc.)
§ 42-137.75 Vacating approximately 310 feet of Spilman Avenue, North of Ridgeview Road. (Batis Development)
§ 42-137.76 Vacating 5 feet of Southbrook Drive adjacent to Lots 2 and 3 of Rolla Park 2nd Addition. (Auto Craft/City of Rolla Public Works Department)
§ 42-137.77 Vacating a 15 foot wide utility easement located on Tract 3, in Heritage Heights Subdivision. (Gingerbread House Inc).
§ 42-137.78 Vacating a 15 foot wide utility easement located between Lot 3 of Paul's Addition and Lot 4A of Paul's Addition Replat Lots 4, 6, 7 and 8.(Akers).
§ 42-137.79 Vacating a portion of Juliene Street and all of a 28 foot wide alley in the Kelly Addition. (City of Rolla)
§ 42-137.80 Vacating two 10 foot utility easements located between Lots 13 and 14 and Lots 15 and 16 of the Maxwell Subdivision and dedicating two 10 foot wide utility easements adjacent to the north line of Lots 14 and 15 of the Maxwell Subdivision.
§ 42-137.81 Vacating a 10 foot easement located on the west side of Lot 31 of Rich Fountain Place Plat No. 3, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri (Fuller)
§ 42-137-82 Vacating a 20-foot utility easement located along the east side of Block 10 of Bishop's  Fourth Addition and along the west side of Lot 2 Copperfield Subdivision to the City of Rolla, Missouri (Denny Ford Lincoln, Inc)
§ 42-137.83 Vacating a 12x120 foot parcel of Olive Street Right-of-Way located between 19th Street and U.S. Highway 63 along the west side of Lots 1 & 2, Block 21 of Schuman's Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri (Heavin)
§ 42-137.84 Vacating Brewer Science Drive right-of-way in its entirety, located beginning at a point east of HyPoint Boulevard, east of HyPoint Drive, and north of Commerce Drive. (RCDC)
§ 42-137.85 Vacating a 20 ft. wide utility easement originally dedicated from Lot #1 of Deer Crossing East Subdivision, and a 10 ft. wide utility easement originally dedicated from Lot #8 in La Chateau Place Subdivision and to substitute said utility easements with a 10 ft. wide replacement utility easement also dedicated from Lot #8. (Robinson)
§ 42-137.86 Vacating part of Bland Street (Ridgeview Road) lying between Block 9 and Block 12 of Cowan’s Addition and all of that part of the 12 foot wide alley in Block 9 of the Cowan’s Addition, an addition to Rolla, Missouri. (City of Rolla Public Works)
§ 42-137.87 Vacating a 20.76 foot wide by 54.37 foot long utility easement of Gracie Place Subdivision, Lot 21 (Sowers)
§ 42-137.88 Vacating of a utility easement being a fractional part of Lots 16 and 17 of the amended final plat of Lexington Place a Planned Unit Development (PUD) in Rolla, Missouri. (Lexington Place).
§ 42-137.89 Vacating a part of a 10 foot utility easement located in Township 37 North, Range 8 West, Section 1 of the 5th P.M. and also being a part of the Forum Addition, Tract 2, an addition to Rolla, Missouri. (City Easement)
§ 42-137.90 Vacating in its entirety a 10 foot drainage easement located in Township 37 North, Range 8 West, Section 12 of the 5th P.M. and also being a part of the Barnitz Addition, an addition to Rolla, Missouri. (City Easement)
§ 42-137.91 Vacating of 14th Street West of Pine Street comprising a 493’ x 60’ parcel to the Missouri University of Science & Technology. The vacated right-of-way shall be retained as a utility easement. (Missouri S&T).
§ 42-137.92 Vacating of Faulkner Ave. between 106 and 111 Faulkner Ave. subject to final plat approval.
42-137.93 Vacating of all of Asher Street, all of Joyce Avenue from the northern boundary of Lot 9 of Block 4 of the Powell Second Addition to 11th Street, and all of the stretch of 12th Street situated between the northern edge of Lot 14 of Block 1 of the Powell Second Addition to the Eastern Edge of Lot 18 of Block 1 of the Powell Second Addition; and that the vacated streets shall be retained as utility easements. (Phelps County Regional Medical Center).
42-137.94 Vacating a section of Bryant Road and dedicate a 6.15-acre right-of-way tract to Missouri Route 72 through the consolidation of 12 deeded parcels that consist of parts of Lot 98 and Lot 103 of the Railroad Addition Subdivision and all of Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 5A, 6A, 7, 8, 9, 11 and 14 of the Revised Park Plaza Subdivision into two right-of-way tracts and three reconfigured lots. (Highway 72 Ext. West)
42-137.95 Vacating an existing sewer easement in the 2400 Block of North Bishop Avenue.
42-137.96 Vacating of a utility easement being a fractional part of the South half of Lot 1 of the Northwest Quarter of Section 30, Township 38 North, Range 7 West of the 5th P.M., Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri. (City of Rolla)
§ 42-137.97 Vacating of the entire alley that connects Rolla Street to the Northeastern end of Houston Road. (Houston/Rolla Alley Vacation)


DIVISION 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 42-22. Interpretation and Purpose.
The provisions of this Article, in their interpretation and application, shall be held to the minimum requirements adopted for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. The purpose of this Article is to regulate the subdivision of land as defined herein. The regulations are designed to provide for the safe, orderly, and economic use of transportation facilities; to facilitate orderly land use and layout; to ensure proper legal description and monumenting of subdivided land; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent overcrowding of land; to facilitate the adequate provision of municipal services including streets, water, sewerage, electricity, parks, open space, schools, and other requirements; and to promote the development of affordable housing. (Ord. 3485)



Sec. 42-22.1. Authority and Scope.
The City Council enacts this Article pursuant to the authority conferred by Chapter 89.300 Revised Statutes of Missouri. The Planning and Zoning Commission of Rolla, Missouri, hereinafter referred to as the Commission, is hereby designated as the administrative agency charged with the duty of making determinations and investigations concerning the design and improvements in proposed subdivisions and for making recommendations to the City Council. The City Council shall approve or disapprove plats for the subdivision of land within the City. (Ord. 3799, §1)

This Article shall apply to all land which has been subdivided if the subdivision was recorded after November 1, 1973, and to any lot or lots which re-subdivided after November 1, 1973. It is not the intent of this Article to interfere with or impair existing provisions of other laws, ordinances or covenants, except those specifically repealed by this Article. Where this Article imposes greater restriction upon land than is imposed or required by such existing laws, ordinances, or covenants, the provisions of this Article shall control. (Ord. 3485)



Sec. 42-22.2. Conditions.
Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable conditions is a valid exercise of the police power delegated by the State of Missouri to the City. The subdivider has the duty of compliance with reasonable conditions established by the Commission and City Council for design, dedication, improvement and land use so as to conform to the appropriate and economic development of the City; and to promote the safety and general welfare of future landowners in the City. The subdivision of land is a privilege conferred through these regulations to private property owners. (Ord. 3485)



Sec. 42-23. Application of Regulations and Enforcement
No person shall divide a lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, tracts, or parcels nor shall any person install a new street, alley, easement, water, sewer or electrical line or any other public improvement except in conformity with this Article; provided, however, that a real estate transaction involving the sale or exchange of a tract or parcel between contiguous platted properties, said tract or parcel sold or exchanged not being in excess of five thousand (5,000) square feet in area, where such sale or exchange does not create an additional lot(s), require any new public improvements or dedications, or violate provisions of the zoning code, shall be exempt from the requirements of this Article.

(1) Recording a Plat: No property description of any subdivision shall be entitled to be recorded in the county Recorder's office or have any validity until it shall have been approved in the manner prescribed herein. In the event any such un-approved property description is recorded, it shall be considered invalid and the City Attorney may cause proceedings to be instituted to have such plat or deed declared invalid. Recording of the property description approved in the manner herein prescribed shall be conclusive evidence of the validity of the subdivision.

(2) Sale of Land in a Subdivision: No owner or agent of the owner of any land located in the City shall transfer, sell, offer, or agree to sell any land by metes and bounds description or other reference when the sale, transfer, or development of the land would affect a subdivision of land within the meaning of this Article and before such land has been subdivided in accordance with these regulations and recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Phelps County.

(3) Permits: The Community Development Department shall not issue permits of any kind for improvement on land which do not meet the definition of "lot" as contained herein. For the purposes of constructing a building, permits may be issued for a tract or parcel of land consisting of two (2) or more contiguous lots or one lot and a portion of another lot and considered as a single lot if the proposed building(s) shall cross interior lot lines rather than being placed closer to a side, rear, or front lot line than otherwise allowed by ordinance.

(4) Public Improvements: The City and its Boards, Commissions and agents shall withhold all public improvements of whatever nature, including the furnishing or maintenance of streets, utilities and sewerage facilities from all subdivisions subject to this ordinance which have not been approved, and from all areas dedicated to the public which have not been accepted by the City Council, in the manner prescribed herein. Upon notice from the Community Development Director or the City Engineer to the Rolla Municipal Utilities of a violation of this ordinance, it shall be unlawful for the Utility to supply utility services to the subject property until properly subdivided as prescribed herein.

(5) Revision of a Plat. After Approval: No changes, erasures, modification or revisions shall be made in any final plat of a subdivision or in any metes and bounds description after approval has been given under the provisions of these regulations. (Ord. 3485)



Sec. 42-24. Variances.
The Commission may approve a variance from the provisions of this Article where it finds that an undue hardship or practical difficulty may result from requiring strict compliance with this Article. A variance may be approved so that substantial justice may be achieved and the public interest secured, provided that any such variance shall not have the effect of nullifying the expressed purpose of this Article. No application for preliminary plat which would create conditions requiring a variance or exception from zoning regulations by the Board of Adjustment, shall be submitted to the Commission unless and until the applicant's petition for variance or exception shall have been first approved by the Board of Adjustment. (Ord. 3485)



Sec. 42-24.1. Conditions of Variance Approval.
No variance shall be granted by the Commission unless it is found that:

(1) The granting of the variance would not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or welfare or be injurious to other property or improvements in the vicinity of the subject property; and

(2) The conditions upon which the request for variance is based are unique to the property for which the variance is sought, are generally not applicable to other properties, and are not self-imposed; and

(3) Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical feature of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, depriving the owner of the reasonable use of his land should the strict interpretation of these regulations be enforced.

(4) The variance will not in any manner abrogate the goals, objectives, or policies of the Rolla Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 3485)



Sec. 42-24.2. Authority to Grant Variances.
The Commission shall be empowered to grant variances with respect to the improvements and the design standards relative to lot dimension and arrangement, street location, alignment, the location and alignment of easements, building lines and similar standards. The Commission may establish certain conditions on variance approval that will, in the judgment of the Commission, substantially secure the purpose of this Article. City Council shall review any denial for a variance or any conditions attached to a variance approval only upon a written appeal by an applicant and only upon the written record made before the Commission. (Ord. 3485)



Sec. 42-24.3. Variance Procedure.
Variances shall be reviewed in accordance with one of the following procedures:

(1) Requests for variances may be submitted concurrently with the preliminary plat or final plat if it is a minor subdivision and reviewed with the subdivision. The written variance request shall state precisely the provisions from which a variance is needed along with the reasons for the variance, particularly as the request relates to the conditions of variance approval.

(2) Requests for variances may be submitted independent of plat review if the applicant can show good cause why such request was not made when the plat was filed.

(3) Within thirty (30) days after Commission has acted on a variance, the City Council may elect to conduct an independent review of any variance request and may grant, reverse, modify, or affirm the decision by the Commission based on the conditions for variance approval. (Ord. 3485)



Sec. 42-24.4 Granting a variance to Sec. 42-24 relating to sidewalks and streets (Scott Family Investments, LLC.
That this variance shall be granted as stated above. (Ord. 3238, §1)



Sec. 42-25. Subdivision Application Procedure and Approval Process.
Before any plat shall be recorded or be of any validity, it shall have been presented to the Commission and approved by City Council as having fulfilled the provisions of these regulations and other applicable ordinances. The provisions of these regulations, unless otherwise stated, shall be administered by the Director. In the administration of these regulations, the Director shall:

(1) Receive and maintain current permanent records for all applications for subdivision approval. The Director shall, in conjunction with the City Engineer, review applications for completeness and substantial compliance with the subdivision regulations.

(2) Insure that copies of the subdivision regulations are available for public review and distribution.

(3) Provide such technical and consultative assistance as may be required by the Commission, City Council, and other agencies of the City in the exercise of their duties relating to these regulations. (Ord. 3485)



Sec. 42-25.1. Procedure for Minor Subdivision Approval.
The required submission of a preliminary plat may be waived for land use actions that are carried out through the minor subdivision process. The application and approval procedures for land use actions that are carried out through the minor subdivision process are as follows:

The applicant or agent of the applicant shall submit to the Director a subdivision application, the minor subdivision application fee found in the Fee Schedule in Section 42.143.1 of the Rolla Planning and Zoning Code, the appropriate recording fees, five copies of the final plat, and any improvement plans or other supplementary materials.

The Director shall place the final plat on the Commission's agenda following review by City and utility companies' staff. If revisions are requested from staff, those requests shall be communicated to the applicant or agent responsible for considering such requests.

The Commission shall review the final plat and supplementary material and any recommendations from agencies or officials. The Commission may approve as submitted, approve with conditions, or disapprove the final plat. If disapproved, the Commission shall express its reasons for this action, which shall become part of the official record.

The final plat and supplementary material along with the record of the Commission proceedings shall be forwarded to the City Council for consideration. If approved by the City Council, the Director shall sign the final plat and ensure that the provisions of Section 42-30 the Rolla City Code concerning public improvements have been satisfied prior to its recording with the Recorder of Deeds of Phelps County. The applicant shall submit three digital copies of the final plat in a form that is acceptable to the Community Development Department.

If disapproved by the Commission, the subdivider may appeal the decision to the City Council within ninety days after the Commission's action. (Ord. 3485; Ord. 4401, §§1-2)

 


Sec. 42-25.2. Procedure for Major Subdivision Approval.
All land subdivision not otherwise classified as a minor subdivision shall be considered a major subdivision and subject to the procedures in this section. A public hearing shall be held for such proposals and the Community Development Department shall notify the public of the hearing and proposal according to the prescribed procedures and standards described in Section 42-143 of the Rolla Planning and Zoning Code. (Ord. 3799, §2)

Sketch Plat: The subdivider may submit a sketch plat and supporting information prior to the delivery of a preliminary plat. City staff shall review this material and provide input to the subdivider concerning design standards and improvement requirements.

Preliminary Plat: The applicant or agent of the applicant shall submit to the Director a subdivision application, the major subdivision application fee found in the Fee Schedule in Section 42.143.1 of the Rolla Planning and Zoning Code, the appropriate recording fees, any improvement plans or supplementary materials, and five copies of the preliminary plat to the Director who, upon determining that the preliminary plat is complete, shall place the application on the Commission's agenda. The Commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the preliminary plat. In any case, a notation of the action taken and the reason(s) the action was taken shall be entered in the records of the Commission. The preliminary plat and supplementary material along with the record of the Commission proceedings shall be forwarded to the City Council for consideration. If disapproved, the subdivider may appeal the commission's decision to the City Council within ninety days after the Commission's action. No person shall present testimony to the City Council that is substantially and materially different from that presented to the Commission, unless the party can demonstrate that the introduction of such evidence before the Commission was not in good faith reasonably possible at the time of the Commission meeting. If the Director does not agree that such evidence could not reasonably be presented at the time of the Commission meeting, the matter shall be referred back to the Commission for their review with the new information or evidence if it is found to be substantially or materially different from what had been presented. (Ord. 3799, §2)

Effective Period of Preliminary Plat Approval: The approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for one year. The final plat must be submitted for approval within the one-year period or be rendered null and void, except that the Commission may extend the effective period in six-month increments with the written request by the subdivider justifying the extension. The approved submission of a partial or phased final plat for a portion of a preliminary plat area shall validate the remainder of the preliminary plat for a one-year period.

Final Plat: Following approval of the preliminary plat by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the applicant shall prepare a final plat together with development plans for the required public improvements, drawn under the supervision of a registered professional engineer and attested to by his signature and seal, all in accordance with applicable standards. The final plat shall be in substantial conformance to the approved preliminary plat. Five copies of the original reproducible plat shall be submitted to the Director who shall determine its completeness and substantial conformity. In addition, one 8.5?? x 11?? or one 11?? x 17?? copy of the final plat shall be submitted to the Director. The applicant shall submit three digital copies of the final plat in a form that is acceptable to the Community Development Department. The final plat and any supporting materials shall be submitted to the City Council for their approval. The City Council may accept the final plat, accept the final plat and impose changes or conditions, or may reject the final plat if it is found to be inconsistent with any City ordinance. If accepted by the City Council, the Director shall sign and record the plat after all other signatures have been obtained and the provisions of Section 42-30 the Rolla City Code concerning public improvements have been satisfied. If rejected, the Director shall attach a statement to the plat outlining the reasons for such rejection for return to the applicant. The final plat shall not be approved by City Council until the development plans have been accepted by the City Engineer and the Rolla Municipal Utilities Engineering Department.

(Ord. 3485; Ord. 3799, §2; Ord. 4401, §§3-4)



Sec. 42-25.3. Phasing of Major Subdivision Plats Permitted.
The final plat for any major subdivision that has received preliminary approval may be submitted in sections or phases provided: (a) each phase satisfies the requirements set forth in this Article and other City ordinances; (b) all required improvements are provided for each phase along with any other necessary improvements to secure the subdivision's orderly development; and (c) adequate assurances are made for the completion of improvements required for each phase. The Director, with input from the City Engineer, shall determine if the proposed phasing of the final plat satisfies these requirements. (Ord. 3485)



Sec. 42-25.4. Resubdivision of Minor or Major Subdivisions.
Resubdivision shall be required to change an approved or recorded final plat when such change will affect public right-of-way, areas reserved for public use, easements, or any lot line, dimension or bearing. However, the vacation of right-of-way, areas reserved for public use and easements dedicated to the City on the plat may be approved by the City Council pursuant to applicable regulations without resubdivision. (Ord. 3485)



Sec. 42-25.5. Cluster Subdivisions.
Purpose: Cluster subdivisions may be approved which will result in improved living and working environments; which will promote affordable housing by reducing development costs and encourage a variety of dwelling types; which will support ingenuity and originality in total subdivision design; and which will preserve open space for recreational, scenic and public service purposes. To achieve these purposes:

a Variations in lot areas, widths, lot coverage and setbacks are permitted as long as overall dwelling unit densities established for the respective residential zoning district are not exceeded;

b Flexibility in the forms of property ownership and building types are allowed as long as only the uses in the particular zoning district are permitted;

Procedures are established to assure adequate maintenance and restricted use of open space areas for the inhabitant's benefit only or for dedication to public use; and

Procedures are established to assure adequate protection of existing and potential developments adjoining the proposed cluster subdivision.

Cluster Subdivision Standards: The minimum size of a lot of record within a residential cluster subdivision shall be:

a Three-thousand (3,000) square feet in the R-R (rural residential district) and R-l (single family district)

Two-thousand (2,000) square feet in the R-2 (two family district); and

One-thousand (1,000) square feet in the R-3 (multi-family district).

Cluster Open Space Requirements: All lot size reductions shall be compensated for by an equivalent amount of land permanently preserved as open space or common area; excluding parking lots, private drives, open storage areas or any land which has been or will be conveyed to a public agency under a purchase agreement or to meet the park land dedication requirements. The open space may be dedicated to the public in the manner prescribed herein or may remain in private ownership. If privately owned, the subdivider shall provide documentation satisfactory to the Director, Commission and City Council that the appropriate legal arrangements have been or will be put in place to assure its maintenance and preservation.

Cluster Subdivision Approval: Cluster subdivisions shall be considered as a major subdivision and shall be approved using the procedure outlined in Sec. 42-25.2., except that the sketch plan review shall be mandatory. The proposed cluster subdivision shall be consistent with the Rolla Comprehensive Plan and:

Will be adequately served by essential public facilities and services such as streets, sewerage, public water and electric supply, police and fire protection, and storm water drainage structures; or the person responsible for the establishment of the proposed cluster subdivision will provide these facilities and services;

Will provide usable and accessible open space for recreation or public use based on the size, shape, and topographic characteristics of the site; and

Will include open space with significant and irreplaceable natural and manmade features. (Ord. 3485)


Sec. 42-26. Requirements for Improvements, Reservation and Design.
In addition to the requirements established herein, all subdivision plats shall comply with the relevant laws, rules, and regulations, such as the City's zoning code, and regulations of the Phelps County Health Department and/or appropriate State agencies, Missouri Department of Transportation if abutting a State highway, and appropriate State and federal agencies. Subdivision lot lines shall conform to the municipal boundary lines when a subdivision abuts unincorporated land. (Ord. 3485)



Sec. 42-26.1. Subdivision Name.
The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate or sound like the name of any other subdivision, any existing or platted street, or any established business or development in Phelps County. Whenever final plats of a subdivision are approved in phases, each submittal for final approval shall be numbered consecutively. (Ord. 3485)



Sec. 42-26.2. Streets.
(1) Conformity: The character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets shall conform to the Official Map or Major Thoroughfare Plan and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographic conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their relation to proposed adjoining land uses. Where not shown on any map or plan, the arrangement and other design standards of streets shall conform to the provisions found herein.

(2) Relation to Adjoining Streets: The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the continuation of the existing streets into the abutting subdivision or tract where appropriate.

(3) Projection of Streets: When a new subdivision adjoins unplatted or undeveloped land, new streets shall be carried to the boundaries of such tract. A temporary turnaround approved by the City Engineer shall be installed at this point unless the terminus of the new street is less than two hundred (200) feet from the intersecting right-of-way of an existing street.

All new subdivisions of twenty-five (25) lots or more shall be designed to provide at least two means of ingress and egress to the subdivision using a public street. The City Engineer may approve the use of dead-end streets abutting undeveloped property with the understanding that a connecting street will be constructed to provide ingress and egress once said abutting property is developed. (Ord. 3799, §3)

(4) Street Jogs Prohibited: Street jogs with centerlines offsets of less than one hundred fifty (150) feet shall be prohibited.

(5) Dead-end Street or Cul-de-Sac: Dead-end streets or cul-de-sacs shall require a turnaround at intervals not to exceed six hundred (600) feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least eighty-four (84) feet and a minimum property line diameter of one hundred (100) feet. If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, the City Engineer may require a similar turnaround along with provisions made for the future extension of the street. The City Engineer may approve alternative turnaround standards, such as "hammerhead" or "Y" configurations, if adequately designed to provide traffic circulation and better land use.

(6) Marginal Access or Service Streets: Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing arterial street or highway the Commission may require marginal access streets or other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential areas and to separate through and local traffic.

(7) Minor Streets: Minor streets shall be arranged so as to discourage through traffic, to permit efficient drainage and utility systems, and to require the minimum number of streets necessary to provide convenient and safe access to all properties.

(8) Street Widths: The right-of-way width required to be dedicated and the pavement width required to be constructed shall be:

Street Type	Right of Way Width***	Pavement Width****
Cul-de-Sac	50'	30'
Lane*	50'	30'
Minor (Local)*	50'	30'
Collector**	50'	34'
Collector-Commercial	60'	34'
Arterial	80'	34'
Highway/Freeway	variable	variable
* Parking permitted on both sides of the street
** Parking permitted on one side only.
*** Greater right-of-way widths may be required as determined by traffic projections made
by the City Engineer for commercial or industrial areas.
**** Measured from the back of the curb.
(9) Low-Density Residential Subdivisions: In low-density, single-family residential subdivisions, pavement widths of minor streets not designed to accommodate through traffic may be reduced to twenty (20) feet. Sidewalks may not be required along minor streets. The City Engineer may waive requirements for curb and guttering if adequate provisions have been made for storm water drainage. The subdivision must comply with the following criteria:

(a) Overall density may not exceed one (1) dwelling unit per two (2) acres.
(b) Lot width abutting the street is not less than two hundred fifty (250) feet at the building line.
(c) In all other respects, street paving and related public improvements shall be provided in accordance with the design standards contained or referenced herein.
(10) Intersections: Streets shall intersect one another at as near a ninety (90) degree angle as is possible. No intersection of streets at angles less than seventy (70) degrees shall be approved. At each street intersection the property line at the block corner shall be rounded with a curve having a radius of not less than twenty five (25) feet. The intersection of more than two (2) streets at any one (1) point shall be prohibited.

(11) Subdivision into Tracts Larger than Ordinary Building Lots: Where a tract is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, as determined by the Director, such parcels shall be arranged so as to allow the opening of future streets and future subdivision.

(12) Curves: A tangent of at least one hundred (100) feet in length shall be introduced between reverse curves on all streets, except for minor streets.

(13) Street Grades: The subdivider shall provide the City Engineer with development plans and drawings which show the grades of all streets and curbs within each subdivision. Street grades shall not exceed five (5) percent for arterial streets, seven (7) percent for collectors, and nine (9) percent for minor or lesser streets. No street grades shall be less than one-half (1/2) of one (1) percent.

(14) Reserve Strips: Reserve strips that control access to abutting streets and, as determined by the Director, do not provide sufficient area to be of practical use under the area's existing zoning classification, shall be prohibited except under conditions approved by the Commission and City Council or for double or reversed frontage lots.

(15) Parallel Streets: Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad or a limited access street right-of-way, the Commission may require the construction of a parallel street on one (1) or both sides of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use under present zoning of the intervening land. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grade separation.

(16) Half-Street Prohibited: Half-streets shall be prohibited except where essential to the reasonable development of a subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of this Article and with the approval of the City Engineer. Wherever a half-street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street right-of-way shall be platted within such tract.

(17) Street Names and Numbers: Names of new streets shall not duplicate existing or platted street names unless the new street is a continuation of, or in alignment with, the existing or platted street. In such cases, it shall carry the name of the existing street. Names shall be easily spelled and pronounced. Street addresses shall be assigned in compliance with the addressing system of the City.

(18) Access to Streets Across Ditches: The subdivider shall provide access from all platted lots to all proposed streets across drainage or other ditches in accordance with standards of the Public Works Department.

(19) Street Vacations: The Commission shall not recommend the vacation of any street or part thereof of a dedicated street if such vacation will interfere with access to the public street of any abutting property or with the uniformity or improvement of the existing street system.

(20) Private Streets: Private streets are discouraged and may be permitted only where the City Council finds: (a) that private ownership, control and maintenance of street right-of-way is integral to the design and function of the subdivision; (b) provision has been made for the continuing and adequate maintenance of such streets; (c) there is evidence that the property rights, including rights of access of persons purchasing land within and adjacent to the subdivision, are safeguarded to the degree they would be protected if the streets were dedicated to the public; (d) the public interest and welfare is not jeopardized. Private streets shall be improved in accordance with City standards and specifications. (Ord. 3485)



Sec. 42-26.3. Alleys.
Alleys may be platted in any subdivision with right-of-way widths of no less than twenty (20) feet. Dead -end alleys shall not be permitted, except where adequate turnaround is provided. (Ord. 3485)



Sec. 42-26.4. Utility Easements.
An easement for utilities shall be provided along the side and/or rear lot lines where necessary to form a continuous easement of at least ten (10) feet in width. If necessary to accommodate the extension of water or sewer lines, to provide space for pole guys for overhead lines along the periphery of a subdivision, or when unusual circumstances require additional space, a utility easement width of twenty (20) feet or greater may be required. Where possible, utility easements shall connect to easements already established in adjoining properties. Drainage easements of varying widths and locations for storm water management may also be required as determined by the City Engineer. The City and all authorized utility providers shall have ingress and egress rights to all dedicated easements. (Ord. 3485)



Sec. 42-26.5. Blocks.
Block lengths shall not exceed thirteen hundred twenty feet (1320) feet, nor be less than three hundred (300) feet, except as permitted by the Commission and City Council because of unusual conditions. Pedestrian crosswalks of not less than six (6) feet in width located in the center of the block may be required for blocks in excess of thirteen hundred twenty (1320) feet in length. A block shall be so designed as to provide two (2) tiers of lots. (Ord. 3485)



Sec. 42-26.6. Lots.
Dimensions: Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of the zoning ordinance minimum standards, but may reflect greater area and lot widths. Building area lines shall be shown to establish required setback distances.

Location: All lots, parcels, or tracts shall abut by their full frontage on a publicly dedicated street right-of-way. As an option for non-residential development, access to a publicly dedicated street may be provided through a recorded private cross or access easement of sufficient width to accommodate emergency vehicles, to permit the installation of utilities, to provide access for public services, and that is not detrimental to the future subdivision of adjacent land. The easement shall be recorded as part of the platting process. In all cases, each individual lot, parcel, or tract shall be assured safe and reasonable vehicular access to and from an approved public street on an all weather surfaced private street or driveway constructed in accordance with Sec. 42-241. (Ord. 3799, §4).

Lines: Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines.

Corner Lots: Corner lots shall be provided extra width to permit required building setbacks.

Flooding: Lots located entirely within Zone A, B, or C on the City's Flood Insurance Rate Map subject to periodic flooding and deemed by the Director and the City Engineer to be a danger to public health and safety if developed for residential use shall not be platted or used for human habitation. Lots or tracts subject to periodic flooding may be platted and dedicated for recreational use, open space, or other uses that will not increase the potential flood hazard in the drainage basin.

Lot Remnants: All lot remnants below the minimum permitted size shall be added to adjacent lots, rather than permitted to remain as unusable parcels.

Double Frontage and Reverse Frontage Lots: Double or reverse frontage lots shall be avoided, except where required to provide separation of development from highway or arterial streets or to overcome specific topographic disadvantages. A ten (10) foot strip shall be reserved in addition to any setback requirement, across which there shall be no right of access, along the lots abutting such highway or arterial for the construction of a solid fence or other improvement (including walls, plantings, berms, etc.). This strip shall be shown on the plat along with any required improvements. (Ord. 3485)

Flag Lots: Flag lots may be platted when the following criteria are met:

Flag lots will be allowed provided the minimum lot area is consistent with the requirements of the respective zoning district designation.

The access portion of such lots shall have a minimum width of forty (40) feet and not shorter than twenty-five (25) feet or longer than two hundred fifty (250) feet in length.

Flag lots shall not be further subdivided into additional lots unless a public right-of-way is dedicated and a street is constructed that meets City standards.

No more than one (1) flag lot may be platted from a single parcel or tract of land.

The building setback lines for flag lots shall be established on the building portion of the lot in accordance with the provisions of the particular zoning district. (Ord. 3799, §4).



Sec. 42-27. Deeding of Public Parks; Alternative Payment In Lieu of Parkland Deeding.
Sec. 42-27.1  Purpose.

The purpose of this section is to:

Provide an adequate level of public park facilities and services to new development and to ensure that such development occurs in a manner that is consistent with the components of the City’s comprehensive plan;
Define the obligation of developers to meet the public park and open space needs generated by new development.
Outline the provision of adequate parkland through the subdivision process.
Encourage the placement of parks within new residential developments or near or within a walkable distance of such developments;
Provide for the development of neighborhood or community parks by considering cash payment in lieu of parkland dedication.
Sec. 42-27.2  Applicability.

This provision shall apply to all residentially zoned subdivisions or re-subdivisions that have not been previously subject to parkland dedication or fee in lieu of. This provision does not apply to boundary line adjustments or lot consolidations. If, during the subdivision process, a rezoning is proposed for the same property, this provision will apply at the rate that is consistent with the newly proposed zoning district. This requirement shall be in addition to any private open space or recreation facilities designated for the sole benefit of the subdivision residents.

The applicant shall, as part of the final plat process, provide a warranty deed to the City in a form that is acceptable to the City or provide an equivalent fee-in-lieu payment, which will be for public use only.

Sec. 42-27.3  Parkland Dedication Requirements.

The area to be dedicated shall be clearly labeled and delineated on the subdivision plat and shall meet the following requirements:

Topography: At least 50 percent of the tract shall have a grade of less than four percent. The balance may be covered with slope, streams, ponds, or other natural features. Retention areas or detention basins which are required by the City’s storm water regulations, drainage easements, or water detention areas will not qualify for the parkland requirement.
Location: The parkland shall have access on a public street with a minimum frontage of 60 feet. Consideration shall be given to placing parks where they can be added to by future subdivisions or as an addition to an existing park.
Size and shape: The tract size shall not be less than one acre in size, unless, in the opinion of the Parks and Recreation Director and the Parks Advisory Commission, this land can be added to an adjacent existing park or future park.
Approval: The Parks Advisory Commission and the Parks and Recreation Director shall recommend the tract as suitable for use as a public park if the requirements listed above have been deemed satisfied before the plat can be approved by the City Council. The area of the tract shall be based upon a calculation using the following schedule:
Rural Residential:   5% of total residential area subdivided.
Single-family:        5% of total residential area subdivided.
Two-family:           5% of total residential area subdivided.
Multi-family:         7% of total residential area subdivided.
The percentage of land deeded shall be based upon the total area of the development or subdivision used for residential uses (lots), excluding any non-residential uses. Non-residential uses shall include such areas as right-of-way, dedicated conservation areas, or private amenities, provided there are no residences on these areas. The deeded land shall be free of liens, special assessments, and other encumbrances and shall have all taxes paid to the date of deeding. The Parks Director will provide a report to the appropriate City departments, the Commission, and the City Council for final determination that describes the suitability of the proposed land to be dedicated and the way in which the parkland dedication requirement was calculated and, if applicable, the way in which the fee in lieu of was calculated. Nothing herein shall prevent the City from using such deeded park property as allowed by Sec. 77.140 RSMo.

Sec. 42-27.4  Fee-in-Lieu Payment.

If the land available within the subject subdivision proposal does not meet the requirements and stipulations listed above in Section 42-27.3 or would produce less than one acre of ground, a fee in lieu of parkland dedication shall apply. The Parks Director will provide a report to the appropriate City departments, Commission, and City Council that confirms that a cash payment shall be paid by the applicant. The payment shall be calculated at a rate of $15,000 per acre of the parkland acreage requirements as calculated above. Any fractional parts of an acre shall be prorated. This rate will apply unless the developer can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Parks Director and the Parks Advisory Commission that the current fair market value should be used.

All fee-in-lieu payments shall be deposited into the Parks and Recreation Land Escrow Account. The applicant shall deposit the required amount into this account without recourse or the right of recovery. Such cash deposit shall be made prior to the recording of the development’s Final Plat Map and before the issuance of any building permits.

These cash payments shall be spent within five years of deposit and shall be used for the following purposes in priority as determined by the City Council with the advice and recommendation of the Parks Director and the Parks Advisory Commission:

Acquisition of neighborhood or community parks within one-half of a mile of the applicable subdivision.
Improvements to existing parks within one mile of the applicable subdivision.
Acquisition or improvement of larger regional or community-wide parks within two miles of the applicable subdivision.
The dollar amount per acre value established herein will be reassessed every five years based on undeveloped real estate values in the City of Rolla. A report and recommendation shall be presented to the City Council for their consideration. (Ord. 3485; Ord. 3622, §2; Ord. 3842, §1; Ord. 4419, §§1-9)



Sec. 42-28. Flood Areas.
Special provisions shall apply within Zone A on the City's Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, and within such parts of Zones B and C on said Maps as are required by the City Engineer to be protected. In these areas, subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be reviewed to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding. Proposals shall be reviewed to assure that:

All such proposals minimize potential flood damage;

All public utilities and streets are located and constructed to minimize flood damage; and

Storm drainage facilities to be provided shall conform to standards established for City street and storm drainage now or hereafter promulgated by the City Engineer or as adopted by City Council. (Ord. 3485)



Sec. 42-29. Subdivision Improvements.
The improvements required in any subdivision shall be in accordance with the following and shall conform to the City of Rolla "Standards and Specifications" which are hereby adopted as the design standards for the public improvements required by this Article.

Streets and Alleys: The subdivider shall grade and pave all new streets and alleys (if any) within the subdivision. All streets shall be bound by curb and gutter, unless exempted. It is the City's policy to participate in or contribute only to certain additional costs for the construction of collector or arterial streets over and above the normal construction costs for minor street standards, when such collector and arterial streets are identified on the Official Map, the Major Thoroughfare Plan, or when designated by the City Engineer. Such participation is not mandatory and is solely at the election of the City Council. (Ord. 3799, §6)

Sanitary Sewers: The subdivider shall install sanitary sewer connections for each lot. When sanitary sewers are not available, the subdivider shall install within the subdivision capped sewer mains and house connections to each lot in addition to other required onsite sewerage facilities. Prior to final approval of the plat, the subdivider shall provide the City Engineer, for his approval, detailed construction plans for the proposed sanitary sewer system.

Storm Sewers: Construction plans for storm sewer facilities shall be shown both in plan and profile with details of all necessary facilities. The data regarding the area to be served by the facilities and the estimated run-off from the area tributary to the facilities beyond the subdivision shall accompany the detailed plans.

Survey Standards and Monuments: The subdivider's surveyor shall establish, or confirm the prior establishment, of permanent monuments at each controlling corner on the boundary of the subdivision and at all block corners, point of intersections, points of curvature, and points of tangency within the subdivision before final plat approval by City Council. Monuments may be selected from the types described by the "Minimum Standards for Property Boundary Surveys" of the Missouri Department of Natural Resources, but shall be made of concrete. In addition, the subdivider's surveyor shall establish at least two (2) permanent monuments as approved by the City Engineer for each block in the subdivision. Monuments shall be placed so as to create base lines in each block from which all points and lines in that block are laid out.

Permits: The subdivider shall be responsible for obtaining all applicable permits or licenses from state and federal agencies for sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and all utilities.

Sidewalks: Sidewalks may not be required on residential cul-de-sac (terminal) streets less then six hundred (600) feet in length. Sidewalks shall not be required in industrial subdivisions if zoned for that use or along State routes.

Where required, sidewalks shall have a minimum width of four (4) feet and shall be located at least three (3) feet from the edge of the curb. Sidewalks shall be installed as follows:

On one side of lanes and minor streets in subdivisions exceeding three (3) units per acre. The City Engineer shall designate on which side of the street the sidewalk shall be constructed.

On cul-de-sac streets, any required sidewalk shall either extend until it intersects with the bulb of the cul-de-sac, with a wheel chair ramp constructed to the street, or extended until it intersects with the first driveway within the bulb of the cul-de-sac.

On both sides of collector or arterial streets as shown on the Official Map or Major Thoroughfare Plan or as designated by the Commission.

The Commission may approve an alternative sidewalk plan, for example, in a Planned Unit Development, where the subdivider has submitted a proposed pedestrian circulation plan that provides more direct and safer movement of pedestrian traffic.

The City Council may also waive sidewalk requirements in developments targeted to providing affordable housing as determined by the Director.

Utilities: Utilities, including but not limited to water, sewer, natural gas, electric, and cable or telephone lines, shall be provided by the subdivider to the lots in accordance with the standards and specifications governing their installation as have been or are hereafter adopted by the City or respective utility companies. It shall be the subdivider's responsibility to repair any damage caused in the public right-of-way as a result of this work. As part of the subdivision process, all easements in, on or across the subdivision, which shall be requested in behalf of the City Engineer or the General Manager of the City Municipal Utilities, shall be granted and shown on the final plat.

Underground Wiring: All electric, cable and telephone lines shall be installed underground, except those overhead distribution feeder lines necessary to serve that subdivision and in locations as approved by the City Engineer and Rolla Municipal Utilities. Cable switching enclosures, pad mounted transformers, and service pedestals may also be installed above ground where approved by the City Engineer and Rolla Municipal Utilities. The Commission may approve above ground installations in whole or in part for nonresidential subdivisions when documentation is provided that demonstrates the impracticability of such underground installation.

Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants shall be placed by the subdivider in accordance with the requirements of the City's Fire Chief, Rolla Municipal Utilities, and the state inspection bureau of Missouri. (Ord. 3485)



Sec. 42-30. Subdivision Improvement Guarantees.
Before the final plat of any subdivision is recorded, the subdivider shall provide for the improvements described in this Article to be extended to all lots shown on the final plat at no cost to the City. In lieu of completion of the said improvements prior to recording, the subdivider or other person who agrees with the City to make public improvements on behalf of the subdivider, may post surety bond with one or more corporate sureties engaged in the business of signing surety bonds in Missouri, an escrow agreement, letter of credit or other appropriate security agreement, as approved by the City Engineer, that will insure that the improvements will be completed by the subdivider. The amount of corporate surety bond, escrow agreement, or other appropriate security agreement shall not be less than the estimated cost of the public improvements as determined by the City Engineer. The City Engineer may, during the period of such bond, accept substitution of principal or sureties on the bond or a substitution of a letter of credit, escrow or other approved security agreement.

The City Engineer may require that certain improvements, such as storm water facilities, be made and refuse to accept security for such improvements when he determines that the improvements are necessary for immediate protection of adjacent property. Otherwise, all improvements shall be completed within two (2) years after recording the plat.

The Commission, upon proof of hardship, may extend the completion date for improvements stated in the bond agreements for a maximum period of one (1) additional year; provided the request is made prior to the end of the second year following recordation and provided the security amount is revised if required by the City Engineer.

The Commission may also defer at the time of final plat approval, subject to appropriate conditions, the provision of any such improvements as, in its judgment, are not appropriate because of incompatible grades, future planned public improvements, inadequate or lack of connecting facilities, or other reasons.

For large subdivisions, the City Engineer may accept a bond or other agreement for less than the entire subdivision if the subdivider provides adequate assurances that all building permit requests will be confined to lots for which improvements will be provided under said bond or other agreement. (Ord. 3485)



Sec. 42-30.1. Release or Reduction of Security.
The release or reduction of required surety bonds, escrow agreement or other security agreement shall be in accordance with the following:

When a petition for improvements by the tax bill method is filed and when said petition has passed the required remonstrance petition assuring the City that all improvements will be provided, said bond or agreements posted by the subdivider may be released by the City Engineer.

The City Engineer may release or reduce said bond or agreements when he has determined that all or a portion of the required improvements have been satisfactorily completed and are free of any liens or other encumbrances. Any reduction in the bond or agreements shall not exceed the ratio of the cost of the completed improvements bears to the total estimated cost of all public improvements for the plat. (Ord. 3485)



Sec. 42-31. Access Criteria for Major Streets.
All existing tracts of record are guaranteed at least one driveway to a public street or right-of-way, either directly or by access easement, except as set forth below:

Collector Streets: Access to existing properties fronting on collector streets is subject only to design and construction standards. However, when new tracts or lots are created through the subdivision process, residential lots accommodating less than five (5) dwelling units will not be allowed direct access to a collector street. For nonresidential subdivisions or mixed use developments, one (1) driveway shall be allowed for each two hundred (200) feet of frontage and shall, at a minimum, be located fifty (50) feet from the near right-of-way line of any intersecting street. Tracts less than two hundred (200) feet in width may share a common access with adjoining lots or take access from a minor street.

Arterial Streets: Access to existing properties fronting on arterial streets is subject only to design and construction standards. When new tracts or lots are created through the subdivision process with frontage on an existing or proposed arterial street, access shall be limited to one (1) driveway for each two hundred fifty (250) feet of frontage. Driveway entrances shall be at least two hundred (200) feet from the near right-of-way line of any intersecting street. Tracts of less than two hundred fifty (250) feet in width must either share a common access with adjoining lots or take access from a minor or collector street.

Highway Access: No direct access is allowed from any property to a highway unless no other direct access or indirect access (via easement) is available. All other properties will be required to take access from a minor, collector, or arterial streets. (Ord. 3485)



Sec 42-32. Specifications for Documents to be Submitted.
Applications and material submitted to the Director for processing under the provisions of this Article shall conform to the specifications prescribed herein. (Ord. 3485)



Sec. 42-32.1. Sketch Plats.
The sketch plat is intended to be conceptual in nature and, while accuracy and legibility are essential, the submission of detailed and finished plans is discouraged. Sketch plats should provide information sufficient to determine general compliance with this Article and other City regulations and policies. The sketch plat should include the property to be subdivided and all adjacent unplatted property under the same ownership, and shall comply with the following requirements:

Three (3) copies of the sketch plat shall be submitted drawn to a scale of one hundred (100) feet to an inch, including scale, north arrow and date prepared.

The sketch plat shall list the proposed subdivision or project name and the name and address of the owner and/or subdivider.

A map insert or description shall accurately locate the property by lot, section, township, range or other appropriate description. Metes and bounds description is not required.

The general dimensions of the property including property lines, existing easements, public and railroad right-of-way, buildings/structures, cemeteries, watercourses, flood prone areas, and other natural or manmade features that may impact development on or adjacent to the site.

The classification, location, dimensions, and name of all existing streets adjacent to the property shall be shown. The approximate location, width, and classification of proposed streets or alleys on or adjacent to the site shall be shown.

Topography at intervals not to exceed two (2) feet based on U.S.G.S. data shall be shown.

The approximate location and size of all existing sewer and water mains on or immediately adjacent to the site.

The approximate location and size of existing and proposed culverts, storm sewers, impoundments and other storm water management facilities on or immediately adjacent to the site shall be shown.

The approximate location, dimensions and configuration of all proposed or existing lots shall be shown.

The approximate location and general layout of proposed water lines and sewage collection and disposal systems shall be shown. (Ord. 3485)



Sec. 42-32.2. Preliminary Plats.
A preliminary plat is a more precise drawing of the proposed subdivision plan than the sketch plat and is intended for detailed review by City, utility, and other officials. Only technical changes should differentiate the preliminary from the final plat, although the final plat need not include topography. The preliminary plat shall include the property intended to be subdivided plus all immediately adjacent property owned by the same person. Five (5) copies of the plat shall be provided, drawn to a scale of at least one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, (multiple sheets are acceptable). In addition, one (1) 8.5 x 11 copy of the preliminary plat shall be provided. Preliminary development plans should be, whenever possible, provided at the time the preliminary plat is submitted. (Ord. 3799, §7)



Sec. 42-32.3. Final Plats.
Once the preliminary plat is approved by the Commission, the applicant shall submit five (5) copies plus one (1) original of the final plat reflecting any required changes. In addition, one (1) 8.5 x 11 or one (1) 11 x 17 copy of the final plat with revisions shall be submitted. Copies of the final plat shall be delivered to the Director for distribution to City and utility company personnel. The final plat shall resemble in all material respects the preliminary plat, excluding topography, except that required changes or modifications shall be shown on the final plat.

Final development plans shall be submitted for review along with the final plat. Computer source copies of the final plat and development plans shall be prepared using Computer Assisted Drafting and Design (CADD) format that is compatible with the latest version of AutoCAD (dwg.format) used by the City. The development plans shall be filed within thirty (30) days following the submittal of the final plat. CADD files shall be submitted referenced to the Missouri Coordinate System of 1983 (Revised 1996) Standards of Practice No. 7.

Building or Construction Permits: To be placed on the plat.

SPECIAL PLAT RESTRICTION AND RESTRICTIVE COVENANT AS TO THE ISSUANCE OF BUILDING OR CONSTRUCTION PERMITS. THE UNDERSIGNED OWNERS OF THE TRACT OF LAND HEREIN PLATTED DO HEREBY IMPOSE UPON SAID PROPERTY AND DO HEREBY MAKE THE FOLLOWING RESTRICTIVE COVENANT: NO CONSTRUCTION MAY BE COMMENCED UPON THE ABOVE DESCRIBED PROPERTY UNTIL ALL NECESSARY BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION PERMITS HAVE BEEN ISSUED BY THE CITY OF ROLLA, MISSOURI AND THAT IT IS UNDERSTOOD BY THE UNDERSIGNED THAT NO SUCH PERMITS SHALL BE ISSUED FOR ANY LOTS HEREIN PLATTED UNTIL THE COMPLETION OF ALL PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS APPERTAINING TO SUCH LOTS OR UNTIL A CASH BOND EQUAL TO THE REASONABLE COSTS OF COMPLETING SUCH PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS HAS BEEN RECEIVED AND APPROVED BY THE CITY OF ROLLA, MISSOURI. THE ABOVE MENTIONED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS SHALL BE COMPLETED PURSUANT TO THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE UNDERSIGNED AND THE CITY OF ROLLA, MISSOURI FOR THE COMPLETION OF SUCH IMPROVEMENTS AS REQUIRED BY ARTICLE II, CHAPTER 42 OF THE CITY CODE OF ROLLA, MISSOURI.

Surveyor's Certificate: To be placed on the plat.

KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS:

THAT I, ________________, DO HEREBY CERTIFY THAT THIS PLAT MEETS MISSOURI MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR PROPERTY BOUNDARY SURVEYS AND WAS PREPARED UNDER MY SUPERVISION FROM ACTUAL SURVEY OF THE LAND HEREIN DESCRIBED PREPARED BY _______________ DATED ________ AND SIGNED BY _______________ L.S. NO. _____ AND THAT CORNER MONUMENTS AND LOT CORNER PINS SHOWN HEREIN WERE PLACED UNDER THE PERSONAL SUPERVISION OF ______________ L.S. NO. _____ IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE II, CHAPTER 42, OF THE CITY CODE OF ROLLA, MISSOURI. (Ord. 3799, §8)

Deeding: An express deeding to the public use the streets, alleys, rights-of-way, easements and any parkland or open space to be deeded to the public shall be shown on the plat with a notarized signature of the owner(s). And, where land is dedicated to a cooperative association as open space, common area or facilities under a Planned Unit Development or cluster subdivision development the owner(s) shall place the following statement with notarized signatures on the final plat.

______________ OWNER(S) OF THE PROPERTY SHOWN AND DESIGNATED HEREON, HEREBY DEED AND CONVEY THE OPEN SPACE, COMMON AREA OR COMMON FACILITIES SHOWN HEREON TO _______________. FURTHER, (I OR WE) CERTIFY THAT THERE ARE NO SUITS, ACTIONS, LIENS, OR TRUSTS ON THE PROPERTY DEEDED AND CONVEYED HEREIN, AND WARRANT GENERALLY AND SPECIFICALLY THE PROPERTY DEEDED AND CONVEYED HEREIN FOR COMMON USE AND WILL EXECUTE SUCH FURTHER ASSURANCES AS MAY BE REQUIRED. (Ord. 3842, §2)

Access Limitation: The following note shall be placed on all final plats where access to collector streets, arterial streets or highways has been placed by the City Council: "LIMITS OF NO ACCESS." The lots and area affected by such limitation shall be clearly indicated. Appropriate release of such access limitation shall be included in the dedication on the plat.

Improvement Acceptance: The acceptance of all required public improvements and dedications, as shown on the development plans on file with the City Engineer, shall be attested on the final plat by the signatures of the City Engineer, the General Manager of Rolla Municipal Utilities, and the Parks Director.

Planning and Zoning Commission Approval: The Chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Community Development Director shall sign the final plat to certify the Commissions approval:

APPROVED THE __________ DAY OF ______________. 20__, BY THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISION OF ROLLA, MISSOURI

City and County Tax Release: The City of Rolla Finance Director and the Phelps County Collector of Revenues shall sign and date the final plat to certify that all taxes have been paid.

Certificate of City Council Approval: The Mayor shall sign the final plat and his signature shall be attested by the City Clerk.

Recorder's Certificate: The Recorder of Deeds for Phelps County shall sign the final plat upon recordation identifying the cabinet and file number of the plat. . (Ord. 3485)



Sec. 42-33. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives shall have the meaning herein given. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.

(1) Affordable Housing: The standard for defining affordable housing shall utilize the maximum home value or rental rate statistics used by the Missouri Housing Development Commission.

(2) Alley: A public way, which affords a secondary access point to an abutting lot.

(3) Arterial: A street that provides primarily for through traffic movement between areas and across the City.

(4) Block: A tract of land bounded by streets or a combination of streets and other rights-of-way, parks or similar uses.

(5) Building: Shall include any part thereof; includes the word structure.

(6) City: City of Rolla, Missouri.

(7) City Council: The City Council of Rolla, Missouri.

(8) City Engineer: The Public Works Department Director or his designee.

(9) Collector: A street that provides for traffic movement between arterials and minor streets.

(10) Comprehensive Plan: A series of plans for the physical development of the City, consisting of goals and objectives, Major Thoroughfare Plan, land use plans, and other elements included by the City Council.

(11) Common Land: Land set aside for open space, including storm water drainage areas, retention ponds, and recreational use areas for the owners of the lots in a subdivision, conveyed in trust for the benefit and enjoyment of the lot owners.

(12) Contiguous Properties: Tracts or lots which abut one another along the side and/or rear lot lines.

(13) Cul-de-Sac: A street which terminates in a circular turnaround.

(14) Director: The Community Development Department Director.

(15) Easement: Authorized by a property owner for the use by another party, for a specified purpose, of any designated part of said property.

(16) Final Plat: The final map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider's plan of subdivision is presented for approval, and which, if approved, will be submitted to the County Recorder for filing.

(16A) Flag Lot: A lot with two (2) distinct portions described as follows:

(a) Access portion. That portion of the lot having frontage on or abutting a public street, with frontage for a private drive to serve the building portion.
(b) Building portion. That portion of the lot not fronting on or abutting a public street, but connected to a public street by the access portion of the lot. (Ord. 3799, §9)
(17) Local Street: See Minor Street.

(18) Lot: An undivided tract or parcel of land under one ownership having access to a street, which parcel is designated as a separate tract identified by a lot number if in a duly approved and recorded subdivision or by a metes and bounds description on a recorded instrument prior to November 1,1973.

(19) Minor Street: A street primarily providing direct access to abutting property and designated to accommodate low volume, low speed traffic.

(20) Major Subdivision: Any subdivision not classified as a minor subdivision.

(21) Minor Subdivision: Any subdivision containing not more than five (5) lots fronting on an existing City street or highway and not requiring the extension or improvement of any street.

(22) Official Map: The map established by the City Council showing streets and highways previously laid out, adopted and established by law and any amendments or additions thereto adopted by City Council through the subdivision process.

(23) Owner: Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land proposed for subdivision to effectuate transfer of the property once subdivided.

(24) Person: See Owner.

(25) Preliminary Plat: The preliminary map, drawing, or chart indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision initially required in the subdivision process.

(26) Right-of-Way: This term, for land platting purposes, shall mean that right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final plat to be separate and distinct from lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way, and not included within the dimensions or area calculations of such lots or parcels.

(27) Setback or Building Line: A line specifically established upon the plat or established by the zoning code which identifies an area into which no part of a building shall project.

(28) Shall, May: The word "Shall" is mandatory and the word "May" is permissive.

(29) Subdivider: Any person commencing proceedings under this Article to effectuate a subdivision of land.

(30) Subdivision: The subdivision of land into two (2) or more lots, tracts or parcels for the purpose of ownership transfer or development, or, if a new street or easement of access is involved, any division of a land parcel. The term includes resubdivisions and Planned Unit Development.

(31) Subdivision, Cluster: A form of development that permits reductions in lot area and bulk requirements, provided there is no increase in overall permitted density and that the resultant undeveloped land area is devoted to open space or other public purpose. (Ord. 3485)



Secs. 42-34 to 42-44. Reserved.


DIVISION 1A CLOSED STREETS
Sec. 42-45. Closing of the First and State Streets bridge.
The closing and removal of the low water bridge at First and State Streets along with Carter Creek channel improvements is hereby authorized. (Ord. 3281, §1)



Secs. 42-46 to 42-48. Reserved.



DIVISION 2 ACCEPTANCE OF PLATS
Sec. 42-49. Forum commercial resubdivision in the Forum Addition.
That the plat of Forum Commercial Resubdivision, a resubdivision of Tract No. 1, and Tract No. 6 of a Resubdivision of lots 149 through 176, lot 182 through 199 and Tract No. 1 and Tract No. 2 of the "Forum," an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, by the owners, W.B. Heagler and Mathel Heagler, husband and wife, Gene Sally and Irene Sally, husband and wife, Harland Hauck and Linda Hauck, husband and wife, First State Bank, Incorporated, A Corporation, and Amcel Corporation, Incorporated, A Corporation, be and the same is hereby approved and accepted by the City of Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 1955, §1, 2-9-76.)



Sec. 42-50. Sylvan Hills Subdivision One.
That the plat of Sylvan Hills Subdivision One, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, consisting of Lot Twenty-One (21) in Railroad Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as recorded in Book G, at page 5 in the office of the recorder of deeds of Phelps County, Missouri, which has this day been submitted to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, by the owners, James Jensen and Velma Jensen, be and the same is hereby approved and accepted by the City of Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 2084, §1, 2-13-78.)



Sec. 42-51. Eastmeadow Addition.
That the plat of Eastmeadow, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, consisting of 61 building lots and three separate tracts, which has this day been submitted to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, by the owner, Renick Enterprises, Inc., be and the same is hereby approved and accepted by the City of Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 2096, §1, 4-4-78.)



Sec. 42-52. Presbyterian Manor Tract.
That the Presbyterian Manor Tract Plat, a copy of which is attached and made a part hereof as if set forth herein at length, be and the same is hereby adopted and approved by the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, and the mayor of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby authorized to subscribe our approval of said plat. (Ord. 2108, §1, 8-7-78.)



Sec. 42-53. Forum Lakes Subdivision.
That the plat of Forum Lakes Subdivision, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, being a subdivision of a fractional part of the SE1/4, a fractional part of Lots 1 and 2, all in the East half of Section 1, Twp. 37 N., Rng. 8 W., and a fractional part of the SE 1/4 of Sec. 36, Twp. 38 N., Rng. 8 W., in Phelps County, Missouri, which has this day been submitted to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri by the owners of said property, be and the same is hereby approved and accepted by the City of Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 2135, §1, 2-12-79.)



Sec. 42-54. Brookridge Estate Addition, Tract No. 3.
WHEREAS, Norman Chapman, Ceola Chapman, Gerald Maggi and Grace Maggi are the owners of a fractional part of lot 2 of the southwest quarter of Section 7, twp. 37 N., Rng. 7 W. in Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri, and have caused the same to be subdivided by plat known as the Brookridge Estate Addition, Tract No. 3, and

WHEREAS, the council has been advised by the city engineer that all ordinances and code requirements for approval of the plat have been satisfied by said owners, and that the same has the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission.

That the plat of the Brookridge Estate Addition, Tract No. 3, as presented to the city council on this date is hereby accepted and approved. (Ord. 2144, § 1, 3-12-79.)


Sec. 42-55. Ponzer Addition.
(a) WHEREAS, John P. and Bessie L. Ponzer are the owners of a portion of the north half of the southeast quarter of Section 13, township 37 north, Missouri, and have caused the same to be subdivided by plat known as the Brookridge Estate Addition, Tract No. 3, and

WHEREAS, the council has been advised by the city engineer that all ordinances and code requirements for approval of the plat have been satisfied by said owners, and that the same has the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission.

(b) That the plat of the Ponzer Addition, as presented to the city council on this date is hereby accepted and approved. (Ord. 2260, § 1, 4-6-81.)



Sec. 42-56. Plat of Fox Creek.
(a) WHEREAS, Charles Blinne and J. Lynette Blinne, his wife, et al are the owners of a portion of a fractional part of lot 3 of the southwest quarter and a fractional part of lot 2 of the northwest quarter of Section 7, township 37 north, range 7 west in Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri, and have caused the same to be subdivided by plat known as Fox Creek, and

WHEREAS, the council has been advised by the city engineer that all ordinances and code requirements for approval of the plat have been satisfied by said owners, and that the same has the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission.

(b) That the plat of Fox Creek, as presented to the city council on this date, is hereby accepted and approved. (Ord. 2289, §1, 11-16-81.)



Sec. 42-57. The plat of Vienna Woods
(a) WHEREAS, Herman Charles and Sharon Lee Maize are the owners of a portion of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 2, township 37 north, range 8 west in Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri, and have caused the same to be subdivided by plat known as Vienna Woods, and

WHEREAS, the council has been advised by the city engineer that all ordinances and code requirements for approval of the plat have been satisfied by said owners, and that the same has the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission.

(b) That the plat of Vienna Woods, as presented to city council on this date, is hereby accepted and approved. (Ord. 2342, § 1, 9-7-82.)



Sec. 42-58. Ledgerwood Estates.
(a) WHEREAS, Larry B. Marti and Patsy Marti are the owners of a portion of the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 13, township 37 north, range 8 west in Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri, and have caused the same to be subdivided by plat known as Ledgerwood Estates, and

WHEREAS, the Council has been advised by the city engineer that all ordinances and code requirements for approval of the plat have been satisfied by said owners, and that the same has the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission,

(b) That the plat of Ledgerwood Estates, as presented to the city council on this date is hereby accepted and approved. (Ord. 2370, §1, 4-4-83).



Sec. 42-59. Pershing Village - Plat No. 1.
(a) WHEREAS, William Beasley and Harold Hall are the developers of a portion of a resubdivision of tract 4 of Heritage Heights, a subdivision of the City of Rolla, Missouri, and a fractional part of lot 3 of the southwest quarter of Section 6, township 37 north, range 7 west in Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri, and have caused the same to be subdivided by plat known as Pershing Village, Plat No. 1, and

WHEREAS, the city council has been advised by the city engineer that all ordinances and code requirements for approval of the plat have been satisfied by said developers and owners, and that the same has the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission,

(b) That the plat of Pershing Village, Plat No. 1, as presented to the city council on this date, is hereby accepted and approved. (Ord. 2383, §1, 7-5-83).



Sec. 42-60. Poe Subdivision.
(a) WHEREAS, Gordon Poe is the developer of a fractional part of lot 56 in the Railroad Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, and have caused the same to be subdivided by plat known as Poe Subdivision; and

WHEREAS, the city council has been advised by the city engineer that all ordinances and code requirements for approval of the plat have been satisfied by said developer and owners and that the same has the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission.

(b) That the plat of Poe Subdivision, as presented to the city council on this date, is hereby accepted and approved. (Ord. 2394, §1, 10-3-83).



Sec. 42-61. Harvest Fields Subdivision.
That the final plat of Harvest Fields Subdivisions as same is submitted on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 2402, §1, 1-3-84).



Sec. 42-62. Harvest Fields Resubdivision.
That the Plat of the resubdivision of Harvest Fields, a subdivision of the City of Rolla, Missouri, as presented this day to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2445, §1, 12-3-84).



Sec. 42-63. Fox Creek Resubdivision.
That the plat of the Resubdivision of Lots 1 through 8, Lots 34 through 37 and Lot 76 of Fox Creek, a subdivision of the City of Rolla, Missouri, as presented this day to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2481, §1, 3-3-86).



Sec. 42-64. Oak Knoll Estates Subdivision.
That the plat of Oak Knoll Estates subdivision, a subdivision of the city of Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 2489, §1, 7-7-86).



Sec. 42-65. Newcastle Place Subdivision.
That the plat of Newcastle Place subdivision, Phase I, a subdivision of the City of Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 2501, §1, 10-6-86.)



Sec. 42-66. Steeplechase Hills Resubdivision.
That the final plat of the resubdivision of Steeplechase Hills subdivision, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date, be and the same is hereby approved. (Ord. 2506, §1, 12-1-86.)



Sec. 42-67. Ponzer Second Addition Subdivision.
That the plat of the Ponzer Second Addition Subdivision, a subdivision of the City of Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 2526, §1, 4-6-87.)



Sec. 42-68. Woodcrest Estates Resubdivision.
That the plat of the Resubdivision of Lots 15 &16 and the vacated portion of Stratford Lane of Woodcrest Estates, a subdivision of the City of Rolla, Missouri, as presented this day to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2535, §1, 6-1-87.)



Sec. 42-69. Brookridge Estates, Tract No. 3, Resubdivision.
That the plat of the Resubdivision of Lots 48 through 88, Tract No. 3, of Brookridge Estates, a subdivision of the City of Rolla, Missouri, as presented this day to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2550, §1, 8-3-87.)



Sec. 42-70. Eastmeadow, Tract A, Resubdivision.
That the plat of the Resubdivision Tract A of Eastmeadow Subdivision, a subdivision of the City of Rolla, Missouri, as presented this day to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2551, §1, 8-3-87.)



Sec. 42-71. Forum Lakes, Tract No. 2, Resubdivision.
That the plat of the Resubdivision of a fractional part of tract No. 2 of Forum Lakes, a subdivision of the City of Rolla, Missouri, as presented this day to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2552, §1, 8-3-87.)



Sec. 42-72. Cowan's Addition, Lots 5 and 6, Block 6, Resubdivision.
That the plat of the Resubdivision of Lots 5 and 6, Block 6 of Cowan's Addition, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri as presented this day to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2558, §1, 9-8-87.)



Sec. 42-73. Hess Addition, Lot 24, Resubdivision.
That the plat of the Resubdivision of Lot 24, of Hess Addition, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as presented this day to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2565, §1, 10-5-87.)



Sec. 42-74. Lakeview Addition, Resubdivision.
That the plat of the Resubdivision of Lakeview Addition, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as presented this day to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2578, §1, 1-4-88.)



Sec. 42-75. Forum Lakes, Tract No. 10, Resubdivision.
That the plat of the Resubdivision of Forum Lakes Tract No. 10, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as presented this day to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2582, §1, 2-1-88.)



Sec. 42-76. Contel Subdivision.
That the plat of the Contel Subdivision, a subdivision of the City of Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 2586, §1, 3-7-88.)



Sec. 42-77. Forum Commercial Resubdivision, Lot "F", Resubdivision.
That the plat of the Resubdivision of Lot "F" Forum Commercial Resubdivision, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as presented this day to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2593, §1, 4-4-88.)



Sec. 42-78. East Meadow, Tract B, Resubdivision.
That the plat of the Resubdivision of Tract B Eastmeadow, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as presented this day to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2602, §1, 5-2-88.)



Sec. 42-79. Woodcrest Estates, Lots 21 thru 42, Lots 61 thru 80, Lot 87, Resubdivision.
That the plat of the resubdivision of Lots 21 thru 42, Lots 61 thru 80, and Lot 87 of Woodcrest Estates, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as presented this day to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2603, §1, 5-2-88.)



Sec. 42-80. Dogwood Trail No. 1.
That the plat of the Dogwood Trail No. 1, a subdivision of the City of Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 2613, §1; 6-7-88.)



Sec. 42-81. Bishop's Subdivision, Block 91, Resubdivision.
That the plat of the resubdivision of Block 91, Bishop's Subdivision, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as presented this day to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2614, §1; 6-7-88.)



Sec. 42-82. Rolla Park No. 2 - Resubdivision of Lot 47, a resubdivision of Lots 39-47.
That the plat of the Resubdivision of Lot 47, a Resubdivision of Lots 39-47, Rolla Park No. 2, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as presented this day to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2622, §1; 7-5-88.)



Sec. 42-83. Stone Ridge Estates - Resubdivision of Brookridge Estates Tract 3, Lots 1-43.
That the plat of Stone Ridge Estates a resubdivision of Brookridge Estates Tract 3, Lots 1-43, of a Resubdivision of Lots 48-88, Brookridge Estates Tract 3, an Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as presented this day to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2637, §1; 9-6-88.)



Sec. 42-84. Ramsey Place Plat No. 1.
That the plat of Ramsey Place Plat No.1, a subdivision of the City of Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 2638, §1; 9-6-88.)



Sec. 42-85. Forum Lakes, Tract 9, Resubdivision.
That the plat of the Resubdivision Tract 9, Forum Lakes, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as presented this day to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2642, §1; 10-3-88.)



Sec. 42-86. Ponzer Third Addition Subdivision.
That the plat of the Ponzer Third Addition Subdivision, a subdivision of the City of Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 2648, §1; 10-3-88.)



Sec. 42-87. Newcastle Place, Plat 1, Resubdivision.
That the plat of the resubdivision of a portion of Newcastle Place Plat 1, a subdivision of the City of Rolla, Missouri, as presented this day to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri is hereby approved. (Ord. 2649, §1; 10-17-88.)



Sec. 42-88. Cowans Addition - Resubdivision of Lots 19 and 20, Block 12.
That the plat of the Resubdivision Lots 19 and 20, Block 12, Cowans Addition, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as presented this day to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2665, §1; 1-3-89.)



Sec. 42-89. Forum Lakes Addition - Resubdivision of Tracts 1 and 4.
That the plats of the Resubdivision Tracts 1 and 4, Forum Lakes, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as presented this day to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2670, §1; 2-6-89.)



Sec. 42-90. Maggi Place Addition.
That the plat of Maggi Place, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2674, §1; 3-6-89.)



Sec. 42-91. Ramsey Place Plat No. 2.
That the plat of Ramsey Place Plat No. 2, a subdivision of the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 2691, §1; 8-7-89.)



Sec. 42-92. 10th Street Medical Center Subdivision.
That the plat of 10th Street Medical Center Subdivision, a subdivision of the City of Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 2701, §1; 9-5-89.)



Sec. 42-93. Old Towne Place.
That the plat of the Resubdivision Old Towne Place, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as presented this day to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2706, §1; Ord. 2738, §1.)



Sec. 42-94. Eastmeadow: Resubdivision of Tract "A-4" of the Resubdivision of
Tract "A" of Eastmeadow.

That the plat of the Resubdivision of Tract "A-4" of the Resubdivision of Tract "A" of Eastmeadow, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as presented this day to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2747, §1.)



Sec. 42-95. Chasteen Subdivision.
That the plat of Chasteen Subdivision, a subdivision of the City of Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 2756, §1.)



Sec. 42-96. Franklin-Schweiss Addition.
That the plat of the Franklin-Schweiss Addition, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as presented this day to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2763, §1.)



Sec. 42-97. Southview and Winchester Drives.
That the plat for the dedication of portions of Southview and Winchester Drives in the City of Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 2787, §1)



Sec. 42-98. Scottsvale Subdivision.
That the plat of Scottsvale Subdivision, a subdivision of the City of Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 2788, §1)



Sec. 42-99. Lots 16, 17, 18, 23 and 24 of Maggi Place.
That the plat of the Resubdivision of Lots 16, 17, 18, 23 and 24 of Maggi Place, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as presented this day to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2789, §1)



Sec. 42-100. Huntington Estates No. 1, a resubdivision of Brookridge Estates No. 2.
That the plat of Huntington Estates No. 1, a resubdivision of Brookridge Estates No. 2, a subdivision of the City of Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 2792, §1)



Sec. 42-101. A portion of Tract 12, Forum Lakes.
That the plat of the Resubdivision of a portion of Tract 12, Forum Lakes, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as presented this day to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2797, §1)



Sec. 42-102. A portion of Tract 5, Forum Lakes.
That the plat of the Resubdivision of a portion of Tract 5 of Forum Lakes, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as presented this day to the City Council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2808, §1)



Sec. 42-103. Huntington Estates No. 2, a resubdivision of Brookridge Estates No. 2.
That the plat of the Huntington Estates No. 2, a resubdivision of Brookridge Estates No. 2, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as presented this day to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2813, §1)



Sec. 42-103.1 Tract 7 Forum Lakes, a resubdivision of Tract 7 Forum Lakes.
That the plat of Tract 7 Forum Lakes, a resubdivision of Tract 7 Forum Lakes, an Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as presented this day to the City Council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2838, §1)



Sec. 42-103.2 Tract No. 1 Silverleaf Subdivision, a resubdivision of Ramsey Place.
That Tract No. 1 of the plat of the Silverleaf Subdivision, a resubdivision of Ramsey Place, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as presented this day to the City Council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2839, §1)



Sec. 42-103.3 Approving the plat of Richfountain Place.
That the plat of Richfountain Place No. 1, a subdivision of the City of Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 2847, §1)



Sec. 42-103.4 Approving the plat of the Division of Tract "B" of resubdivision of Lots 16, 17, 18 Maggi Place Subdivision.
That the Division of Tract "B" of the resubdivision of Lots 16, 17, 18 Maggi Place Subdivision, all of Tract "B" formerly made up of Lots 16, 17 and 18 is now changed into Tract "B-1" and Tract "B-2", an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as shown on the plat and presented this day to the City Council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2863, §1)



Sec. 42-103.5 Approving the plat of the resubdivision of a part of Tract 1 of Heritage Heights.
That the plat of the Resubdivision of a part of Tract 1 of Heritage Heights, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri as presented this day to the City Council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2864, §1)



Sec. 42-103.6 Approving the plat of the resubdivision of a portion of Tract 12, Forum Lakes.
That the plat of the resubdivision of a portion of Tract 12 Forum Lakes, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as presented this day to the City Council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2865, §1)



Sec. 42-103.7 Approving the plat of the resubdivision of a portion of Lots 82 and 83, Railroad Addition.
That the plat of the resubdivision of a portion of Lots 82 and 83, Railroad Addition, a subdivision of the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 2877, §1)



Sec. 24-103.8 Approving the plat of the Wal-Mart Supercenter Plaza.
That the plat of the Wal-Mart Supercenter Plaza, a subdivision of the City of Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 2880, §1)



Sec. 42-103.9 Approving the plat of Lots G &H (now called I &J), of the resubdivision of Lot 1 of the resubdivision of a portion of Tract 12, Forum Lakes Addition.
That the resubdivision of Lots G & H (now called I & J) of the resubdivision of Lot 1 of the resubdivision of a portion of Tract 12, Forum Lakes Addition, as shown on the plat and presented this day to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2881, §1)



Sec. 42-103.10 Approving the plat of Tract B-2 of the Resubdivision of Tract B of the Resubdivision of Lots 16, 17, 18, 23 and 24 of Maggi Place.
That the Resubdivision of Tract B-2 of the Resubdivision of Tract B of the Resubdivision of Lots 16, 17, 18, 23 and 24 of Maggi Place Addition, as shown on the plat and presented this day to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2887, §1)



Sec. 42-103.11 Approving the plat of the Resubdivision of Holloways First Addition, Second Plat.
That the Resubdivision of Holloways First Addition, Second Plat, as shown on the plat and presented this day to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2898, §1)



Sec. 42-103.12 Approving the plat of the Resubdivision of Tract 3 Forum Lakes Subdivision.
That the Resubdivision of Tract 3 Forum Lakes, as shown on the plat and presented this day to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2905, §1)



Sec. 42-103.13 Approving the plat of the Resubdivision of Tract A, Maggi Place.
That the plat of the Resubdivision of Tract A, Maggi Place, an Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as presented this day to the City Council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2916, §1)



Sec. 42-103.14 Approving the plat of the Resubdivision of Tract 11 of Forum Lakes Subdivision.
That the Resubdivision of Tract 11 Forum Lakes as shown on the plat and presented this day to the City Council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2917, §1)



Sec. 42-103.15 Approving the plat of the Rolla Recycling Center Subdivision.
That the plat of the Rolla Recycling Center, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as presented this day to the City Council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2918, §1)



Sec. 42-103.16 Approving the plat of the Mossman Subdivision.
That the plat of the Mossman Subdivision, a subdivision of the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 2942, §1)



Sec. 42-103.17 Approving the plat of the Deer Crossing Subdivision.
That the plat of the Deer Crossing Subdivision, a subdivision of the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 2943, §1)



Sec. 42-103.18 Approving the plat of the resubdivision of Scottsvale Subdivision.
That the Resubdivision of Scottsvale, as shown on the plat and presented this day to the City Council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2951, §1)



Sec. 42-103.19 Approving the plat of the Hutchinson Subdivision No. 2.
That the plat of the Hutchinson Subdivision No. 2, a subdivision of the City of Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 2954, §1)



Sec. 42-103.20 Approving the plat of the resubdivision of Tracts "B-2", "B-3" & "B-4" of the resubdivision of Tract B of the Eastmeadow Subdivision.
That the Resubdivision of Tracts "B-2", "B-3" & "B-4" of the Resubdivision of Tract B of Eastmeadow Subdivision, as shown on the plat and presented this day to the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2959, §1)



Sec. 42-103.21 Approving the final plat of the Paul Lewis Subdivision First Plat.
That the final plat of the Paul Lewis Subdivision First Plat, a subdivision of the City of Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 2961, §1)



Sec. 42-103.22 Approving the final plat of the Hy Point Industrial Park South Subdivision.
That the final plat of the Hy Point Industrial Park South Subdivision, a subdivision of the City of Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 2972, §1)



Sec. 42-103.23 Approving the final plat of the Second Fire Station plat No. 1Subdivision.
That the final plat of the Second Fire Station Plat No. 1 Subdivision, a subdivision of the City of Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 2973, §1)



Sec. 42-103.24 Approving the final plat of the VBC, Inc. Subdivision.
That the final plat of the VBC, Inc. Subdivision, a subdivision of the City of Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 2982, §1)



Sec. 42-103.25 Approving the amended plat of the Resubdivision of Scottsvale Subdivision.
That the Resubdivision of Scottsvale, as shown on the amended plat and presented this day to the City Council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2986, §1)



Sec. 42-103.26 Approving the plat of the Walmart Supercenter Plaza II Resubdivision.
That the Walmart Supercenter Plaza II Resubdivision, as shown on the plat and presented this day to the City Council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 2987, §1)



Sec. 42-103.27 Approving the plat of the LDS Subdivision.
That the plat of the LDS Subdivision, a subdivision of the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 2990, §1)



Sec. 42-103.28 Approving the plat of the Ashley Hill Subdivision.
That the plat of the Ashley Hill Subdivision, a subdivision of the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 2991, §1)



Sec. 42-103.29 Approving the plat of the English Hills Resubdivision of the Chasteen Subdivision, a subdivision in the City of Rolla, Missouri.
That the plat of the English Hills Resubdivision, a resubdivision of the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 2996, §1)



Sec. 42-103.30 Approving the plat of the Dishman Subdivision, a resubdivision of Lots 1, 4, 5 and 8 of Block 64 of the County Addition in the City of Rolla, Missouri.
That the plat of the Dishman Subdivision, a resubdivision of Lots 1, 4, 5 and 8, of Block 64 of the County Addition of the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 2997, §1)



Sec. 42-103.31 Approving the plat of the Resubdivision of Lots 12, 15-19 of the Scottsvale Subdivision, a subdivision in the City of Rolla, Missouri.
That the plat of the Resubdivision of Lots 12, 15-19 of the Scottsvale Subdivision, a subdivision in the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 2999, §1)



Sec. 42-103.32 Approving the plat of the Resubdivision of Part of Tracts 2 and 3 of the Heritage Heights Addition, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri.
That the plat of the Resubdivision of Part of Tracts 2 and 3 of the Heritage Heights Addition, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3000, §1)



Sec. 42-103.33 Approving the plat of the Marty Brown Subdivision, a subdivision in the City of Rolla, Missouri.
That the plat of Marty Brown Subdivision, a subdivision in the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3005, §1)



Sec. 42-103.34 Approving the plat of the M & M Subdivision, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri.
That the plat of the M & M Subdivision, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3010, §1)



Sec. 42-103.35 Approving the plat of the Newcastle Place Plat No. 2 Subdivision, Phase 1, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri.
That the plat of the Newcastle Place Plat No. 2 Subdivision, Phase 1, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3011, §1)



Sec. 42-103.36 Approving the plat of the Vienna Oaks Subdivision, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri.
That the plat of the Vienna Oaks Subdivision, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3012, §1)



Sec. 42-103.37 Approving the plat of the Chrysler Addition, a resubdivision of part of Lots 68 and 77 of the Railroad Addition, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri.
That the plat of the Chrysler Addition, a resubdivision of Part of Lots 68 and 77 of the Railroad Addition, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3018, §1)



Sec. 42-103.38 Approving the plat of the Ponzer Fourth Addition, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri.
That the plat of the Ponzer Fourth Addition, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3022, §1)



Sec. 42-103.39 Approving the plat of the Dogwood Trail No. 2 Subdivision, a resubdivision of Lot 1 of Dogwood Trail No. 1 Subdivision.
That the plat of the Dogwood Trail No. 2, a resubdivision of Lot 1 of Dogwood Trail No. 1 Subdivision, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3032, §1)



Sec. 42-103.40 Approving the plat of the Raymond Bartle Subdivision.
That the plat of the Raymond Bartle Subdivision, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3033, §1)



Sec. 42-103.41 Approving the plat of the Newcastle Place Plat No. 3 Subdivision.
That the plat of the Newcastle Place Plat No. 3 Subdivision, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3043, §1)



Sec. 42-103.42 Approving the replat of Lot 56 of the Ponzer Second Addition.
That the replat of Lot 56 of the Ponzer Second Addition, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3050, §1)



Sec. 42-103.43 Approving the plat of the Payne Subdivision.
That the plat of the Payne Subdivision, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3051, §1)



Sec. 42-103.44 Approving the plat of the Frontier Subdivision.
That the plat of the Frontier Subdivision, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3061, §1)



Sec. 42-103.45 Approving the Poe's Subdivision, a subdivision of Block 9, of a part of James Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri.
That the plat of Poe's Subdivision, a resubdivision of a part of James Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3065, §1)



Sec. 42-103.46 Approving the plat of the "Spring Crest" Subdivision.
That the plat of the Spring Crest Subdivision, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3072, §1)



Sec. 42-103.47 Approving the resubdivision of Lots C-1 through C-5 of the resubdivision of Tract A, B and C of the Newcastle Place Plat No. 1.
That the resubdivision of Lots C-1 through C-5 of the resubdivision of Tract A, B and C of the Newcastle Place, Plat No. 1, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3085, §1)



Sec. 42-103.48 Approving the plat of the Johns Acres Subdivision Plat No. 1.
That the plat of the Johns Acres Subdivision Plat No. 1, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3086, §1)



Sec. 42-103.49 Approving the Old Power Plant Addition, a resubdivision of part of Block 8, Rolla Mill Addition.
That the Old Power Plant Addition, a resubdivision of part of Block 8, Rolla Mill Addition, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3106, §1)



Sec. 42-103.50 Approving a resubdivision of Lots 58, 59 and 60 of the Forum Subdivision.
That the resubdivision of lots 58, 59 and 60 of the Forum Subdivision, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3107, §1)



Sec. 42-103.51 Approving the plat of Victoria Hills Subdivision Plat No. 1.
That the plat of Victoria Hills Subdivision Plat No. 1, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3115, §1)



Sec. 42-103.52 Approving the plat of Westen Ridge Subdivision, a subdivision in Lots 24 &25 of Railroad Addition.
That the plat of Westen Ridge Subdivision, a subdivision in lots 24 &25 of Railroad Addition, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3119, §1)



Sec. 42-103.53 Approving the plat of Forsyth Addition.
That the plat of Forsyth Addition, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3141, §1)



Sec. 42-103.54 Approving the plat of Ware Addition, a resubdivision of part of tract No. 4 Heritage Heights Addition.
That the plat of Ware addition, a resubdivision of a part of tract No. 4, Heritage Heights Addition, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3146, §1)



Sec. 42-103.55 Approving the plat of Scottsvale Manor a resubdivision of Lots 25-30 and 38-75 of the amended subdivision plat of Scottsvale Subdivision.
That the plat of Scottsvale Manor a Resubdivision of lots 25-30 and 38-75 of the amended subdivision plat of Scottsvale Subdivision, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3174, §1)



Sec. 42-103.56 Approving the plat of Carolyn Estates, a subdivision in part of Lot B of a resubdivision of a portion of Tract 7 of Forum Lakes, and a part of Tract 8 of Forum Lakes.
That the plat of Carolyn Estates, a Subdivision in part of lot B of a Resubdivision of a portion of Tract 7 of Forum Lakes and a part of Tract 8 of Forum Lakes, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3178, §1)



Sec. 42-103.57 Approving the plat of Richfountain Place Plat No. 2.(Chapman)
That the plat of Richfountain Place Plat No. 2, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3184, §1)



Sec. 42-103.58 Approving Blue's Lake Plat No. 1.
That the plat of Blue's Lake Plat No. 1, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3187, §1)



Sec. 42-103.59 Approving the plat of Rolla Federal Credit Union Subdivision,
a resubdivision, in part of Tract 2 of the Forum, and in the SE 1/4, SEC 1, T37N, R8W, Rolla.

That the plat of Rolla Federal Credit Union Subdivision, a resubdivision, in part of Tract 2 of the Forum, and in the SE 1/4, Sec. 1, T37N, R8W, Rolla, Missouri, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3191, §1)



Sec. 42-103.60 Approving the plat of Victoria Hills Plat No. 2. (Snelson/Harlan)
That the plat of Victoria Hills Plat No. 2, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3196, §1)



Sec. 42-103.61 Approving the plat of Blue's Lake Parkway, a road in the Southwest Quarter of Section 10 and the Northwest Quarter of Section 15, Township 37 North, Range 8 West. (Dietzmann)
That the plat of Blue's Lake Parkway, a road in the Southwest Quarter of Section 10 and the Northwest Quarter of Section 15, Township 37 North, Range 8 West, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3205, §1)



Sec. 42-103.62 Approving the plat of Habitat for Humanity Addition, a resubdivision of Lots 5 through 8, Block 3 of Hargis Addition and part of vacated Seventh Street. (Phelps County Habitat for Humanity, Inc.)
That the plat of Habitat for Humanity Addition, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3208, §1)



Sec. 42-103.63 Approving the plat of Rhodes Subdivision No. 1. (Vernon E. Rhodes Family)
That the plat of Rhodes Subdivision No. 1, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the city council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3209, §1)



Sec. 42-103.64 Approving the plat of Oak Knoll South Plat No. 1 (Morgan).
That the plat of Oak Knoll South Plat No. 1, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3221, §1)



Sec. 42-103.65 Approving the plat of Bradford Subdivision, a resubdivision of Lots 1 and 4 of Block 3 of Newmans Addition. (Bradford)
That the plat of Bradford Subdivision, a Resubdivision of lots 1 and 4 of Block 3 of Newmans Addition, Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3235, §1)



Sec. 42-103.66 Approving the plat of Ryan's Acres, a subdivision in the SW 1/4 SW 1/4, Sec. 10, T37N, R8W, Rolla.
(a) That the plat, Ryan's Acres, a subdivision in the SW 1/4 SW 1/4, Sec. 10, T37N, R8W, Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3257, §1)



Sec. 42-103.66.1 Approving the plat of Copperfield Subdivision, a resubdivision of part of Block 42 of Bishop's Addition, Rolla (Bennish/Vessell).
That the plat of Copperfield Subdivision, a Resubdivision of part of Block 42 of Bishop's Addition, Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3243, §1)



Sec. 42-103.66.2 Approving the plat of Oak Knoll South Plat No. 2, a subdivision in the SW 1/4, SE 1/4, Sec. 13, T37N, R8W, Rolla (Morgan).
That the plat of Oak Knoll South Plat No. 2, a subdivision in the SW 1/4 SE 1/4, Sec. 13, T37N, R8W, Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3245, §1)



Sec. 42-103.66.3 Approving the plat of Richfountain Place Plat No. 3, a resubdivision of Lot B of Richfountain Place Plat No. 2 (Chapman).
That the plat of Richfountain Place Plat No. 3, a resubdivision of Lot B of Richfountain Place Plat No. 2 an addition to the City of Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri, as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3246, §1)



Sec. 42-103.66.4 Approving the plat of Hickory Hills Plat No. 2, a resubdivision of Lots 23, 24, 25, 26 and West 1/2 of Lot 27 of Hickory Hills, Rolla (Powell Lumber Co.).
That the plat of Hickory Hills Plat No. 2, a resubdivision of Lots 23, 24, 25, 26 and the west 1/2 of lot 27 of Hickory Hills, Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3247, §1)



Sec. 42-103.66.5 Approving the plat of Marty Brown Subdivision Plat No. 2, a resubdivision of lots 3 and 4 of Marty Brown Subdivision, Rolla (Schweiss)
That the plat of Marty Brown Subdivision Plat No. 2, a resubdivision of Lots 3 and 4 of Marty Brown Subdivision, Rolla, Missouri, as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3248, §1)



Sec. 42-103.67 Approving the plat of Victory Acres, a subdivision in the SW 1/4 SW 1/4, Sec. 10, T37N, R8W, Rolla.
That the plat, Victory Acres, A Subdivision in the SW1/4 SW1/4, SEC. 10 T37N, R8W Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3288, §1)



Sec. 42-103.68. Approving the plat of University Park Subdivision.
That the plat, University Park Subdivision, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3294, §1).



Sec. 42-103.69. Approving the plat of Hod's Hills Resubdivision of Lot 12 of Deer Crossing and a fractional part of Railroad Lot 87.
That the plat of Hod's Hills Resubdivision of Lot 12 of Deer Crossing and a fractional part of Railroad Lot 87, a Subdivision in Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3306, §1)



Sec. 42-103.70. Approving the plat of Vienna Oaks Subdivision Phase II a Resubdivision of Tract A of Vienna Oaks Subdivision - Phase I, a resubdivision of Lot 15 and part of Lot 2, Railroad Addition.
That the plat, Vienna Oaks Subdivision Phase II a Resubdivision of Tract A of Vienna Oaks Subdivision - Phase I, a Resubdivision of lot 15 and part of Lot 2, Railroad Addition, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3307, §1)



Sec. 42-103.71. Approving the plat of Wild Rose Hill.
That a new ordinance approving the plat of Wild Rose Hill Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby enacted. (Ord. 3338, §1; Ord. 3349, §2)



Sec. 42-103.72. Approving the plat of Municipal Acres No. 1 (RMU).
That the plat of Municipal Acres No. 1, a Subdivision in Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3350, §1)



Sec. 42-103.73. Approving the plat of Municipal Acres No. 2 (RMU).
That the plat of Municipal Acres No. 2, a Subdivision in Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3351, §1)



Sec. 42-103.74. Approving the plat of Oak Knoll South Plat No. 3.
That the plat, Oak Knoll South Plat No. 3, a Subdivision in Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3353, §1)



Sec. 42-103.75. Approving the plat of California Hills, a Resubdivision of part of Tract 3C of Resubdivision of Tract 3 of Forum Lakes.
That the plat of California Hills, a Resubdivision of part of Tract 3C of Resubdivision of Tract 3 of Forum Lakes, a Subdivision in Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3354, §1)



Sec. 42-103.76 Approving the plat of Timber Creek.
That the plat of Timber Creek, a Subdivision in Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3372, §1; Ord. 3394, §2)

That this Ordinance be approved contingent upon the Corps of Engineers issuing a permit for the drainage channel in Village Lake Subdivision. (Ord. 3372, §2)



Sec. 42-103.77 Approving the plat of lot 14 of Forum Lakes Subdivision, a Planned Unit Development (PUD).
That the plat of the Resubdivision of Lot 14 of Forum Lakes Subdivision, a Planned Unit Development in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3380, §1)



Sec. 42-103.78 Approving the plat of Swinfard Subdivision.
That the plat, Swinfard Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3384, §1)



Sec. 42-103.79 Approving the plat of Lowe's Rolla No. 1.
That the plat, Lowe's Rolla No. 1, a Subdivision in Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3385, §1)



Sec. 42-103.80 Approving the plat of Pine Creek Commercial Park Plat No. 1.
That the plat of Pine Creek Commercial Park Plat No. 1, a Subdivision in Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3398, §1)



Sec. 42-103.81 Approving the plat of Mid Missouri Credit Union.
That the plat of Mid Missouri Credit Union, a Subdivision in Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3404, §1)



Sec. 42-103.82 Approving the plat of Songbird Subdivision.
That the plat of Songbird Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3410, §1)



Sec. 42-103.83. Approving the plat of Richfountain Place Tract "C".
That the plat of Richfountain Place Tract "C", a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3413, §1)



Sec. 42-103.84 Approving the plat of Country Aire Place.
(a) That the plat of Country Aire Place Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3442, §1)

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3442, §2)



Sec. 42-103.85 Approving the plat of Municipal Acres No. 3 (RMU).
That the plat of Municipal acres No. 3, a Subdivision in Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3450, §1)



Sec. 42-103.86 Approving the plat of Municipal Acres No. 4 (RMU).
That the plat of Municipal acres No. 4, a Subdivision in Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3451, §1)



Sec. 42-103.87 Approving the plat of Municipal Acres No. 5 (RMU).
That the plat of Municipal acres No. 5, a Subdivision in Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved. (Ord. 3452, §1)



Sec. 42-103.88 Approving the plat of C & M Properties Resubdivision (Kehoe).
(a) That the plat of C & M Properties Resubdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3455, §§1 &2)



Sec. 42-103.89. Approving Silverleaf Subdivision No. 2 (Sonshine Street Enterprises Inc.)
(a) That the plat of Silverleaf Subdivision No. 2, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3457, §§1 &2)



Sec. 42-103.90 Approving Park Place Replat (Brown).
(a) That the plat of Park Place Replat, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3458, §§1 &2)



Sec. 42-103.91 Approving Deer Crossing East Subdivision (Renick).
(a) That the plat of Deer Crossing East Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3459, §§1 &2)



Sec. 42-103.92 Approving KD-S Gardens (Hall).
(a) That the plat of KD-S Gardens, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3466, §§1 &2)



Sec. 42-103.93 Approving Robertson Subdivision No. 1 (Heartland Properties of Missouri L.L.C.)
(a) That the plat of Robertson Subdivision No. 1, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3467, §§1 &2)



Sec. 42-103.94 Approving the plat of Wild Horse Run Plat No. 1 (Sooter).
(a) That the plat of Wild Horse Run Plat No. 1, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) The mandatory parkland dedication or fee-in-lieu requirement for subdivisions contained in Chapter 42, Article II, Section 42-26 is hereby waived for the Wild Horse Run Subdivision Phase 1 and all subsequent phases within the original 32.5 acre development provided the subdivider/owner:

(1) Constructs the clubhouse and swimming pool facility prior to the issuance of any building permits for single-family dwellings in the subdivision.

(2) Constructs the clubhouse and swimming pool facility on Lot 1 (.33 acre) of Wild Horse Run Subdivision at the corner of Dana Renee' Drive and South Rolla Street in substantial conformance with the attached site plan diagram with respect to location, size, layout, and construction type and materials.

(3) Establishes a homeowner's association prior to the issuance of any building permits for single-family dwellings in the subdivision. The By-:Laws and Articles of Incorporation to be recorded with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds and reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The By-Laws and Articles of Incorporation shall state responsibility for the maintenance and operation of the clubhouse and swimming pool facility.

(c) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3468, §§1-3)



Sec. 42-103.95. Approving Blue's Lake Plat No. 2 (Dietzmann).
(a) That the plat of Blue's Lake Plat No. 2, a Subdivision in Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3471, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.96. Approving Linwood Estates Plat I (Holt).
(a) That the plat of Linwood Estates Plat I, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3476, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.97. Approving Callen Subdivision (Callen).
(a) That the plat of Callen Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3477, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.98 Approving Wild Horse Run Plat No. 2 (Sooter).
(a) That the plat of Wild Horse Run Plat No. 2, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3483, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.99 Approving Harris Subdivision.
(a) That the plat of Harris Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) Storm water and park dedication requirements shall be met at the time Lot 2, of Harris Subdivision is subdivided. (Ord. 3494, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.100 Approving Country Ridge Subdivision (Huffman).
(a) That the plat of Country Ridge Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3498, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.101 Approving the Resubdivision of Lots 3-26 of Maxwell Subdivision (Ellis/Shanks).
(a) That the Resubdivision of Lots 3-26 of Maxwell Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3502, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.102 Approving Linwood Estates No. 2 (Holt).
(a) That the plat of Linwood Estates No. 2, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3503, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.103 Approving the Resubdivision of Jordan's Pass No. 2 (Jordan).
(a) That the Resubdivision of Jordan's Pass No. 2, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3504, §§2-3)



Sec. 42-103.104 Approving Tri-C Subdivision II (Chapman).
(a) That the plat of the Tri-C Subdivision II, a Subdivision in Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3507, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.105 Approving Morgan's Hill (Morris).
(a) That the plat of Morgan's Hill, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3508, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.106 Approving the resubdivision of Lots 46-52 of University Park Subdivision (Hayes-Williams).
(a) That the plat of the Resubdivision of Lots 46-52 of University Park Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3509, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.107 Approving University Heights (Morris).
(a) That the plat of University Heights, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3510, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.108 Approving Leonard Sally Subdivision (Pietsch).
(a) That the plat of Leonard Sally Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3515, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.109 Approving Shepherd Place Subdivision (Shepherd).
(a) That the plat of Shepherd Place Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3521, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.110 Approving Hy Point Industrial Park North Plat No. 1 Subdivision (RCDC).
(a) That the plat of Hy Point Industrial Park North Plat No. 1 Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3522, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.111 Approving Rhodes Subdivision No. 2 (Rhodes).
(a) That the plat of Rhodes Subdivision No. 2, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3539, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.112 Approving Brewer Subdivision No. 1 (Brewer Science).
(a) That the plat of Brewer Subdivision No. 1, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3540, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.113 Approving Charlotte's Acres (Barrack).
(a) That the plat of Charlotte's Acres, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) The park dedication or fee-in-lieu payment requirement shall be met at the time Lots 1 or 2 of Charlotte's Acres Subdivision are further subdivided. The property owner, in the event that a fee-in-lieu of land dedication is required, shall pay the fee amount calculated using the rate established at the date the re-subdivision is approved.

(c) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3547, §§1-3)



Sec. 42-103.114 Approving the Steak House Subdivision. (Hogan/Dietzmann).
(a) That the plat of the Steak House Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3563, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.115 Approving Poe Subdivision II. (Poe)
(a) That the plat of the Poe Subdivision II, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3568, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.116 Approving Halifax Court Subdivision. (Moorkamp)
(a) That the plat of the Halifax Court Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3569, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.117 Approving Blue's Lake Plat No. 3 (Dietzmann)
(a) That the plat of the Blue's Lake Plat No. 3, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3578, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103. 118 Approving Hy Point Industrial Park South Plat No. 2 Subdivision. (Rolla Community Development Corporation)
(a) That the plat of Hy Point Industrial Park South Plat No. 2 Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3591, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.119 Approving Southside Plaza Subdivision. (Burrell)
(a) That the plat of Southside Plaza Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3594, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.120 Approving Pope Place Subdivision. (Pope)
(a) That the plat of Pope Place Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3595, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.121 Approving Deer Cove Subdivision. (Apostolic Pentecostal Church of Rolla)
(a) That the plat of Deer Cove Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3596, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.122 Approving Gracie Place Subdivision. (JRS Enterprises)
(a) That the plat of Gracie Place Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3601, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.123 Approving Tucker Place Subdivision. (Herrman/Voss)
(a) That the plat of Tucker Place Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3602, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.124 Approving Huntleigh Estates Subdivision. (Holt)
(a) That the plat of Huntleigh Estates Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3614, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.125 Approving Deer Cove Subdivision amended Plat. (Apostolic Pentecostal Church)
(a) That the plat of Deer Cove Subdivision Amended Plat, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community

Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3617, §§1-2)

Sec. 42-103.126 Approving Pope Plaza Subdivision. (Pope)
(a) That the plat of Pope Plaza Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3619, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.127 Approving Guffey Subdivision. (Guffey Zumwalt L.L.C.)
(a) That the plat of Guffey Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3620, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.128. Approving Hy Point Industrial Park North Plat No. 2. (RCDC)
(a) That the plat of Hy Point Industrial Park North Plat No. 2, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3626, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.129. Approving La Chateau Subdivision.
(a) That the plat of La Chateau Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3628, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.130 Approving Raspberry Hill Subdivision.
(a) That the plat of Raspberry Hill Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3629, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.131 Approving Oak Knoll South Plat No. 4.
(a) That the plat of Oak Knoll South Plat No. 4, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3650, §§1-2).



Sec. 42-103.132 Approving Frueh Estates (Frueh).
(a) That the plat of Frueh Estates, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3654, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.133 Approving Stuart's Little Subdivision (Baur/Hahn).
(a) That the plat of Stuart's Little Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3656, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.134 Approving Rolla Investments Shopping Center Subdivision (Rolla Investments LLC).
(a) That the plat of Rolla Investments Shopping Center Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3657, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.135 - Approving Harris Subdivision No. 2 (Harris).
(a) That the plat of Harris Subdivision No. 2, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3667, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.136 - Approving Country Trace Subdivision (Chapman).
(a) That the plat of Country Trace Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. No building permits should be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3669, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.137 - Approving Blue's Lake Plat No. 4. (Dietzmann).
(a) That the plat of Blue's Lake Plat No. 4, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds.

(c) A special agreement shall accompany the plat, addressing storm water related issues for the present and future development of the Blue's Lake Area. (Ord. 3673, §§1-3)



Sec. 42-103.138 - Approving Al West Chrysler Nissan Drive-In. (Al West Chrysler Nissan).
(a) That the plat of Al West Nissan Drive-In, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3677, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.139 - Approving the resubdivision of Lots 33-38 of University Park Subdivision. (H&C Investments).
(a) That the plat of the Resubdivision of Lots 33-38 of University Park Subdivision No. 2, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3678, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.140 Approving Heritage Heights Addition. (Beard, Deo and Davis).
(a) That the plat of Heritage Heights Addition, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3681, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.141 Approving Aldi Subdivision No. 2. (Investment Realty).
(a) That the plat of Aldi Subdivision No. 2, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) Chapter 15 of Rolla Ordinances relating to Storm Water Conveyance and Detention shall be met at the time lots 3W and 3E are developed and concurrently with the requirements of Chapter 15 of the City of Rolla Ordinances relating to Erosion and Sediment Control.

(c) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3686, §§1-3)



Sec. 42-103.142 Approving Lost Acres Subdivision. (Lortz).
(a) That the plat of Lost Acres Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) All public improvements including storm water and flood control requirements shall meet current requirements in place at the time the tracts are developed or further subdivided. Tract A requirements shall be met at the time Tract B is developed or further subdivided.

(c) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3687, §§1-3)



Sec. 42-103.143 Approving Poe Subdivision III. (Poe)
(a) That the plat of Poe Subdivision III, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3691, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.144. Approving Investment Subdivision. (Woessner)
(a) That the plat of Investment Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3695, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.145. Approving Paul's Addition. (Coverdell)
(a) That the plat of Paul's Addition, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3696, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.146. Approving I-44 Center. (Real Ventures)
(a) That the plat of I-44 Center, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3700, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.147. Approving Meadow Brook Subdivision #2.
(a) That the plat of the Meadow Brook Subdivision #2, a replat of Lots 32 thru 39 of Meadow Brook Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3707, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.148. Approving Habitat for Humanity Second Addition. (Habitat for Humanity).
(a) That the plat of Habitat for Humanity Second Addition, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3711, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.149. Approving Paul's Addition Replat of Lots 4, 6, 7, and 8. (Coverdell)
(a) That the plat of Paul's Addition Replat of Lots 4, 6, 7, and 8, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3714, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.150. Approving Lister Subdivision. (Lister)
(a) That the plat of Lister Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3719, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.151. Approving John Brown Subdivision. (Brown)
(a) That the plat of John Brown Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3733, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.152. Approving Collegiate Station at Rolla. (Collegiate Station at Rolla LP Irving Texas)
(a) That the plat of Collegiate Station at Rolla, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That the attached Site Plan be filed with the ordinance, therefore requiring future development of Collegiate Station at Rolla be done in a manner substantially consistent with the attached site plan.

(c) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3734, §§1-3)



Sec. 42-103.153. Approving Arwood Hills No. 1. (Chapman)
(a) That the plat of Arwood Hills No. 1, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3738, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.154. Approving Brookridge South No. 1. (Chapman)
(a) That the plat of Brookridge South No. 1, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3739, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.155. Approving Subway Subdivision. (Banholzer)
(a) That the plat of Subway Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3742, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.156. Approving Pebble Stone Planned Unit Development. (Forness)
(a) That the plat of Pebble Stone Planned Unit Development, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) The mandatory parkland dedications or fee-in-lieu requirement for subdivisions contained in Chapter 42, Article II, Section 42-26 is hereby waived for Pebble Stone PUD provided the subdivider/owner develop and provide a park in substantial compliance with the PUD Site Plan as approved by the City Council.

(c) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3746, §§1-3)



Sec. 42-103.157. Approving Cowboy Subdivision. (James)
(a) That the plat of Cowboy Subdivision, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) No structure intended for human occupancy constructed on lot 2 shall be located more than 500 lineal feet from the closest fire hydrant. This condition shall satisfy the requirement for the placement of hydrants as found in Article II Subdivisions, Division 1, Section 42-29(9).

(c) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3754, §§1-3)



Sec. 42-103.158. Approving Mehta Estates. (Mehta)
(a) That the plat of Mehta Estates, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3755, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.159. Approving Maxwell Subdivision. (Ellis/Shanks)
(a) That the plat of Maxwell Subdivision Plat No. 2, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3760, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.160. Approving Calkins Addition. (Calkins)
(a) That the plat of Calkins Addition, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3771, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.161. Approving Ronani Block Subdivision. (Block)
(a) That the plat of Ronani Block Subdivision, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) Park land dedication or fee in lieu shall be waived until such time the subdivision is further subdivided.

(c) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3776, §§1-3)



Sec. 42-103.162. Approving Brookridge South No. 2. (Chapman).
(a) That the plat of Brookridge South No. 2, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3777, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.163. Approving Basswood Subdivision. (Parkview Baptist Corporation)
(a) That the plat of Basswood Subdivision, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3781, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.164. Approving Rolla Rural Fire No. 1. (Rolla Rural Fire Department)
(a) That the plat of Rolla Rural Fire No. 1, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) Access shall be limited to three points of ingress and egress to accommodate public and emergency vehicles.

(c) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3791, §§1-3)



Sec. 42-103.165. Approving Maxwell Subdivision Plat No. 3. (Development Contractors)
(a) That the plat of Maxwell Subdivision Plat No. 3, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3792, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.166. Approving Ann Lee Estates. (Anderson)
(a) That the plat of Ann Lee Estates, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3793, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.167. Approving Mid America Plat 1. (Mid America Bank & Trust Co.)
(a) That the plat of Mid America Plat 1, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) The south side of Lot 2 of the subdivision shall be curbed before the occupancy permit is issued.

(c) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3796, §§1-3)



Sec. 42-103.168. Approving Event Center Subdivision. (Blues Lake Development LLC)
(a) That the plat of Event Center Subdivision, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3798, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.169. Approving Wal-Mart Super Center Plaza III. (Wal-Mart)
(a) That the plat of Wal-Mart Super Center Plaza III, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3806, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.170. Approving Mid America Plat 2. (Mid America Bank and Trust)
(a) That Mid America Plat 2, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3807, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.171. Approving Maxwell Subdivision Plat No. 4. (Development Contractors LLP)
(a) That the plat of Maxwell Subdivision Plat No. 4, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3808, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.172. Approving the Resubdivision of Lot 1, Heritage Heights Addition. (Coverdell)
(a) That the Resubdivision of Lot 1, Heritage Heights Addition,, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3822, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.173. Approving the Blue's Lake Plat No. 6. (Dietzmann)
(a) That Blue's Lake Plat No. 6, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3827, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.174. Approving I-44 Center Plat No. 2. (Real Ventures LLC)
(a) That I-44 Center Plat No. 2, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3828, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.175. Approving Asher Street Dedication Plat. (City of Rolla)
(a) That Asher Street Dedication Plat, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. (Ord. 3844, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.176. Approving Rojo Properties. (Rojo Properties LLC)
(a) That Rojo Properties, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3852, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.177. Approving Estey Subdivision. (Brown)
(a) That Estey Subdivision, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3853, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.178. Approving Jordan Subdivision. (Jordan)
(a) That Jordan Subdivision, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) Current storm water detention requirements for each lot shall be met before a building permit is issued.

(c) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3854, §§1-3)



Sec. 42-103.179. Approving Waterman Heights. (Waterman/Skyles)
(a) That Waterman Heights, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) Current storm water detention requirements for each lot shall be met before a building permit is issued.

(c) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3855, §§1-3)



Sec. 42-103.180. Approving Robbie Addition. (Robertson)
(a) That Robbie, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3860, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.181. Approving RoJo Properties Subdivision Number 2. (Rojo Properties LLC)
(a) That RoJo Properties Subdivision Number 2, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3868, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.182. Approving the Re-subdivision of Lots 1, 2 & 3 of Cowboy Subdivision. (Peterman)
(a) That the Re-subdivision of Lots 1, 2 & 3 of Cowboy Subdivision, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3870, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.183. Approving the plat of Summit Square. (Timberline Land Co.)
(a) That the plat of Summit Square, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3871, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.184. Approving the Road Dedication Plat of St. John's Parkway. (Dietzmann)
(a) That the Road Dedication Plat of St. John's Parkway, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3883, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.185 Approving Parson's Addition, a re-subdivision of a Fractional part of Lots 4, 5 & 6 of Block 3, Frisco Addition. (Parsons)
(a) That Parson's Addition, a re-subdivision of a Fractional part of Lots 4, 5, & 6 of Block 3, Frisco Addition, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3909, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.186 Approving Deer Crossing East II. (Renick)
(a) That Deer Crossing East II, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3910, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.187 Approving the subdivision plat of Parker Place. (Parker)
(a) That Parker Place, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3914, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.188 Approving Oak Knoll South Plat No. 5. (City of Rolla)
(a) That Oak Knoll South Plat No. 5, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3915, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.189 Approving Blue's Lake Plat No. 7. (St. Johns Clinic/Neenan Co.)
(a) That Blue's Lake Plat No. 7, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3919, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.190 Approving Manion Plat No. 1. (Manion)
(a) That Manion Plat No. 1, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3924, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.191 Approving Bridgeview Subdivision, a Minor subdivision in a Fractional part of Lot 3, Railroad Addition. (Chapman)
(a) That Bridgeview Subdivision, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3932, §§1-2)

Sec. 42-103.192 Approving McCutchen Acres No. 1. (McCutchen Family/Mike Woessner)
(a) That McCutchen Acres No. 1, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date, is hereby approved.

(b) Upon further re-subdivision of Tracts A or B of the McCutchen Acres Subdivision, Phase 1, 18th Street shall be fully extended from McCutchen Street to Forum Drive meeting all city standards for Commercial Collector streets.

(c) The park land dedication requirement for residential subdivisions shall be satisfied by accepting a fee-in-lieu of payment to be assessed on a pro rata basis as individual tracts are further subdivided.

(d) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3939, §§1-4)

Sec. 42-103.193 Approving Rolla Park Third Addition, a Replat of Lot 9, Rolla Park Second Addition. (Lahontan/Warren Dean)
(a) That Rolla Park Third Addition, a Minor Subdivision, a Replat of Lot 9, Rolla Park Second Addition, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved.

(b) That this Section shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3940, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.194 Approving Blue's Lake Plat No. 8, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (Dietzmann).
(a) That Blue's Lake Plat No. 8, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date, is hereby approved. (Ord. 3952, §1)

(b) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3952, §2)



Sec. 42-103.195 An ordinance approving Belotta Trails Rolla, Phelps County Missouri, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (Woessner).
(a) That Belotta Trails, Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date, it hereby approved.

(b) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3955, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.196 An ordinance approving Heritage Village Subdivision, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (Woessner for Bass and Antolak).
(a) That Heritage Village, A subdivision in Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date, is hereby approved.

(b) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3969, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.197 An ordinance approving McDonalds Addition, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (McDonalds)
(a) That McDonalds Addition, subdivision in Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date, is hereby approved.

(b) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3977, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-103.198 An ordinance approving Forum Hill, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (Davis)
(a) That Forum Hill, subdivision in Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date, is hereby approved. (Ord. 3991, §1)

(b) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3991, §2)



Sec. 42-103.199 An ordinance approving I-44 Center Plat No. 3, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (Real Ventures LLC)
(a) That I-44 Center Plat No. 3, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date, is hereby approved. (Ord. 3997, §1)

(b) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3997, §2)



Sec. 42-103.200 An ordinance approving Schweiss Subdivision, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (Investment Realty)
(a) That Schweiss Subdivision, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date, is hereby approved. (Ord. 4002, §1)

(b) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4002, §2)



Sec. 42-103.201 An ordinance approving RSBS Subdivison, a a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (Whitehead/Dollar General)
(a) That RSBR Subdivision, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date, is hereby approved. (Ord. 4016, §1)

(b) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4016, §2)



Sec. 42-103.202 An ordinance approving Chymiak Investments Plat #1, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (Watson & Huskey)
(a) That Chymiak Investments Plat #1, a subdivision in Rolla Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date, is hereby approved.

(b) That the following legal description applies to this subdivision:

A fractional part of Lots 67 and 68 of Railroad Addition, Rolla, Missouri more particularly described as follows: Commencing at the Northeast Corner of Lot 67 of said Railroad Addition; thence South 87º32'40” West, 38.00 feet along the North line of said Lot 67; thence South 2º27'20” East, 15.00 feet to a point on the westerly right of way of U.S. Highway 63 (Bishop Avenue), the true point of beginning of the hereinafter described tract: Thence continuing South 2º27'20” East, 20.00 feet, and, North 88º20'20” East, 72.62 feet., and, South 1º16'40” East, 123.20 feet, and, South 7º54' West, 171.04 feet, all along said westerly right of way to the northeast corner of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Document No. 2006-7874; thence North 77º31'30” West 85.46 feet, and, South 9º04'20” West, 24.43 feet, and, North 80º51'10” West, 135.70 feet, all along the northerly line of said Document No. 2006-7874 parcel to the East line of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Document No. 2008-4032; thence North 7º37'30” East, 150.06 feet along said East line to the South line of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Document No. 1998-3537; thence North 87º17' East, 40.13 feet along said South line to the southeast corner of said Document No. 1998-3537 parcel; thence North 1º19'40” West, 139.16 feet along the East line of said Document No. 1998-3537 parcel to the South right of way of Oak Lane Drive; thence North 87º32'40” East, 111.91 feet along said South right of way to the true point of beginning. Above described tract contains 1.39 acre, more or less, per plat of survey J-270F, dated December 2, 2011, by Archer-Elgin Surveying and Engineering, LLC.

(c) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds.

(Ord. 4029, §§1-3)



Sec. 42-103.203 Approving the final Plat of the Rolla Industrial Park West Subdivision, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (Rolla Public Works Department).
(a) That the Rolla Industrial Park West Subdivision, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date, is hereby approved. (Ord. 4034, §1)

(b) That the following legal description applies to this subdivision.

ROLLA INDUSTRIAL PARK WEST SUBDIVISION
BOUNDARY DESCRIPTION

A part of the S ½ of Lots 1, 2 and 3 of the NW ¼ and a part of the N ½ of Lot 3 of the SW ¼ of Section 31, Township 38 North, Range 7 West of the 5th P.M.; Part of the SE ¼ of the NE ¼ and a part of the NE ¼ of the SE ¼ of Section 36, Township 38 North, Range 8 West of the 5th P.M.; All of Lots 3 and 4 and part of Lot 2 of ““Amended Plat of ROLLA INDUSTRIAL PARK; as recorded July 21, 1972, Phelps County Records, all in Rolla, Phelps County Missouri described as follows: commencing at a railroad spike at the SE corner of the NE ¼ of the SE ¼ of Section 36; Thence Westerly along the South line of said NE ¼ of the SE ¼, S 88º53'52” W (basis of bearing based on Geodetic North) 51.68 feet to an iron pin on the North Right-of-way line of a 60 foot wide proposed future street, as located May 2008, and the point of beginning; Thence with said North Right-of-way line, and the South line of said NE ¼ of the SE ¼ 88º53'52” W 225.29 feet to an iron pin; Thence leaving said North Right-of-way line, along the South line of said NE ¼ of the SE ¼, S 88º53'52” W 1052.46 feet to an iron pin at its' SW corner; Thence with the West line of said NE ¼ of the SE ¼, N 00º22'39” W 1320.47 feet to an ‘x' in a concrete monument at its NW corner on the South Right-of-way line of Twitty Drive, as located May 2008; Thence leaving said South Right-of-way line, along the West line of the SE ¼ of the NE ¼ of Section 36, N 00º15'55” W 374.63 feet to an iron pin on the Southerly Right-of-way line of Burlington Northern Railroad, as located May 2008; Thence with said Southerly Right-of-way line, along a curve to the right with a chord bearing and length of N 79º01'28” E 260.63 feet to an iron pin; Thence N 81º26'02” E 2290.31 feet to an iron pin; Thence along a curve to the right with a chord bearing length of S 87º07'47” E 754.15 feet to an iron pin; Thence S 75º41'35” E 594.11 feet to an iron pin; Thence along a curve to the left with a chord bearing and length of S 84º44'08” E 612.94 feet to an iron pin; Thence leaving said Southerly Right-of-way line, S 00º49'36” W 541.70 feet to an iron pin on the South line of Lot 1 of the NW ¼ of Section 31; Thence with said South line, N 89º11'08” W 433.51 feet to an iron pin at the SW corner of Lot 1 of the NW ¼ of Section 31 N 80º13'23” W 1330.67 feet to an iron pin at the NE corner of Lot 3 of the SW ¼ of Section 31; Thence with the South line of Lot 2 of the NW ¼ of Section 31; Thence with the East line of said Lot 3 of the SW ¼, S 00º14'42” E 665.08 feet to an iron pin; Thence S 00º20'13” W 327.19 feet to an iron pin; Thence leaving said East line, N 88º49'59” W 1318.12 feet to an iron pin on the East Right-of-way line of McCutchen Drive, as located May 2008; Thence with said East Right-of-way line, N 00º13'38” W 29.99 feet to an iron pin; Thence leaving said East Right-of-way line, N 88º49'23” W 59.90 feet to an iron pin on the West Right-of-way line of McCutchen Drive, as located May 2008; Thence with said West Right-of-way line, S 00º13'38” E 343.72 feet to an iron pin; Thence leaving said West Right-of-way line, with a transitioning Right-of-way line, along a curve to the right with a chord bearing and length of S 44º20'07” W 35.08 feet to the point of beginning. Description per survey number I-1308 by Integrity Engineering, Inc., September 10, 2008.Containing 132.81 acres. (Ord. 4034, §2)
(c) That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds.

(Ord. 4034, §3)


§ 42-103.204 Approving Blue's Lake Plat No. 9 Subdivision, a Resubdivision of Lot 1 Blue;s Lake Plat No. 8, a Subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (Dietzmann).
That the proposed re-subdivision of Lot 1, Blue's Lake Plat No. 8,  approving Blue's Lake Plat No. 9, a Subdivision in Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date, is hereby approved. (Ord. 4061, §1)

That the following legal description applies to this subdivision.

All of Lot 1 of Blue's Lake Plat No. 8, Rolla Missouri, containing 17.04 acres, more or less, per plat survey J-594, dated September 20, 2012, by Archer-Elgin Surveying and Engineering, LLC.
(Ord. 4061, §2)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4061, §3)

Sec. 42-103.205  Approving the final plat of Blue’s Lake Plat No. 10. A subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (Dietzmann).
That the Final Plat of Blue’s Lake Subdivision No. 10, a proposed subdivision in Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date, is hereby approved. (Ord. 4065, §1)

That the following legal description applies to this subdivision.
Blue’s Lake Plat No. 10, Rolla, Missouri, containing 11.84 acres, more or less, per plat survey J-637, dated January 7, 2013, by Archer-Elgin Surveying and Engineering, LLC. (Ord. 4065, §2)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds.
(Ord. 4065, §3)


Sec. 42-103.206  Approving the revised final plat of Bruss’s 1st Addition, a minor subdivision, and part of Blocks 11 and 49, of Bishop’s 4th Addition, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (CVS #10280)
That the revised final plat of Bruss’s 1st Addition, proposed in Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date, is hereby approved. (Ord. 4075, §1, Ord. 4087)

That the following legal description applies to this subdivision:
Bruss’s 1st Addition, a minor subdivision, Part of Blocks 11 and 49, Bishop’s 4th a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri, containing 1.277 acres, more or less following the expansion of the CVS Pharmacy original parcel. (Ord. 4075, §2) (Amended by Ord. 4087)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4075, §3)

Sec. 42-103.207  Approving the final plat of Pathways Addition, a minor subdivision, being a re-subdivision of Lot 2, Pope Addition, Rolla, Missouri. (Pathways)
That the final plat of Pathways Addition, proposed in Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date, is hereby approved. (Ord. 4077, §1)

That the following legal description applies to this subdivision:
Pathways Addition, a minor subdivision, being a re-subdivision of Lot 2, Pope Addition, Rolla, Missouri, containing 2.53 acres, more or less. (Ord. 4077, §2)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from  and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4077, §3)

Sec. 42-103.208  Approving the replat of Arwood Hills No. 1 final plat of Rolla Skilled Nursing Facility Plat No. 1, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri. (Chapman)
That the Rolla Skilled Nursing Facility Plat No. 1 proposed in Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council is hereby approved. (Ord. 4088, §1)

That the following legal description applies to this minor subdivision:
Rolla Skilled Nursing Facility No.1, Rolla Missouri, containing 20.10 acres in two lots 1 and 2, more or less, a minor subdivision being a re-subdivision of Lots 11, 18-26 and 31 thru 40 of Arwood Hills No. 1 and a portion of NE ¼, Sec.35, T38N, R8W Rolla, Missouri, Phelps County plat survey J-737, dated March 19, 2013 by Archer-Elgin Surveying and Engineering, LLC. (Ord. 4088, §2)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4088, §3)

Sec. 42-103.209    Amend a minor subdivision of Lot 2, Pope Addition, Pathways Addition, Plat No. 2 (Pathways).
That the Pathways Addition, Plat No. 2 Subdivision in Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date is hereby approved for the property located at 1450 East 10th Street, Lots 1 and 2, Amended Pathways Addition, being a re-subdivision of Lot 2, Pope Addition, Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 4101 §1)

This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval by City Council. (Ord. 4101 §2)

Sec. 42-103.210    Approving a minor subdivision and re-plat of a portion of Lots 2 and 3 of Ozark Terrace Second Addition in Rolla, Missouri, thereby establishing two new lots (Lots 2A and 3A. (Taylor)
That the re-plat of Lots 2 and Lot 3 of the Ozark Terrace Second Addition, Rolla, Missouri, has been reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by City Council. (Ord. 4111 §1)

That the following legal description applies to this re-plat. A fractional part of Lots 2 and 3 of the Ozark Terrace Second Addition, Rolla, Missouri containing 0.69.6 acres, per Survey No. L-200, dated July 31, 2013 by Lortz Surveying, LLC. (Ord. 4111 §2)

This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4111 §3)
(Return to Contents)


Sec. 42-103.211    Approving the re-plat of Lots 24 and 25 of the Wedgewood Manor Subdivision, an addition to Rolla, Missouri, by consolidating existing Lots 24 and 25, establishing a single Lot 24A. (Bowen)
That the re-plat of Lots 24 and 25 of the Wedgewood Manor Subdivision, being a minor subdivision in Rolla, Missouri, has been reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved the City Council. (Ord. 4112 §1)

That the following legal description applies to this re-plat. All of Lots 24 and 25 of the Wedgewood Manor Subdivision in Rolla, Missouri, said consolidated Tract 24A containing 0.81 acres, prepared and signed by William Anderson, L.S. No. 1801, Dated June 21, 2013 by Anderson & Associates LLC. (Ord. 4112 §2)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4112 §3)

Sec. 42-103.212    Approving the re-plat of Lots 11 and 12 of the Wild Rose Hill Subdivision, an addition to Rolla, Missouri by consolidating Lots 11 and 12, thereby establishing a single lot 12A, shown on the attached subdivision plat. (Bachman)
That the re-plat of Lots 11 and 12 of the Wild Rose Hill Subdivision, an addition to Rolla, Missouri, has been reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the City Council. (Ord. 4113 §1)

That the following legal description applies to this re-plat. All of Lots 11 and 12 of the Wild Rose Hill Subdivision in Rolla, Missouri, said consolidated Tract 12A containing .56 acres, prepared and signed by Louis D. Gilbert, L.S. No. 2425 per Survey dated July 10, 2013 by Simply Surveying, LLC. (Ord. 4113 §2)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4113 §3)

Sec. 42-103.213    Approving the re-plat of Lot 1, Chrysler Addition, and approving the final plat of Lots 1 and 2 of Chrysler Addition No. 2 being a re-subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (West)
That the re-plat of Lot 1, Chrysler Addition, being a minor subdivision in Rolla, Missouri, and approving the final plat of Lot 1 and Lot 2 Chrysler Addition No. 2 being a re-subdivision in Rolla, Missouri, having been reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved the City Council. (Ord. 4123 §1)

That the following legal description applies to this re-plat. The re-plat of all of lot 1 of the Chrysler Addition and creating two lots, lot 1 and lot 2, of the Chrysler Addition No. 2 in Rolla, Missouri, consisting of 1.16 acres, prepared by and signed by Archer-Elgin Group, P.C. Dated October 2, 2013, Survey Number J967. (Ord. 4123 §2)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the  date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4123 §3)


Sec. 42-103.214    Approving the re-subdivision of Belotta Trials Addition No. 1, Lots 3A, 5A, 6A and 3B, as a minor final plat of an approved subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (Baxter)
That the re-plat of Belotta Trails Addition No. 1, Lots 3A, 5A, 6A and 3B, being a minor subdivision in Rolla, Missouri, having been reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved the City Council. (Ord. 4134 §1)

That the following legal description applies to this re-plat of Lots 3, 5, and 6 of Belotta Trails, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri: The Re-Subdivision of a fractional part of Lot 66 & 77, Railroad Addition No.2.in Rolla, Missouri, consisting of .1.39 acres, prepared by and signed by Archer-Elgin Group, P.C. Dated February 14, 2014, Survey Number J-1059B. (Ord. 4134 §2)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4134 §3)


Sec. 42-103.215    Approving the re-subdivision of Belotta Trials Addition No. 2, Lots 11A, 12A, 13A, and 14A, as a minor subdivision final plat of an approved subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (Baxter)
That the re-plat of Belotta Trails Addition No. 2, Lots 11A, 12A, 13A, and 14A, being a minor subdivision in Rolla, Missouri, having been reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved the City Council. (Ord. 4135 §1)

That the following legal description applies to this re-plat of Lots 11, 12, 13, and 14 of Belotta Trails, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri: The Re-Subdivision of a fractional part of Lot 66 & 77, Railroad Addition No.2.in Rolla, Missouri, consisting of .68 acres, prepared by and signed by Archer-Elgin Group, P.C. Dated February 14, 2014, Survey Number J-1059A. (Ord. 4135 §2)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4135 §3)

Sec. 42-103.216  Approving the re-subdivision of McCutchen Acres No. 1, Tract B, to McCutchen Acres No. 2, Lots 1 through 4, a minor re-subdivision in Rolla, Missouri (Davis).
That the re-plat of McCutchen Acres No. 1, Tract B, to McCutchen Acres No. 2, Lots 1 through 4, being a minor subdivision in Rolla, Missouri, having been reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the City Council. (Ord. 4140 §1)

That the following legal description applies to this re-plat of Tract B, McCutchen Acres No. 1, a minor subdivision in Rolla, Missouri: All of Tract B, in McCutchen Acres No. 1 subdivision situated in the East Half of Lot 1 of the Northeast quarter of Section 1, Township 37 North Range 8 West of the 5th P.M. contains 8.04 acres. Survey dated April 14th 2014, Survey Number L-279. (Ord. 4140 §2)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4140 §3)

Sec. 42-103.217  Approving the re-subdivision of a fractional part of Lot 9 of the Ozark Terrace Subdivision, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri. (Ridenhour).
That the re-plat of a fractional part of Lot 9, Ozark Terrace an Addition to Rolla, Missouri, being a minor subdivision in Rolla, Missouri, having been reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the City Council. (Ord. 4149 §1)

That the following legal description applies to this re-plat of Lot 9, Ozark Terrace, an Addition to Rolla, Missouri this being a minor subdivision in Rolla, Missouri: All of Lot 9, Ozark Terrace Subdivision situated in Rolla, Missouri, Section 23, Township 37 North, Range 8 West, of the 5th P.M., Rolla, Missouri.  Survey dated June 12, 2014 Survey Number SS-2114. (Ord. 4149 §2)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4149 §3)

Sec. 42-103.218 Approving the re-subdivision of Lots 24 and 25 of the Meadow Brook Subdivision, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri. (Wilkerson).
That the proposed consolidation of Lots 24 and 25 of the Meadow Brook subdivision, thereby creating Lot 24A, an addition to Rolla, Missouri, having been reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the City Council. (Ord. 4150 §1)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4150 §2)
Sec. 42-103.219 Approving the Country Hills Subdivision, Lots 1 and 2, this being a minor subdivision in a fractional part of SE ¼, Sec. 36, T38N, R8W, Rolla, Phelps County Missouri. (Harvey).
That the approval of the Country Hills Subdivision, Lots 1 & 2, an addition to Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri, having been reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and recommended for approval by the City Council. (Ord. 4155, §1)
That the following legal description applies to Country Hills Subdivision, Lots 1 & 2, a minor subdivision in a fractional Part of SE ¼, Sec. 36, T38N, R8W; an addition to Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri. (Ord. 4155, §2)


Sec. 42-103.220 Approving the resubdivision of a fractional part of 2100 State Route E, a fractional part of Lot 21, Gracie Place Subdivision, all in Section 3, T37N, R8W, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri (Sowers) (Claire Court PUD).
That the replat of a fractional part of 2100 State Route E, a fractional part of Lot 21, Gracie Place Subdivision, all in Section 3, T37N, R8W, an addition to Rolla, Missouri, being a major subdivision in Rolla, Missouri, having been reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission.  (Ord. 4172, §1)

That the following legal description applies to this replat of Gracie Place Subdivision, an Addition to Rolla, Missouri, this being a major subdivision in Rolla, Missouri.

A fractional part of 2100 State Route E, a fractional part of Lot 21, Gracie Place Subdivision, all in Section 3, T37N, R8W, an addition to Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 4172, §2)

This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4172, §3)


Sec. 42-103.221 Approving the re-subdivision (consolidation of interior lot lines) of property including Lots 1, 4, & 5 of Block 67, County Addition, Rolla, Missouri. (Wands)
That the re-subdivision (consolidation of interior lot lines) for Lots 1, 4, & 5 of Block 67, County Addition, Rolla, Missouri, having been reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the City Council; and (Ord. 4182, §1)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4182, §2)


Sec. 42-103.222 Approving the re-subdivision of Cedar Trail Planned Unit Development Plat No. 2; a minor re-subdivision of Lot 2, consisting of news lots 5, 6, 7, and 8 (Cedar Trails, LLC).
That the re-plat of Cedar Trail Subdivision, Plat No.2 , forming a Minor Subdivision consisting of Lots 5,6,7,and 8, an addition to Rolla, Missouri, being a minor subdivision in Rolla, Missouri, having been reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the City Council. (Ord. 4187, §1)

That the following legal description applies to this replat of Cedar Trail Planned Unit Development Subdivision, an Addition to Rolla, Missouri this being a minor subdivision in Rolla, Missouri:  Lot 2, Cedar Trail Planned Unit Development (PUD),  Plat No. 2 forming a Minor Subdivision consisting of Lots 5, 6, 7, and 8 an addition to Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 4187, §2)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4187, §3)


Sec. 42-103.223 Approving the re-subdivision of Holloway’s First Addition, former lots 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12, Block 6, consisting of two new lots designated as Lots 1 and 2 (Miles).
That the re-plat of a portion of Holloway’s First Addition, consisting of former Lots 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12, an addition to Rolla, Missouri, being a minor subdivision in Rolla, Missouri, having been reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the City Council. (Ord. 4205, §1)

That the following legal description applies to this re-plat of Holloway’s First Addition to Rolla, Missouri, this being a minor subdivision in Rolla, Mo: a re-plat of Lots 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12, forming a minor subdivision consisting of two new Lots 1 and 2. (Ord. 4205, §2)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4205, §3)


Sec. 42-103.224 Approving a final plat of Blue’s Lake Plat No. II, a minor subdivision being a replat of a portion of Lot 1, Blue’s Lake Plat No. 6 and a part of W½ SW¼ Sec. 10, T37N, R8W Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri (Citizens Bank of Newburg).
That an ordinance approving a final plat of Blue’s Lake Plat No. II, a Minor Subdivision, being a re plat of a portion of Lot 1, Blue’s Lake Plat No. 6 and a part of W½ SW¼ Sec. 10, T37N, R8W, Rolla, Missouri, having been reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission at their July 14, 2015, meeting. (Ord. 4220, §1)
That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4220, §2)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 42-103.225 Approving the elimination of interior lot lines and the designation of a new Lot 1, a re-plat of the west half of Lots 1 and 2, the north half of Lot 6, the east 50 feet of Lot 7, in Block 18, of the Frisco Subdivision, and a fractional part of Section 1, Township 37 north, Range 8 west, Rolla, Missouri, Lot 15, a plat located in Rolla, Missouri (LIN) (Arkansas Plaza)
The re-plat of a portion of the Frisco Subdivision, having been reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission at their July 14, 2015 meeting as a preliminary plat and considered as a final plat at their August 11, 2015 meeting. (Ord. 4224, §1)

That the following legal description applies to this re-plat of the Frisco Subdivision concerning the west half of Lots 1 and 2, the north half of Lot 6, and the east 50 feet of Lot 7, in Block 18, Frisco Subdivision, and a fractional part of Section 1, Township 37 north, Range 8 west Rolla, Missouri, consisting of .36 acres, prepared by and signed by Lortz Surveying, LLC, Dated August 2, 2015, Survey Number L – 415. (Ord. 4224, §2)

This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4224, §3)


Sec. 42-103.226 Approving the final plat of Deer Crossing East III, a major subdivision in Rolla, Missouri, being a re-plat of Lot 1, Deer Crossing East II, Phelps County, Missouri. (Renick)
Site Description: All of Lot 1 of Deer Crossing East II, Rolla, Missouri, and, all of the Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of Section 12, Township 37 North, Range 8 West, Phelps County, Missouri, except that portion lying within the right-of-way of Southview Drive consisting of 77.10 acres, more or less; and (Ord. 4225, §1)

That all required public improvements, storm water management requirements, and parkland dedication requirements related to Lot 14 are waived until such time Lot 14 is further subdivided.  Lot 15 shall be conveyed to the City of Rolla to satisfy the storm water management and park land dedication requirements for Lot 2, Deer Crossing II and for Lots 3 through 13 as created by this plat; and (Ord. 4225, §2)

That the undersigned owners of this property do hereby impose upon said property covenants stating that no construction may be commenced upon the above described property until all necessary building and construction permits have been obtained from the City and that it is understood by the undersigned that no such permits shall be issued for any lots herein platted until the completion of all public improvements appertaining to such lots or until a cash bond equal to the reasonable costs of completing such improvements has been received and approved by City officials. The above mentioned public improvements shall be completed pursuant to the agreement between the undersigned and the City of Rolla for the completion of such improvements as required by this Article of the Rolla City Code, Missouri; and (Ord. 4225, §3)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4225, §4)

Sec. 42-103.227 Approving the final plat of Happy Jack’s Subdivision, Lot 17 in Oak Knoll Estates and a part of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 14, Township 37 north, Range 8 West. (Frost)
That the re-plat of Oak Knoll Estates being a minor subdivision in Rolla, Missouri, having been reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved the City Council. (Ord. 4229, §1)

That the following legal description applies to this re-plat of Lot 17 in Oak Knoll Estates Addition and Lots 1 through 3 of the Happy Jack’s Subdivision, being a part of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 14, Township 37 North, Range 8 West prepared by Lortz Surveying LLC., dated July 2015. (Ord. 4229, §2)

That a fire apparatus access road must be provided per International Fire Code 2000 Section 502 and 503 for Lot 2 of the Happy Jack’s Subdivision. (Ord. 4229, §3)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the  date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4229, §4)

Sec. 42-103.228 Approving the re-subdivision of a minor subdivision, located at 803 W. 13th Street including Lots 1 & 2 and a fractional part of a vacated alley in Block 4 of the Townsend Addition to the City of Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri. (Rome) (Spring Avenue Addition).
That an Ordinance approving the re-subdivision of Lots 1 and 2, and a fractional part of a vacated alley in Block 4 of the Townsend Addition to the City of Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri, was reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission at their October 13, 2015 meeting; and (Ord. 4237, §1)

That the north half of the vacated portion of the alley consisting of 12 foot width between property lines shall be designated to be a utility easement; and  (Ord. 4237, §2)
That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4237, §3)

Sec. 42-103.229 Approving the final plat of Vienna Hills, a subdivision in the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 35, Township 38 North, Range 8 West, Rolla, Missouri. (Vienna Hills Subdivision)
That the final plat of Vienna Hills, a subdivision in the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 35, Township 38 North, Range 8 West, to the City of Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 4245, §1)
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds.  (Ord. 4245, §2)

(Return to Contents)
Sec. 42-103.230 Approving the replat of a fractional part of Lots 73, 74, and 75, Block 3, James Addition, into Lot 1, to the City of Rolla, Missouri (407 North Olive Street) (Woolf’s Second Addition).
That the replat of a fractional part of Lots 73, 74, and 75, Block 3, James Addition, which is hereby consolidated into Lot 1, to the City of Rolla, Missouri is hereby approved. (Ord. 4246, §1)
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds.  (Ord. 4246, §2)

Sec. 42-103.231 Approving a minor subdivision of Lot 6, Cedar Trail Planned Unit Development (PUD), Plat No. 3, Rolla, Missouri. (Cedar Trail PUD).
That the re-plat of Cedar Trail Subdivision, Plat No. 2, forming a Minor Subdivision consisting of Lots 9, 10, 11, and 12, an addition to Rolla, Missouri, being a minor subdivision in Rolla, Missouri, having been reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the City Council. (Ord. 4249, §1)
That the following legal descriptions apply to the vacated easements A, B, and C shown on the Re-plat of Cedar Trail Planned Unit Development, a minor subdivision in Rolla, Missouri.

EASEMENT VACATION PARCEL A
A fractional part of Lot 6 of Final Plat of Cedar Trail Planned Unit Development Plat No. 2, Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri more particularly described as follows:  Commencing at the Northwest Corner of Lot 5 of said Cedar Trail Planned Unit Development Plat No. 2; thence North 63°24’40” East, 67.08 feet, and, North 78°04’10” East, 2.98 feet, all along the northerly line of said Lot 5; thence North 2°25’20” West, 5.03 feet to the true point of beginning of the hereinafter described tract:  Thence North 0°47’10” West, 64.94 feet; thence North 85°15’50” East, 10.02 feet; thence South 0°47’10” East, 52.06 feet; thence southwesterly, 17.67 feet along the arc of a curve, concave southeasterly with a radius of 16.71 feet, the chord of which is South 35°36’20” West, 16.85 feet to the true point of beginning.  Per plat of survey J-1638, dated November 10, 2015, by Archer-Elgin Surveying and Engineering, LLC.

EASEMENT VACATION PARCEL B
A fractional part of Lot 6 of Final Plat of Cedar Trail Planned Unit Development Plat No. 2, Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri more particularly described as follows:  Commencing at the Northwest Corner of Lot 5 of said Cedar Trail Planned Unit Development Plat No. 2; thence North 63°24’40” East, 67.08 feet, and, North 78°04’10” East, 2.98 feet, all along the northerly line of said Lot 5; thence North 2°25’20” West, 5.03 feet; thence North 0°47’10” West, 84.99 feet to the true point of beginning of the hereinafter described tract:  Thence continuing North 0°47’10” West, 72.05 feet; thence northeasterly, 68.16 feet along the arc of a curve, concave southeasterly with a radius of 88.32 feet, the chord of which is North 21°19’20” East, 66.48 feet; thence South 45°47’10” East, 10.00 feet; thence southwesterly, 60.31 feet along the arc of a curve, concave southeasterly with a radius of 78.32 feet, the chord of which is South 21°16’30” West, 58.83 feet; thence South 0°47’10” East, 71.36 feet; thence South 85°15’50” West, 10.02 feet to the true point of beginning.  Per plat of survey J-1638, dated November 10, 2015, by Archer-Elgin Surveying and Engineering, LLC.

EASEMENT VACATION PARCEL C
A fractional part of Lot 6 of Final Plat of Cedar Trail Planned Unit Development Plat No. 2, Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri more particularly described as follows:  Commencing at the Northwest Corner of Lot 5 of said Cedar Trail Planned Unit Development Plat No. 2; thence North 63°24’40” East, 67.08 feet, and, North 78°04’10” East, 19.77 feet, all along the northerly line of said Lot 5; thence North 0°47’10” West, 183.71 feet; thence North 44°12’50” East, 71.43 feet to the true point of beginning of the hereinafter described tract:  Thence continuing North 44°12’50” East, 17.67 feet; thence westerly, 41.71 feet along the arc of a curve, concave southerly with a radius of 88.32 feet, the chord of which is South 70°01’50” West, 41.32 feet; thence South 45°47’10” East, 10.27 feet; thence easterly, 21.06 feet along the arc of a curve, concave southerly with a radius of 78.32 feet, the chord of which is North 65°48’20” East, 21.00 feet to the true point of beginning.  Per plat of survey J-1638, dated November 10, 2015, by Archer-Elgin Surveying and Engineering, LLC. (Ord. 4249, §2)
That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4249, §3)

Sec. 42-103.232 Approving the minor plat of Huffman East No. 1, consisting of new Lots 1 and 2. (Huffman East No. 1).
That the proposed plat of Huffman East No.1, forming a minor subdivision consisting of Lot 1 (1.85 acres) and Lot 2 (6.80 acres)  an addition to Rolla, Missouri, being a minor subdivision in Rolla, Missouri, having been reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the City Council. (Ord. 4252, §1)
That the following legal description applies to the plat of Huffman East No.1 an Addition to Rolla, Missouri this being a minor subdivision in Rolla, Missouri.

DESCRIPTION
A fractional part of the South Half of Lot 2 of the Northwest Quarter of Section 18, Township 37 North, Range 7 West of the 5th P.M. described as follows:  Beginning at the Northeast Corner of the South Half of Lot 2 of the Northwest Quarter of said Section 18; thence South 0°01’50” West, 556.65 feet along the East line of said South Half of Lot 2 of the Northwest Quarter to the centerline of an existing sanitary sewer easement described in Phelps County Deed Records at Book 142, Page 156; thence North 84°22’ West, 88.02 feet, and, South 75°02’50” West, 483.44 feet, all along said centerline to the current northeasterly right of way of Missouri Highway 72; thence North 49°15’30” West, 391.94 feet along said northeasterly right of way to the southernmost corner of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Document No. 1993-1448; thence North 53°53’ East, 714.85 feet along the southeasterly line of said Document No. 1993-1448 parcel to the North line of the aforesaid South Half of Lot 2 of the Northwest Quarter; thence South 89°04’50” East, 274.48 feet along said North line to the point of beginning.  Above described tract contains 8.65 acres, more or less, per plat of survey J-1640, dated November 12, 2015, by Archer-Elgin Surveying and Engineering, LLC. (Ord. 4252, §2)
That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4252, §3)

Sec. 42-103.233 Approving Arthur’s Addition, Lot 1, being a minor subdivision and a consolidation of Lots 15, 16, 17, & 18, Block 13, Cowan’s Addition, Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri. (Arthur).
That the proposed consolidation of parts of Lot 15 through Lot 18 Cowan’s Addition, Block 13, forming a Minor Subdivision consisting of Lot 1 Arthur’s Addition to Rolla, Missouri having been reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the City Council is hereby amended by designating Lot 1 of ARTHUR’S ADDITION, a minor subdivision situated within the City of Rolla, Missouri, and located at 200 South Bishop Avenue, as described per plat comprising .66 Acre more or less, per survey J-1648, dated December 17, 2015 by Archer-Elgin Surveying and Engineering, LLC and described as follows:

LEGAL DESCRIPTION

A fractional part of Lots 15, 16, 17 and 18, Block 13 of COWAN’S ADDITION, Rolla, Missouri more particularly described as follows:  Beginning at the Southwest Corner of Lot 18, Block 13 of said COWAN’S ADDITION; thence North 0°11’ West, 62.00 feet, and, North 0°03’40” West, 135.97 feet, all along the East right of way of Spilman Avenue to the southwest corner of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Document No. 2003-6941; thence North 89°19’30” East, 61.17 feet, and, South 82°34’30” East, 87.34 feet, all along the southerly line of said Document No. 2003-6941 parcel to the intersection of the South line of the aforesaid Lot 15, Block 13 of COWAN’S ADDITION and the West right of way of U.S. Highway 63 (Bishop Avenue); thence South 0°17’40” West, 187.21 feet along said West right of way to the South line of the aforesaid Lot 18, Block 13 of COWAN’S ADDITION; thence South 89°55’20” West, 146.47 feet along said South line to the point of beginning.  (Ord. 4254, §1)
SPECIAL PLAT RESTRICTION AND RESTRICTIVE COVENANT AS TO THE ISSUANCE OF BUILDING OR CONSTRUCTION PERMITS
The undersigned owners of the tract of land herein platted do hereby impose upon said property and do hereby make the following restrictive covenant: No construction may be commenced upon the above described property until all necessary building and construction permits have been issued by the City of Rolla, Missouri and that it is understood by the undersigned that no such permits shall be issued for any lots herein platted until the completion of all public improvements appertaining to such lots or until a cash bond equal to the reasonable costs of completing such public improvements has been received and approved by the City of Rolla, Missouri. The above-mentioned public improvements shall be completed pursuant to the agreement between the undersigned and the City of Rolla, Missouri for the completion of such improvements as required by this article of the City Code of Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 4254, §2)
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4254, §3)


Sec. 42-103.234 Approving the subdivision of a 12.52 acre tract located at 2600 North Bishop Avenue, a final plat of Kingdom West, a subdivision in the southwest quarter of Section 36, Township 38 North, Range 8 West, Rolla, Missouri. (Kingdom West).
Chapter 42 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri Rolla, Missouri, which ordinance adopts subdivision and zoning regulations, use districts, and a zoning map in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan, is hereby amended by approving the Kingdom West subdivision situated within the City of Rolla Missouri, located at 2600 North Bishop Avenue, more particularly described as follows: 

All that part of the Southwest Quarter of Section 36, Township 38 North, Range 8 West of the 5th P.M. described as follows:
Commencing at the Southwest Corner of the Northeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of said Section 36; thence North 10°45’24” West, 97.79 feet to the Point of Beginning; thence South 85°46’39” East, 129.63 feet; thence North 82°44’37” East, 35.27 feet; thence 245.87 feet along the arc of a curve turning to the right with a radius of 240.00 feet, the chord of said curve bears South 67°54’27” East, 235.26 feet; thence South 38°33’30” East, 192.33 feet; thence South 60°44’22” East, 34.56 feet; thence North 57°51’25” East, 216.90 feet to Northwesterly right of way of U.S. Interstate 44; thence North 22°56’51” East, 100.00 feet and North 08°22’07” East, 51.66 feet and North 22°56’51” East, 150.00 feet and North 37°31’14” East, 51.66 feet and North 22°56’51” East, 43.00 feet and North 67°03’09”West, 50.00 feet and North 22°56’51” East, 50.00 feet and South 67°03’09” East, 50.00 feet and North 22°56’51” East, 459.73 feet and 119.47 feet along the arc of a curve turning to the right with the radius of 2067.08 feet, the chord of said curve bears North 23°45’32” East, 119.45 feet all along said Northwesterly right of way; thence North 69°58’39” West, 488.99 feet to the East right of way of U.S. Highway 63; thence South 14°09’59” West, 201.23 feet and South 02°06’59”East, 171.10 feet and South 06°26’35” West, 132.28 feet and South 36°57’39” West, 150.70 feet and South 62°39’56” West, 142.52 feet and North 82°43’44” West, 175.38 feet and South 36°38’56” West, 225.92 feet Page 2 and South 31°12’35” West, 140.44 feet to the Point of Beginning.  Contains 12.52 acres per Survey No. l-455 by Lortz Surveying, LLC. less all parts deeded to the State Highway Commission of Missouri except all legally established roads and highways. (Ord. 4255, §1)

SPECIAL PLAT RESTRICTION AND RESTRICTIVE COVENANT AS TO THE ISSUANCE OF BUILDING OR CONSTRUCTION PERMITS

The undersigned owners of the tract of land herein platted do hereby impose upon said property and do hereby make the following restrictive covenant: No construction may be commenced upon the above described property until all necessary building and construction permits have been issued by the City of Rolla, Missouri and that it is understood by the undersigned that no such permits shall be issued for any lots herein platted until the completion of all public improvements appertaining to such lots or until a cash bond equal to the reasonable costs of completing such public improvements has been received and approved by the City of Rolla, Missouri. The above-mentioned public improvements shall be completed pursuant to the agreement between the undersigned and the City of Rolla, Missouri for the completion of such improvements as required by this article of the City Code of Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 4255, §2)

This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4255, §3)


Sec. 42-103.235 Approving the preliminary plat of the Hypoint West Plat No. 1, a major subdivision, being a fractional part of the South Half of the Northeast Quarter and the South Half of Lot 1, Northwest Quarter, all in Section 30, T38N, R7W, Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri. (Hypoint West).
That Chapter 42 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri Rolla, Missouri, which ordinance adopts subdivision and zoning regulations, use districts, and a zoning map in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan, is hereby amended by approving the HyPoint West subdivision situated within the City of Rolla Missouri, and located at 4025 Highway V, Rolla, Missouri, more particularly described as follows: 

A fractional part of the South Half of Lot 1 of the Northwest Quarter, and, a fractional part of the South Half of the Northeast Quarter of Section 30, Township 38 North, Range 7 West of the 5th P.M. described as follows:  Beginning at the Southeast Corner of the South Half of Lot 1 of the Northwest Quarter of said Section 30; thence South 89°18’30” West, 1324.03 feet along the South line of said South Half of Lot 1 of the Northwest Quarter to its southwest corner; thence North 0°25’ West, 1324.59 feet along the West line of said South Half of Lot 1 of the Northwest Quarter to its northwest corner; thence North 89°29’ East, 1026.62 feet along the North line of said South Half of Lot 1 of the Northwest Quarter to the northwest corner of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Document No. 2009-3229; thence South 0°18’40” East, 420.09 feet along the West line of said Document No. 2009-3229 parcel to its southwest corner; thence North 89°31’ East, 299.88 feet along the South line of said Document No. 2009-3229 parcel to the West line of the Southwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter; thence North 0°16’30” West, 420.02 feet along said West line to the northwest corner of said Southwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter; thence North 89°25’ East, 1326.18 feet along the North line of said Southwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter to the northwest corner of the Southeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter; thence North 89°24’10” East, 1295.98 feet along the North line of said Southeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter to the westerly right of way of State Route V; thence South 0°34’10” East, 597.40 feet, and, southwesterly, 473.80 feet along the arc of a curve, concave northwesterly with a radius of 543.69 feet, the chord of which is South 24°23’50” West, 458.95 feet, and, South 49°21’40” West, 179.93 feet, and, South 49°21’ West, 303.16 feet, all along said westerly right of way to the South line of the aforesaid Southeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter; thence South 89°31’ West, 740.71 feet along said South line to the southeast corner of the aforesaid Southwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter; thence South 89°31’10” West, 1324.34 feet along the South line of said Southwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter to the true point of beginning.  Above described tract contains 113.80 acres, more or less, per plat of survey J-1689, dated February 2016, by Archer-Elgin Surveying and Engineering, LLC. (Ord. 4264, §1)

SPECIAL PLAT RESTRICTION AND RESTRICTIVE COVENANT AS TO THE ISSUANCE OF BUILDING OR CONSTRUCTION PERMITS: The undersigned owners of the tract of land herein platted do hereby impose upon said property and do hereby make the following restrictive covenant: No construction may be commenced upon the above described property until all necessary building and construction permits have been issued by the City of Rolla, Missouri and that it is understood by the undersigned that no such permits shall be issued for any lots herein platted until the completion of all public improvements appertaining to such lots or until a cash bond equal to the reasonable costs of completing such public improvements has been received and approved by the City of Rolla, Missouri. The above-mentioned public improvements shall be completed pursuant to the agreement between the undersigned and the City of Rolla, Missouri for the completion of such improvements as required by this article of the City Code of Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 4264, §2)
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4264, §3)


Sec. 42-103.236 Approving the final plat of Hypoint East No. 1 being a minor subdivision in a fractional part of the S ½ NW ¼, NE ¼, and SW ¼ all in Section 29, T38N, R7W, Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri. (Hypoint East).
That the final plat of HyPoint East, No. 1 being a Minor Subdivision including Lot 1 consisting of 23.5 acres, Lot 2 consisting of 11.01 acres and Lot 3, with 18.16 acres, an addition to Rolla, Phelps, County, Missouri having been reviewed on March 9, 2016 by the Planning and Zoning Commission and recommended for approval by the Rolla City Council. (Ord. 4265, §1)
That the following legal description applies to this subdivision:

A fractional part of the S ½, NW1/4 NE1/4 & SW1/4 all in Section 29, T38N, R7W, Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri . (Ord. 4265, §2)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4265, §3)


Sec. 42-103.237 Approving the final plat of the Rolla Property LLC, No. 1, being a minor subdivision in a fractional part of W ½, SW ¼, Section 29, being fractional part of E ½ SE ¼ of Section 30, all in T38N, R7W Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri (Rolla Property).
That the Final Plat of Rolla Property LLC, No.1 being a Minor Subdivision including Lot 1 consisting of 5 acres, Lot 2 consisting of 8.12 acres, and Lot 3 with 31.93 acres, an addition to Rolla, Phelps, County, Missouri having been reviewed on March 9, 2016 by the Planning and Zoning Commission and recommended for approval by the Rolla City Council. (Ord. 4266, §1)
That the following legal description applies to this Subdivision:

A fractional part of  W1/2 SW ½, Section 29, being a fractional part E ½ SE ¼ Section 30, all in T38N, R7W Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri. (Ord. 4266, §2)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4266, §3)


Sec. 42-103.238 Approving the subdivision of the final plat of the I-44 Center Plat No. 4, a minor subdivision, being a resubdivision of a part of Lot B of the I-44 Center Plat No. 2, Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri. (I-44 Subdivision).
That the Rolla City Council approves the subdivision of the final plat of the I-44 Center Plat No. 4, a minor subdivision, being a resubdivision of a part of Lot B of the I-44 Center Plat No. 2, Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri and described as follows:           

A fractional part of Lot B of I-44 CENTER PLAT NO. 2, Rolla, Missouri more particularly described as follows:  Beginning at the Northeast Corner of Lot B of said I-44 CENTER PLAT NO. 2; thence South 0°11’50” East, 664.42 feet along the East line of said Lot B to the northeast corner of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Document No. 2008-0944; thence South 89°49’30” West, 288.24 feet along the North line of said Document No. 2008-0944 parcel to its northwest corner; thence South 0°11’30” East, 475.51 feet along the West line of said Document No. 2008-0944 parcel to the northerly right of way of U.S. Interstate 44; thence North 89°16’40” West, 165.43 feet, and, westerly, 240.14 feet along the arc of a curve, concave northerly with a radius of 556.59 feet, the chord of which is North 79°18’10” West, 238.28 feet, and, North 66°44’20” West, 33.02 feet, all along said northerly right of way to its intersection with the northeasterly right of way of Center Drive; thence North 20°59’40” East, 109.14 feet, and, North 17°17’ East, 501.96 feet, and, northwesterly, 510.82 feet along the arc of a curve, concave southwesterly with a radius of 230.00 feet, the chord of which is North 46’20”40” West, 412.12 feet, and, South 70°01’50” West, 54.20 feet, and, westerly, 51.72 feet along the arc of a curve, concave northerly with a radius of 152.45 feet, the chord of which is South 79°45’ West, 51.47 feet, and, South 89°28’20” West, 337.51 feet, all along said northeasterly right of way to the southeast corner of Lot B-1 of I-44 CENTER PLAT NO. 3; thence North 0°12’10” East, 273.16 feet along the East line of said Lot B-1 to the North line of the aforesaid I-44 CENTER PLAT NO. 2; thence South 88°46’20” East, 343.94 feet, and, South 88°53’10” East, 231.23 feet, and, South 88°55’ East, 23.70 feet, and, South 88°46’ East, 663.72 feet, all along said North line to the point of beginning.  Above described tract contains 16.44 acres, more or less, per plat of survey J-1730, dated March 15, 2016, by Archer-Elgin Surveying and Engineering, LLC. (Ord. 4275, §1)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from after the date of its passage and approval.  (Ord. 4275, §2)

 


Sec. 42-103.239 Approving the re-subdivision of RSBR No. 1 subdivision, being a minor re-subdivision to eliminate the interior lot lines for Lots 1 and 2 of the RSBR Subdivision, situated in the NW¼, SW¼, Section 36, T38N, R8W of the 5th P.M. City of Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri. (RSBR No. 2 Subdivision).
That the following legal description applies to this Re-Subdivision of the RSBR No. 1 Subdivision:

The re-subdivision of RSBR No. 1 Subdivision, being a Minor re-subdivision, to eliminate the interior lot lines for lots 1 and 2 of the current RSBR Subdivision, situated in the NW1/4, SW ¼, Section 36, T38N, R8W of the  5TH P.M. City of Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri.  (Ord. 4280, §1)

That the lot lines between Lots 1 and 2 of the RSBR No. 1 Subdivision are hereby eliminated, establishing a single lot consisting of 3.57 acres.  (Ord. 4280, §2)

That Rolla Municipal Utilities (RMU) and the City of Rolla will require the developer(s) to install a water main along the entire length of the subdivision adjoining the U.S. Highway 63 right-of-way.  Development plans for this resubdivision must be submitted and approved by the City of Rolla and RMU before the plat can be filed at the Phelps County Courthouse. (Ord. 4280, §3)

The developer(s) will be required to pay a Land Development Permit fee and a Storm Water Management fee if required by the Public Works Director. (Ord. 4280, §4)

The developer(s) will install a sanitary sewer system sufficient to serve this area, including any designated utility easements. (Ord. 4280, §5)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4280, §6)

 


Sec. 42-103.240 Approving the re-subdivision of KDs Gardens, being a minor subdivision to eliminate the interior lot lines for Lots 1 and 2 of the KDs Gardens Subdivision No. 2, thereby creating a third lot encompassing 3.36 acres in total area. (KDs Gardens No. 2 Subdivision.
That the following legal description applies to this Re-Subdivision of the KDs Gardens No. 2 Subdivision as approved by the Rolla City Council.  More specifically, an Ordinance to approve the re-subdivision of KDs Gardens No. 2 Subdivision, being a Minor re-subdivision, to eliminate the interior lot lines for lots 1 and 2 of the KDs Gardens Subdivision No. 2 is hereby approved by the Rolla City Council. (Ord. 4283, §1)

That the Lot lines between Lots 1 and 2 of the KDs Gardens No. 2 Subdivision are hereby eliminated, thus establishing a single Lot 3 consisting of 3.68 acres.  (Ord. 4283, §2)

That Rolla Municipal Utilities (RMU) and the City of Rolla will require the developer (s) to install all required water service for the subdivision as needed adjoining the Vienna Road right-of-way.  Development plans for this re-subdivision must be submitted and approved by the City of Rolla and RMU before the plat can be filed at the Phelps County Courthouse. (Ord. 4283, §3)

The developer(s) will be required to pay a Land Development Permit fee and a Storm Water Management fee if required by the Public Works Director. (Ord. 4283, §4)

The developer(s) will install a sanitary sewer system sufficient to serve this area, including any designated utility easements. (Ord. 4283, §5)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4283, §6)


Sec. 42-103.241 Approving the plat of Wands Second Subdivision, a subdivision located in the Southeast Quarter of the Southeasat Quarter of Section 2, Township 37 North, Range 8 West, Rolla, Missouri, this plat being a minor subdivision, to consolidate existing interior property lines and to establish a single Lot 1 (.81 acre) for future development in Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri. (Wands Second)
That the lot lines are consolidated to create Lot 1 of Wands Second Subdivision, including property located at 1206 North Oak Street, 1208 North Oak Street and 1210 North Oak Street. (Ord. 4292, §1)

That the following legal description applies to this Subdivision:  A subdivision located in the Southeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 2, Township 37 North, Range 8 West, Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 4292, §2)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4292, §3)

 


Sec. 42-103.242 Approving the resubdivision of Lot 11 of the Cedar Trails Planned Unit Development (PUD), Plat Number 3, (Amended) being a minor resubdivision to establish six new lots (Lot 13 to Lot 18), to allow the construction of not more than six, two story, four-plex dwelling units in the City of Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri (Cedar Trails LLC 4).
That the resubdivision of Lot 11, Cedar Trails PUD, being a minor subdivision, to increase the number of lots from 13 to 18 of the Cedar Trails PUD, situated in the NW ¼ of the NE ¼, Section 14, Township 37 North, Range 8W, of the 5th PM, City of Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri, is hereby approved. (Ord. 4293, §1)

That Lot 11 is hereby subdivided, designating the addition of Lots 13 through 18. (Ord. 4293, §2)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4293, §3)


Sec. 42-103.243 Approving the Westside Marketplace Subdivision, being a major subdivision of the Railroad Addition Lot 94 and part of Lots 93 and 95 and part of the Southwest ¼ Section 10, Township 37 North, Range 8 West in the City of Rolla. (Westside Marketplace).
That the following legal description applies to the Westside Market Place property, as follows:
Plat of the Westside Market Place, a Resubdivision of the Railroad Addition Lot 94 and Parts of Lots 93 and 95 and Part of the Southwest ¼ Section 10, Township 37 North, Range 8 West, in the City of Rolla, County of Phelps, Missouri. (Ord. 4301, §1)

That the site, utility, and grading plans shall be approved by the City of Rolla and Rolla Municipal Utilities (RMU) before building permits may be issued for this project. (Ord. 4301, §2)

That RMU and the City of Rolla will require the developer(s) to install all required water and sewer service for the subdivision as needed, including any designated utility easements.  Development plans for this subdivision must be submitted and approved by the City of Rolla and RMU before the plat will be filed at the Phelps County Courthouse. (Ord. 4301, §3)

The developer(s) will be required to pay a Land Disturbance Permit fee and a Storm Water Management fee or construct storm water detention facilities as required by the Public Works Director. (Ord. 4301, §4)

No construction may be commenced upon Westside Market Place until all necessary building and construction permits have been issued by the City of Rolla, Missouri and that it is understood that no such permits shall be issued for any lots herein platted until the completion of all public improvements appertaining to such lots or until a cash bond equal to the reasonable costs of completing such public improvements has been received and approved by the City of Rolla, Missouri.  The above-mentioned public improvements shall be completed as required by Chapter 42, Article II of the Rolla City Code. (Ord. 4301, §5)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4301, §6)


Sec. 42-103.244 Approving the final plat of the Wild Horse Run No. 3 Subdivision, said subdivision being a minor subdivision located in the SW ¼ NW ¼ Section 24, T37N, R8W, City of Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri. (Wild Horse Run No. 3)
That the final plat of Wild Horse Run Subdivision Plat No. 3, being a minor subdivision including Lots 1 and 2 consisting of .25 acre each, Lots 3 and 4 consisting of .34 acre each and Lot 5 consisting of .52 acre for a total of 1.18 total acres, an addition to the City of Rolla, Phelps, County, Missouri having been reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission on August 9, 2016 and approved by the Rolla City Council on September 6, 2016. (Ord. 4302, §1)

That the following legal description applies to this Subdivision: A minor subdivision of the SW 1/4  NW 1/4 Section 24, all in 37N, T37N, R8W, City of Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri. (Ord. 4302, §2)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4302, §3)


Sec. 42-103.245 Approving the final plat of Mitchell’s Consolidated Subdivision, being a minor subdivision and part of Lot 26 and part of Lot 27, Maxwell Subdivision, Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri (Mitchell).
That the Final Plat of Mitchell’s Consolidated Subdivision, being a Minor Subdivision, Lot 1 Mitchell’s Consolidated Addition consisting of .20 acres, an addition to Rolla, Phelps, County, Missouri having been reviewed on September 13, 2016, by the Planning and Zoning Commission and recommended for approval to the Rolla City Council. (Ord. 4310, §1)

No construction may be commenced upon the above described property until all necessary building and constructions permits have been issued by the City of Rolla, Missouri and that it is understood by all parties that improvements appertaining to such lots or until a cash bond equal to the reasonable costs of completing such public improvements has been received and approved by the City of Rolla, Missouri.  The above mentioned public improvements shall be completed pursuant to the agreement between all parties subject to the ordinance as required by this article of the City Code of Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 4310, §2)

This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4310, §3)


Sec. 42-103.246 Approving the final plat of Sticky Forks Properties, LLC, being a sole owner(s) of all of the property shown on this plat, now desires to consolidate the land as shown on this plat, said subdivision to be named “Shrove Subdivision” Lot No. 1, Phelps County, Missouri. (Sticky Fork)
That the Final Plat of Shrove Subdivision, being a Minor Subdivision including Lot No. 1, consisting of 1.35 acres of land, an addition to Rolla, Phelps, County, Missouri having been reviewed on September 13, 2016 by the Planning and Zoning Commission and recommended for approval to the Rolla City Council. (Ord. 4311, §1)

No construction may be commenced upon the above described property until all necessary building  and constructions permits have been issued by the City of Rolla, Missouri and that it is understood by all parties that improvements appertaining to such lots or until a cash bond equal to the reasonable costs of completing such public improvements has been received and approved by the City of Rolla, Missouri. The above-mentioned public improvements shall be completed pursuant to the agreement between all parties subject to the ordinance as required by this article of the City Code of Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 4311, §2)

This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4311, §3)


Sec. 42-103.247 Amending the Wands Second Subdivision, a subdivision located in the Southeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 2, Township 37 North, Range 8 West, Rolla, Missouri, this plat being a minor subdivision, to eliminate certain utility easements and replace other utility easements as shown on the Wands Third Subdivision Plat. (Wands Third)
That Wands Second Subdivision easements are hereby eliminated and the Wands Third Subdivision, recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission, will be approved by the City Council. (Ord. 4316, §1)

That a fire access road shall be developed as a private driveway along the south side of the subject property that shall be kept free and clear at all times for emergency fire access.  The driveway shall maintain a minimum width of 20 feet. (Ord. 4316, §2)

That the following legal description applies to this subdivision:  A subdivision located in the Southeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 2, Township 37 North, Range 8 West, Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 4316, §3)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of the passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4316, §4)


Sec. 42-103.248 Approving the re-subdivision of Lots, 7, 8, and 9 Block 10, of the Holloway First Addition to eliminate interior lot lines between Lots 7 and 8 and Lots 8 and 9, Holloway Addition to substitute a minor subdivision described as Lot 1, Spring Properties First Addition, City of Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri. (Spring Properties)
An ordinance approving the re-subdivision of Lots 7, 8, and 9, Block 10 of the Holloway First Addition, to eliminate interior lot lines between Lots 7 and 8 and Lots 8 and 9, Holloway Addition to substitute a minor subdivision described as Lot 1, Spring Properties First Addition, City of Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri. (Ord. 4330, §1)

All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed insofar as they do conflict. (Ord. 4330, §2)

That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4330, §3)


Sec. 42-103.249  Approving Hypoint Industrial Park North Plat No. 3 a re-subdivision of a minor subdivision, being a fractional part of the Southwest Quarter Northwest Quarter, Section 29, Township 38 North, Range 7 West and all of Lot 1, Hypoint Industrial Park North Plat No. 1, Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri (Hypoint).
An ordinance to approve the re-subdivision of a Minor Subdivision, being a Fractional Part of the Southwest Quarter Northwest Quarter, Section 29, Township 38 North, Range 7 West and all of Lot 1, HyPoint Industrial Park North Plat No. 1, Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri. (Ord. 4340, §1)

All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed insofar as they do conflict. (Ord. 4340, §2)

That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4340, §3)


Sec. 42-103.250  Established the Welty Subdivision, a minor subdivision, being a consolidation of Lot 5, Block 2, School View Addition Number Two and all of Lot 4 and portions of adjoining vacated alleys, all in Walker’s Addition Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri (Welty).
An ordinance to approve the establishment of the Welty Subdivision, a Minor Subdivision, being a Consolidation of Lot 5, Block 2, School View Addition Number Two and all of Lot 4 and portions of adjoining vacated alleys, all in Walker’s Addition Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri. (Ord. 4341, §1)

All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed insofar as they do conflict. (Ord. 4341, §2)

That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4341, §3)


Sec. 42-103.251  Established Lot 1, Chapman Addition, by eliminating Lots 1, 2, 3, and 4, Block 10 Holloway First Addition Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri. (Chapman Addition)
That the following legal description applies to this ordinance:  Chapman Addition, a Minor Subdivision being a lot consolidation of Lots 1, 2, 3, and 4, Block 10, Holloway First Addition, Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri, Section 1, Township 37 North, Range 8 West of the 5th P.M. City of Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri. (Ord. 4342, §1)

All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed insofar as they do conflict. (Ord. 4342, §2)

That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4342, §3)


Sec. 42-103.252  Approving the final plat of The Lodges at Rolla Subdivision (The Lodges at Rolla)
That the following legal description applies to this ordinance; A consolidation of Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 of the Kayser North Hills Subdivision, Resubdivision No. 2 and Part of the North Half of Lot 23, Railroad Addition & Part of the South Half East Half Lot 1 Northeast Quarter, Section 3, Township 37 North Range 8 West; Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri. (Ord. 4346, §1)

That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4346, §2)
 


Sec. 42-103.253 Approving the subdivision of an 11.44 acre tract of land located in a fractional part of the SW ¼ of the NW ¼, Sec. 24, T37N, R8W, consisting of Lots 1-4 and the right-of-way of the proposed Joyner Estates Subdivision, including Tract A. (Joyner)
An ordinance approving the re-subdivision of part of the SW ¼ of the NW ¼, Section 24, Township 27 North, Range 8 West, consisting of Lots 1-4 and the Right-of-Way of the proposed Joyner Estates Subdivision, including Tract A, City of Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri. (Ord. 4362, §1)

All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed insofar as they do conflict. (Ord. 4362, §2)
That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4362, §3)

42-103.254 Approving the consolidation of Lots 5, 7, and 8 in Block 4 of Newman's Addition Subdivision in the City of Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri, and to vacate the 16-foot-wide alley situated between the aforesaid Lots 7 and 8. (Design 4 U)
An ordinance approving the consolidation of Lots 5, 7, and 8 in Block 4 of Newman’s Addition, City of Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri. (Ord. 4368, §1)

The location of the alley to be vacated is shown on the attached plat.  The section of the alley proposed for vacation runs a distance of 16 feet between 207 South Oak Street and 206 South Olive Street. (Ord. 4368, §2)

Said vacation will not take effect until a subdivision plat that addresses all utility easements is approved.  No building permits will be issued until all platting issues, easements, and utility relocations are addressed. (Ord. 4368, §3)

That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4368, §4)
 


42-103.255 Approving the adjustment of the boundary lines of the parcels that are known as 2409 and 2419 North Bishop Avenue through the subdivision process. (RCP)
An ordinance approving the adjustment of the boundary lines of the parcels that are known as 2409 and 2419 North Bishop Avenue through the subdivision process. (Ord. 4377, §1)

SECTION 2: That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4377, §2)

 

 


42-103.256 Approving the reconfiguration and consolidation of numerous parcels, which are located to the North and South of the stretch of Ridgeview Road between BNSF Railroaod right-of-way and Spilman Avenue, into three right-of-way tracts and four lots through the resubdivision process. (Highway 72 Ext.)
The reconfiguration and consolidation of numerous parcels, which are located to the north and south of the stretch of Ridgeview Road between BNSF Railroad right-of-way and Spilman Avenue, into three right-of-way tracts and four lots through the resubdivision process. (Ord. 4381, §1)

That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4381, §2)


42-103.257 Approving the reconfiguration of three parcels, which are known as 515 and 521 South Bishop Avenue and 514 Fort Wyman Road, through the subdivision process. (Fort Wyman Crossing)
The reconfiguration of three parcels, which are known as 515 and 521 South Bishop Avenue and 514 Fort Wyman Road, through the subdivision process (Fort Wyman Crossing). (Ord. 4383, §1)

That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4383, §2)


42-103.258 Approving the consolidation of the three parcels that are known as 1601, 1603, and 1605 North Pine Street into one parcel through the resubdivision process. (Theta XI Addition)
The consolidation of three parcels that are known as 1601, 1603, and 1605 North Pine Street into one parcel through the resubdivision process. (Ord. 4392, §1)

That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4392, §2)


42-103.259 Approving the consolidation of the four parcels that are known as 206 and 208 East 12th street and 207 and 209 East 11th Street into one parcel through the resubdivision process. (Sigma Pi Addition)
The consolidation of the four parcels that are known as 206 and 208 East 12th Street and 207 and 209 East 11th Street into one parcel through the resubdivision process. (Ord. 4394, §1)

That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4394, §2)


42-103.260 Approving the consolidation of Lot 1 and Lot 2 of Block 4 of Cowan's Addition into one lot through the resubdivision process. (Meyer)
The consolidation of Lot 1 and Lot 2 of Block 4 of Cowan's Addition into one lot through the resubdivision process. (Ord. 4395, §1)

That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4395, §2)

 


42-103.261 Subdivide the parcel known as 901 Oaklane Drive into two lots through the resubdivision process. (Oaklane South).
A subdivision of the parcel known as 901 Oaklane Drive into two lots through the resubdivision process.

That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds.


Sec. 42-103.262  Consolidated all of Lots 3, 4, 5, and 6 of Block 7 of Cowan’s Addition and all of Lots 4, 5, and 6 of Block 8 of Cowan’s Addition together with the vacated right-of-way that lies between the fourth, fifth, and sixth lots of Block 7 and 8 of the Cowan’s Addition Subdivision through the resubdivision process. (Sonic)
A consolidation of all of Lots 3, 4, 5, and 6 of Block 7 of Cowan’s Addition and all of Lots 4, 5, and 6 of Block 8 of Cowan’s Addition together with the vacated right-of-way that lies between the fourth, fifth, and sixth Lots of Blocks 7 and 8 of the Cowan’s Addition Subdivision through the resubdivision process. (Ord. 4407, §1)

That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4407, §2)


Sec. 42-103.263.  Reconfigure Lot 1 and Lot 2 of the Rolla Skilled Nursing Facility Plat No. 1 Subdivision, which is also known as 2735 Eagleson Drive, and Lot 29 and Lot 30 of the Arwood Hills No. 1 Subdivision into four newly configured Lots. (Silverstone)
An ordinance to reconfigure Lot 1 and Lot 2 of the Rolla Skilled Nursing Facility Plat No. 1 Subdivision, which is also known as 2735 Eagleson Drive, and Lot 29 and Lot 30 of the Arwood Hills No. 1 Subdivision into four newly configured lots. (Ord. 4423, §1)

That Course No. 1 as shown hereon, being the end of the Eagleson Drive right of way, shall remain as an open and unrestricted access to Lot 1.  Furthermore, any drive leading from Course No. 1 to the “Drive and Parking Area” denoted heron shall remain open and unrestricted, regardless of ownership of Lot 1.  No gate, barrier, etc. shall be constructed at either Course No. 1 nor at any point along the access to the “Drive and Parking Area” without prior review and approval by the City of Rolla. (Ord. 4423, §2)

That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds and development plans for public improvements have been approved by the Public Works Director. (Ord. 4423, §3)


Sec. 42-103.264.  Reconfigure the boundary lines of the four deeded parcels, one of which is located in Joyner Estates Subdivision and two of which are within the Wild Horse Run Plat No. 1 Subdivision, that are identified by their Phelps County Assessor Account Numbers of 10954.01, 10654.47, 10954.20, and 10954.19 (Moutray)
An ordinance to, through the subdivision process, reconfigure the boundary lines of the four deeded parcels, one of which is located in Joyner Estates Subdivision and two of which are within the Wild Horse Run Plat No. 1 Subdivision, that are identified by their Phelps County Assessor Account Numbers of 10954.01, 10654.47, 10954.20, and 10954.19, and more accurately described below:

A parcel of land being part of Tract A of Joyner Estates as recorded in Plat Cabinet "D", as Slide 331 and situated in The Southwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of Section 24 in Township 37 North, Range 8 West, Phelps County, Missouri and more particularly described as:

Commencing at the southeast corner of Lot 3 of the aforementioned Joyner Estates, thence along the south line of said Tract A, North 89 degrees 44 minutes 20 seconds East a distance of 100.00 feet to the Point of Beginning, thence along the following courses:

North 00 degrees 15 minutes 40 seconds West, 136.00 feet;
North 89 degrees 44 minutes 20 seconds East, 320.00 feet;
South 00 degrees 15 minutes 40 seconds East, 136.00 feet;

Thence South 89 degrees 44 minutes 20 seconds West, 320.00 feet to the Point of Beginning and containing 43,520 square feet (0.9991 acres) more or less. (Ord. 4432, §1)

A condition of the approval of this ordinance is that a recorded deed conveyancing the above-described property to Norman A. & Dora E. Moutray shall be submitted to the Community Development Department within 60 days of the approval of this ordinance, a point in time after which this ordinance will become null and void if no such deed is submitted. (Ord. 4432, §2)

That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds and, if required, development plans for public improvements have been approved by the Public Works Director. (Ord. 4432, §3)

Sec. 42-103.265.  Consolidate Lot 2, Lot 3, and the North 35 feet of Lot 4 of Block 5 of the Frisco Subdivision into one 0.29-acre lot. (Equinox)
An ordinance to, through the subdivision process, consolidate Lot 2, Lot 3, and the north 35 feet of Lot 4 of Block 5 of the Frisco Subdivision into one 0.29-acre lot. (Ord. 4433, §1)

Section 2: That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds and, if required, development plans for public improvements have been approved by the Public Works Director. (Ord. 4433, §2)
Sec. 42-103.266.  Approving the Final Plat of St. Maria's Tatandra, which is a major subdivision plat that divides an approximately 42-acre tract of land that is identified by the Phelps County Assessor's Account Number of 12081, into 58 lots and five outlets. (St. Maria's Tatandra)

That the property within the boundary of the Final Plat of St. Maria's Tatandra, be divided into 58 lots and five outlots. (Ord. 4451, §1)

That no construction may be commenced upon any land within the Final Plat of St. Maria's Tatandra until all necessary building construction permits have been issued by the City of Rolla, Missouri, and that no such permits shall be issued for any lot within said subdivision of land until all public improvements appertaining to such lots or until a cash bond equal to the reasonable costs of completing such public improvements has been received and approved by the City of Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 4451, §2

That all use restrictions stated on the plat shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of this ordinance's passage. (Ord. 4451, §3)

That no building or construction permits shall be issued to any lot or outlots within the boundary of the Final Plat of St. Maria's Tatandra until, all else equal, said plat is recorded in the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds and that said plat shall not be recorded until the fees in-lieu of parkland dedication have been paid and Section 42-30 of the Rolla City Code concerning public improvements has been satisfied. (Ord. 4451, §4)

That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage. (Ord. 4451, §5)


Sec. 42-103.267.  Consolidating Lots 2, 3, and part of 6 of Block 5 of Newman's Addition, which, together, currently constitute two deeded parcels that are identified by their Phelps County Assessor Account Numbers of 8200 and 8199 and by the addresses of 300/302 Rhodes Avenue and 203 South Olive Street, into two lots. (Thoennes Addition)

An ordinance to consolidate Lots 2, 3, and part of 6 of Block 5 of Newman's Addition, which, together, currently constitute two deeded parcels that are identified by their Phelps County Assessor Account Numbers of 8200 and 8199 and by the addresses of 300/302 Rhodes Avenue and 203 South Olive Street, into two lots. (Ord. 4452, §1)

That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds and, if required, development plans for public improvements have been approved by the Public Works Director. (Ord. 4452, §2)


Sec. 42-103.268.  Approving the Final Plat of Hy Point West No. 2, which is a minor subdivision plat that subdivides Lot 5 and Lot 6 of the Final Plat of Hy Point West No. 1 into four lots. (Hy Point West No. 2)

An ordinance that approves the Final Plat of Hy Point West No. 2, which is a minor subdivision plat that subdivides Lot 5 and Lot 6 of the Hy Point West No. 1 into four lots. (Ord. 4458, §1)

That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits shall not be issued by the Community Development Department until the Final Plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds and, if required, storm water detention facilities have been constructed or a fee in lieu of such facilities is paid to the Rolla Department of Public Works. (Ord. 4458, §2)


Sec. 42-103.269.  Approving the Final Plat of Cottonwood Drive Addition, which is a plat that will, through the minor subdivision process, consolidate the parcels identified with the Phelps County Assessor Account Numbers of 10731, 10732, 10733, 10734, 10735, and part of 10725 into a 1.53-acre lot. (Cottonwood Dr. Add.)

An ordinance that approves the Final Plat of Cottonwood Drive Addition, which is a plat that will, through the minor subdivision process, consolidate the parcels identified with the Phelps County Assessor Account Numbers of 10731, 10732, 10733, 10734, 10735, and part of 10725 into a 1.53-acre lot. (Ord. 4472, §1)

That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits shall not be issued by the Community Development Department until the Final Plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds, the building that is located on the north boundary of Lot 1 of the Final Plat of Cottonwood Drive Addition is demolished, and, if required, the owner of the consolidated lot obtains additional utility easements of sufficient width and access to accommodate electric service system improvements. (Ord. 4472, §2)


Sec. 42-103.270.  Approving the Final Plat of Joyner Acres, which is currently platted as Lot 4 of the Final Plat of Moutray Acres. (Joyner Acres)

An ordinance that approves the Final Plat of Joyner Acres, which is currently platted as Lot 4 of the Final Plat of Moutray Acres. (Ord. 4473, §1)

That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits shall not be issued by the Community Development Department until the Final Plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4473, §2)


Division 3. Public Land Transfers
Sec. 42-104. Conveying real estate located in the Rolla Industrial Park to Rolla Community Development Corporation.
Authority to convey real estate. The city is hereby authorized to convey by special warranty deed to Rolla Community Development Corporation the following described real property situated in Phelps County, Missouri:

That part of Lot 1 of Rolla Industrial Park, a Subdivision of Phelps County, Missouri, that lies in the Northeast Quarter (NE 1/4) of the Southwest Quarter (SW 1/4) of Section 31, Township 38 North, Range 7 West of the 5th P.M., as per amended plat thereof filed for record July 24, 1972.

All of Lot 4 of Rolla Industrial Park, a Subdivision of Phelps County, Missouri, as per amended plat thereof filed for record July 24, 1972.

A fractional part of the East Half (E 1/2) of the North Half (N 1/2) of Lot 1 of the Southwest Quarter (SW 1/4) of Section 31, Township 38 North, Range 7 West in Phelps County, Missouri, and more particularly described as follows: Commencing at the Northeast Corner of Lot 1 of the Southwest Quarter (SW 1/4) of said Section 31: thence North 87° 35' West, 308.5 feet along the North Line of Lot 1 of said Southwest Quarter (SW 1/4) to the true point of beginning of the tract hereinafter described: Thence North 87° 35' West, 352.6 feet along the North line of said Lot 1 of the Southwest Quarter (SW 1/4) to the West line of Lot 1 of the Southwest Quarter (SW 1/4); thence South 623.73 feet along said West line to the center line of Phelps County Road No. 40; thence North 61° 40' East, 395.87 feet along said center line, thence North 0° 37' East, 389.88 feet to the true point of beginning. Above tract contains 4.00 acres, more or less. As per survey of Robert L. Elgin recorded in Phelps County Surveyor's Records Book "E", page S-1117A, known as Tract "B".

Subject to: (i) Easements, restrictions and reservations now of record, (ii) the rights of the public in and to any part of the premises lying or being in public roads, alleys or highways and (iii) taxes and assessments, general and special, not now due or payable.

Excepting therefrom a fractional part of Lot 1 of the Southwest Quarter of Section 31, Township 38 North, Range 7 West, more particularly described as follows: Beginning at the Northeast corner of Lot 1 of the Southwest Quarter of said Section 31; thence North 87° 35' West, 661.10 feet; thence South 0° 00' West, 313.31 feet to the point of beginning of the tract herein described; thence South 87° 35' East, 176.19 feet; thence South 0° 00' West, 207.07 feet, to the North right-of-way of Old St. James Road; thence South 61° 40' West, along the Old St. James Road, 200.00 feet; thence North 0° 00' East, 309.42 feet, to the point of beginning, containing 1.04 acres.

Description per survey of Heagler and Marshall, Inc., dated December 1981.

Purchase price. The purchase price for said land shall pursuant to the aforesaid lease be the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) receipt of which is acknowledged by the City of Rolla.

Proof of redemption of bonds. The City of Rolla acknowledges that there has been exhibited to its mayor and city council the canceled bonds of the city issued pursuant to City of Rolla Ordinance No. 1757.

Waiver of delay in closing. The requirement of Article 12 of the aforesaid lease for a forty-five (45) day delay in closing from receipt of notice of intention to exercise the option to purchase by Rolla Community Development Corporation is herewith waived and the city is authorized to proceed to execute said deed forthwith. (Ord. 2529, §§1-4, 6-6-87.)



Secs. 42-105 to 42-106. Reserved.


DIVISION 4. LAND ACQUISITION
Sec. 42-107. Accepting a tract of land as a public right of way from the Rolla Lions Club.
That the dedication by the Rolla Lions Club of a tract of land more particularly described on Exhibit A attached hereto is hereby accepted on behalf of the City of Rolla, Missouri for use as a public right of way.

It is understood and accepted by the City of Rolla, Missouri that part of the consideration given to the Rolla Lions Club in exchange for this dedication is the following condition: That the owners of said tract shall not be assessed by the City of Rolla, Missouri for the future public improvements made to said tract including pavement of the roadway, curb and guttering, storm sewer installation, sidewalks and incidental construction expense related thereto. (Ord. 2539, §§1-2, 6-1-87.)



Sec. 42-108. Accepting a tract of land dedicated by Glen Brown for use as a public right-of-way.
That the dedication by Glen Brown of a tract of land more particularly described on Exhibit A attached hereto is hereby accepted on behalf of the City of Rolla, Missouri for use as a public right-of-way. (Ord. 2553, §1, 8-3-87.)



Sec. 42-109. Authorizing the Rolla Municipal Utilities to purchase Lot 35, Resubdivision of Harvest Fields, in the City of Rolla, for constructing water wells.
That Rolla Municipal Utilities be authorized to purchase Lot 35, Resubdivision of Harvest Fields of the City of Rolla, Missouri, for use in the project authorized in Resolution 1083. (Ord. 2657, §1, 11-7-88.)



Sec. 42-110. Accepting a tract of land from the Briarwood Condominium Association for use as a public right of way.
That the dedication by the Briarwood Condominium Association tract of land more particularly described on Exhibit A attached hereto is hereby accepted on behalf of the City of Rolla, Missouri for use as a public right of way. (Ord. 2668, §1, 1-6-89.)



Sec. 42-111. Accepting a tract of land from the owners of Lot 110, Wedgewood Manor, for use as a public right of way.
That the dedication by the owners of Lot 110, Wedgewood Manor of a tract of land more particularly described on Exhibit A attached hereto is hereby accepted on behalf of the City of Rolla, Missouri for use as a public right-of-way. (Ord. 2677, §1; 4-3-89.)



Sec. 42-111.1 Accepting a strip of land for utility purposes.
A utility easement in a fractional part of Lots 82 and 83 of Railroad Addition, Rolla, Missouri, more particularly described as follows:

Commencing at the Southwest corner of Lot 83 of said Railroad Addition; thence North 2 degrees 41 minutes 00 seconds East, 69.96 feet along the West line of said Lot 83; thence North 89 degrees 53 minutes 30 seconds East, 404.75 feet to the Westerly right-of-way of U.S. Highway 63; thence North 10 degrees 34 minutes 30 seconds East, 569.48 feet along said Westerly right-of-way to the true point of beginning of the hereinafter described easement; thence continuing North 10 degrees 34 minutes 30 seconds East, 15.31 feet along said Westerly right-of-way; thence South 89 degrees 04 minutes 30 seconds West, 131.21 feet to the Southerly right-of-way of Lanning Lane; thence continuing South 89 degrees 04 minutes 30 seconds West, 226.92 feet and South 88 degrees 06 minutes 30 seconds West, 280.00 feet, all along said Southerly right-of-way; thence South 5 degrees 32 minutes 46 seconds East, 190.63 feet; thence North 89 degrees 46 minutes 30 seconds West, 28.12 feet to the East line of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Book 298, Page 172; thence South 05 degrees 32 minutes 46 seconds East, 45.20 feet along said East line and its extension; thence South 89 degrees 46 minutes 30 seconds East, 48.21 feet; thence North 05 degrees 32 minutes 46 seconds West, 221.37 feet; thence North 88 degrees 06 minutes 30 seconds East, 258.88 feet; thence North 89 degrees 04 minutes 30 seconds East, 354.95 feet to the true point of beginning. (Ord. 2822)



Sec. 41-111.2 Accepting a tract of land as a public right of way from Frank B. Powell Lumber Company for widening of Lanning Lane.
A fractional part of Lot 83 of Railroad Addition, Rolla, Missouri, more particularly described as follows: Commencing at the Southwest Corner of Lot 83 of said Railroad Addition; thence North 2°-41' East, 69.96 feet along the West line of said Lot 83; thence North 89°-53'30" East, 404.75 feet to the westerly right-of-way of U.S. Highway 63; thence North 10°-34'-30" East, 584.79 feet along said westerly right-of-way to the true point of beginning of the hereinafter described tract: Thence continuing North 10°-34'-30" East, 13.63 feet along said westerly right-of-way to the southerly right-of-way of Lanning Lane; thence South 88°-28'-30" West, 98.00 feet, and, South 70°-08'-30" West, 37.99 feet, all along said southerly right-of-way; thence North 89°-04'-30" East, 131.21 feet to the true point of beginning. Above described tract contains 0.03 acre, more or less, per plat of survey R-4597, dated October 18, 1991, by Elgin Surveying and Engineering, Inc. (Ord. 2822)



Sec. 42-111.3 Accepting the dedication of a tract of land for use as a public right-of-way from the owners of Aldi Subdivision.
That the dedication by the owners of the Aldi Subdivision of a tract of land more particularly described on Exhibit A attached hereto is hereby accepted on behalf of the City of Rolla, Missouri for use as a public right-of-way. (Ord. 2908, §1)



Sec. 42-111.4 Accepting the dedication of a tract of land for use as a public right-of-way for the north extension of McCutchen Drive.
That the dedication of a tract of land more particularly described on Exhibit A attached hereto is hereby accepted on behalf of the city of Rolla, Missouri, for use as a public right-of-way. (Ord. 2932, §1)



Sec. 42-111.5 Approving the condemnation or appropriation of private property for street widening and drainage improvements which necessitate property acquisition and easements over and through property which are needed for the construction of sidewalk, curbing, and improved drainage.
(a) The property description attached hereto and incorporated herein as Exhibit "A" represent the private property which the City of Rolla, Missouri intends to condemn or appropriate and the mayor is given full authority to execute this ordinance and fully bind the City.

(b) The city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri, hereby declares the passage of this ordinance to be an emergency. (Ord. 3180, §§1-2)

EXHIBIT A

Property No. 1: Belonging to Carrie Ann (Miller) Vincent

A right-of-way acquisition being:

A fractional part of the Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 35, Township 38 North, Range 8 West of the 5th P.M. described as follows: Commencing at the Southeast Corner of the Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of said Section 35; thence South 88°18'30" West, 25.00 feet along the South line of said Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter; thence North 0°25'50" West, 816.40 feet to the South line of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Book 348, Page 144, the true point of beginning of the hereinafter described tract: Thence continuing North 0°25'50" West, 89.49 feet to the North line of said Book 348, Page 144 parcel; thence North 88°11'40" East, 5.19 feet along said North line to the northeast corner of said Book 348, Page 144 parcel; thence south 0°48'10" East, 89.48 feet along the East line of said Book 348, Page 144 parcel to its southeast corner, thence South 88°11'40" West, 5.76 feet along the South line of said Book 348, Page 144 parcel to the true point of beginning. Above described tract contains 0.011 acre, more or less.

Maps outlining the right-of-way acquisition are attached hereto as Exhibit No. 1 and are incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.

Property No. 2: Belonging to Wilma M. Via and Sadie Go forth:

A right-of-way acquisition being:

A fractional part of Lot 14 of Railroad Addition, Rolla, Missouri more particularly described as follows: Commencing at the Northeast Corner of Lot 14 of said Railroad Addition; thence South 0°14'30" West, 133.39 feet along the East line of said Lot 14 to the northeast corner of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Book 291, Page 83, the true point of beginning of the hereinafter described tract: Thence South 0°44'40" West, 98.88 feet along said East line of Lot 14, also being along the East line of said Book 291, Page 83 parcel to its southeast corner; thence westerly, 4.54 feet along the South line of said Book 291, Page 83 parcel; thence North 2°37'10" West to the North line of said Book 291, Page 83 parcel; thence easterly, 10.34 feet along said North line to the true point of beginning. Above described tract contains 0.017 acre, more or less.

Maps outlining the right-of-way acquisition and are attached hereto as Exhibit No. 2 and are incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.

Property No. 3: Belonging to James L. Braun and J. Gale Braun:

A right-of-way acquisition being:

A fractional part of Lot 14 of Railroad Addition, Rolla, Missouri more particularly described as follows: Beginning at the Northeast Corner of Lot 14 of said Railroad Addition, said point also being the northeast corner of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Book 383, Page 248; thence South 89°09' West, 17.00 feet along the North line of said Lot 14, also being along the North line of said Book 383, Page 248 parcel; thence South 2°37'10" East to the South line of said Book 383, Page 248 parcel; thence easterly, 10.34 feet along said South line to the southeast corner of said Book 383, Page 248 parcel, also being a point on the aforesaid East line of Lot 14 of Railroad Addition; thence North 0°14'30" East, 133.39 feet along said East line of Lot 14, also being along the East line of the aforesaid Book 383, Page 248 parcel to the point of beginning. Above described tract contains 0.042 acre, more or less.

Maps outlining the right-of-way acquisition are attached hereto as Exhibit No. 3 and are incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. 3180)



Sec. 42-111.6 Approving the condemnation or appropriation of private property for sanitary sewer improvements which necessitate property acquisition and utility easements over and through properties which are needed for the construction of sanitary sewer improvements.
The property descriptions attached hereto and incorporated herein as Exhibit "A" represent the private property which the City of Rolla, Missouri intends to condemn or appropriate and the Mayor is given full authority to execute this Ordinance and fully bind the City.

The City Council of the City of Rolla, Missouri hereby declares the passage of this Ordinance to be an emergency. (Ord. 3492)



Sec. 42-111.7 Approving the condemnation or appropriation of private property for sanitary sewer, water and storm sewer improvements.
The property descriptions attached hereto and incorporated herein as Exhibit "A" represent the private property which the City of Rolla, Missouri intends to condemn or appropriate and the Mayor is given full authority to execute this Ordinance and fully bind the City.

The City Council of the City of Rolla, Missouri hereby declares the passage of this Ordinance to be an emergency. (Ord. 3631)



Sec. 42-111.8 Approving the condemnation or appropriation of private property for Lion's Club Drive Street improvements, Southview Drive Street improvements, flood protection systems improvements and public park improvements.
(a) The property descriptions attached hereto and incorporated herein as Exhibit "A" represent the private property which the City of Rolla, Missouri intends to condemn or appropriate and the Mayor is given full authority to execute this Ordinance and fully bind the City.

(b) The City Council of the City of Rolla, Missouri hereby declares the passage of this Ordinance to be an emergency. (Ord. 3632)



Sec. 42-111.9 Approving the condemnation or appropriation of private property for Lion's Club Drive Street improvements.
(a) The property descriptions attached hereto and incorporated herein as Exhibit "A" represent the private property which the City of Rolla, Missouri intends to condemn or appropriate and the Mayor is given full authority to execute this Ordinance and fully bind the City.

(b) The City Council of the City of Rolla, Missouri hereby declares the passage of this Ordinance to be an emergency. (Ord. 3633)



Sec. 42-111.10 Approving dedication of certain streets and easements within Kensington Park.
(a) That certain streets and easement within Kensington Park as detailed in the attached Appendix “A" as submitted to the City Council on this date, is hereby approved.

(b) This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. (Ord. 3967)



DIVISION 5. VACATED STREETS AND ALLEYS
Sec. 42-112. Vacating a public alley located in Block 59 of County Addition.
That the public alley situated in Block 59 of County Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri is hereby vacated as a public alley by the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri pursuant to the authority granted to it in Section 88.637 Revised Statutes of Missouri. (Ord. 2092, §4, 3-13-78.)



Sec. 42-113. Vacating a portion of Rucker Avenue.
That portion of Rucker Avenue being forty feet in width as dedicated on the plat of Cowan's Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri lying south of the south right-of-way line of Missouri State Highway No. 72 and lying north of the north right-of-way line of Williams Road, as said line is shown on the plat of Shady Grove Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 2097, §2, 4-10-78.)

That the portion of Rucker Avenue described above is hereby vacated as a public street by the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri pursuant to the authority granted to it in Section 88.637 Revised Statutes of Missouri. (Ord. 2097, §5, 4-10-78.)



Sec. 42-114. Vacating an alley situated in Block 43 of Bishop's Addition.
That the alley located between 7th Street and 6th Street in Block 43 of the Bishop's Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby vacated. (Ord. 2170, §1, 8-13-79.)



Sec. 42-115. Vacating a public alley located in Block 9 of Holloway Addition.
That the public alley situated in Block 9 of Holloway Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri is hereby vacated as a public alley by the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri pursuant to the authority granted to it in Section 88.637 Revised Statutes of Missouri. (Ord. 2213, §4, 6-9-80.)



Sec. 42-116. Vacating a portion of Pine Street (Old Rolla-Vichy Road) lying immediately south of Interstate 44.
A fractional part of the southeast one-quarter of the northeast one-quarter of Section 2, township 37 north, range 8 west, being a city street 40.0 feet in width and lying 20.0 feet on either side of the following described centerline; Beginning at the west right-of-way line of Olive Street extended north to the intersection of the south right-of-way line of I-44; thence north 88o 06' 20" west, along the south right-of-way line of I-44, 431.94 feet to the point of beginning of this description; thence south 8o 08' 30" west, 7.21 feet; thence south 13o 41' 30" west, 49.32 feet; thence south 19o 14' 30" west, 49.32 feet; thence south 24o 47' 30" west, 49.32 feet. The intent of the above description is to vacate the north 155.17 feet of Pine Street formerly known as Old Rolla-Vichy Road. (Ord. 2214, §1, 6-9-80.)

That the above described public street is hereby vacated by the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri pursuant to the authority granted to it in Section 88.637 Revised Statutes of Missouri. (Ord. 2214, §5, 6-9-80.)



Sec. 42-117. Vacating a portion of Stratford Lane in Woodcrest Estates Subdivision.
That the portion of Stratford Lane located in Woodcrest Estates Subdivision to the City of Rolla, Missouri and situated between lots 15 and 16 of said subdivision be and the same is hereby vacated. (Ord. 2385, §1, 8-1-83).



Sec. 42-118. Vacating a portion of a public street known as Keeney Court; retaining easement rights.
Subject to the reservation of easement set forth below, the following portion of a public street, known as Keeney Court, more particularly described as:

That portion of Keeney Court as shown on the plat of Laird's Second Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, at the extreme west end of the 60-foot-wide strip of right-of-way lying west of an arc formed by a 53-foot radius having the same center of circle as the remaining portion of the Keeney Court cul de sac. is hereby vacated.

The city does hereby reserve unto public use the following easement over, under and across the above described vacated portion of Keeney Court: The right to maintain, repair and construct upon, over and under the above described tract sidewalks, sanitary sewer lines, storm drains, and electrical power transmission lines forever. (Ord. 2418, §§1, 2, 5-7-84).

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 42-119. Vacating a portion of State Street.
That the portion of State Street situated between the intersection of State Street and Fourteenth Street and the intersection of State Street and Sixteenth Street be and the same is hereby vacated. (Ord. 2421, §1, 6-4-84.)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 42-120. Vacating a utility easement located in the Forum Commercial Resubdivision.
That a ten (10) foot wide utility easement situated on the following described real property, located in the Forum Commercial Resubdivision, more particularly described as follows:

The ten (10) foot wide utility easement that crosses East-West of Lot "A" of the Forum Commercial Resubdivision, more particularly described as follows: Beginning at the SE corner of said Lot "A"; thence North 5°30' West 356.71 ft. to the point of beginning of easement herein described: thence continuing North 5°30' West 10.0 ft.; thence South 89°23' West 142.27 ft. more or less, to a point on the East line of a utility easement shown on the plat of record for the Forum Commercial Resubdivision; thence South along the East line of said utility easement 10.0 ft. to a point which is on the East line of said utility easement and which bears South 89°23' West 143.62 ft. more or less, from the point of beginning; thence North 89°23' East 143.62 ft. to the point of beginning of easement herein described be and the same is hereby vacated. (Ord. 2439, §1, 11-5-84).



Sec. 42-121. Vacating portions of Fourteenth Street and State Street at the request of the University of Mo. at Rolla in exchange for public right of way.
That the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri has received a request from the University of Missouri to close and vacate the following described portions of Fourteenth Street and State Street:

A fractional part of State Street, and a fractional part of Fourteenth Street in the City of Rolla, Missouri, and more particularly described as follows: Commencing at the Southeast Corner of Railroad Lot 38 in the City of Rolla, thence N1°-17'-20"W, 25.00 feet along the east line of said Railroad Lot to the north line of said Fourteenth Street, said point also being the true point of beginning of the hereinafter described tract: Thence S87°-56'-40"W, 25.00 feet along the said north line; thence S2°-03'-20"E, 46.55 feet to the south line of Fourteenth Street; thence N88°-44'-20"E, 141.41 feet along said south line to the northeast corner of Ladd's Addition and the west line of State Street; thence S1°-13'-40"E, 146.96 feet along said west line; thence N88°-46'-20" E, 60.00 feet to the east line of State Street; thence N1°-13'-40"W, 207.00 feet along said east line to the north line of Fourteenth Street; thence S88°-44'-20"W, 177.10 feet; and S1°-17'-20"E, 13.10 feet along the east line of said Railroad Lot 38 to the true point of beginning. Above described tract contains 0.47 acres, more or less, per plat of survey number R-360A dated January 30, 1985 by Elgin Surveying &Engineering, Inc.

As a consideration in the closing and vacating of the afore described property in Section 1, the University of Missouri has agreed to dedicate to the City of Rolla and improve the following described public right of way:

A fractional part of vacated State Street and a fractional part of vacated Fourteenth Street and a fractional part of Ladd's Addition, all in the City of Rolla, Missouri and more particularly described as follows: Commencing at the Southeast corner of Railroad Lot 38; thence North 1°-17'-20" West, 25.0 feet along the East line of said Railroad Lot 38: thence South 87°-56'-40" West, 25.0 feet to the North line of Fourteenth Street and the true point of beginning of the tract hereinafter described: thence South 2°-03'-20" East, 46.55 feet to the South line of Fourteenth Street: thence South 88°-44'-20" West, 108.35 feet along the South line of Fourteenth Street to the Northwest corner of Ladd's Addition: thence South 1°-12'-40" East, 4.95 feet along the West line of Ladd's Addition; thence North 87°-56'-40" East, 108.42 feet; thence Southeasterly along the arc of a curve of radius 88.96 feet, the chord for which is South 69°-08'-20" East, 69.28 feet; thence South 42°-41'-40" East, 81.15 feet: thence Southeasterly along the arc of a curve of radius 80.0 feet, the chord for which is South 23°-43'-30" East, 61.23 feet to the West line of State Street: thence North 88°-46'-20" East, 60.0 feet to the East line of State Street: thence Northwesterly along said East line along the arc of a curve with radius of 140.0 feet, the chord of which is North 23°-43'-40" West, 107.15 feet; and thence North 49°-45'-40" West, 81.15 feet; thence Northwesterly along the arc of a curve of radius 138.96 feet, the chord for which is North 69°-08'-20" West, 108.21 feet to the true point of beginning. Above described tract contains 0.34 acres, more or less, per plat of survey number R-360B dated February 4, 1985 by Elgin Surveying and Engineering, Inc.

That the council, after considering said request and the reports and recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the city engineer, finds that the vacation of portions of said public streets would be in the best interest of the City of Rolla, Missouri and would promote the health, safety and welfare of said city.

That the portions of the above described public streets are hereby vacated by the city council of the City of Rolla, Missouri pursuant to the authority granted to it in Section 88.637 Revised Statutes of Missouri automatically at such time as the public right of way for the new roadway as described in Paragraph (b) has been received from the Board of Curators. (Ord. 2455, §§1-4, 4-1-85.)



Sec. 42-122. Vacating the alley running North-South in Block 48 of Bishop's Addition to the City of Rolla.
That the alley in Block 48 of Bishop's Addition to Rolla, running north to south and being sixteen feet wide east to west, according to the Plat of Record located in the Phelps County office of the Recorder of Deeds, dated September 22, 1862, and transferred from the old Plat Book August 3, 1869 by H. C. Wheat, Recorder, be and the same is hereby vacated. (Ord. 2462, §1, 6-3-85.)



Sec. 42-123. Vacating a portion of Whitehall Road and a portion of the Greentree Road Cul-De-Sac in the Fox Creek Resubdivision.
(a) That the following described portion of Whitehall Road as shown in the plat of Fox Creek Resubdivision, an Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, to-wit:

Beginning at the southwest corner of lot no. 77 of "Fox Creek", an Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri; thence N. 16° 00' 02" east 116.09 ft. to the true point of beginning; thence N. 75° 40" west 123.69 ft. to the east right of way of Greentree Road; thence north 0° 00' east along said east right of way 51.60 ft.; thence south 75° 40' east 142.50 ft.; thence south 28° 07' 24" west 21.82 ft.; thence south 16° 00' 02" west 28.82 ft. to the point of beginning be and the same is hereby vacated.

(b) That the following described portion of Greentree Road Cul-de-sac as shown in the plat of Fox Creek Resubdivision, an Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, to-wit:

Beginning at the southeast corner of lot no. 9 of "Fox Creek", an Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri; thence S. 0° 00' west 475.26 ft. to the true point of beginning; thence south 0° 00' west 27.47 ft.; thence south 11° 38' west 71.86 ft.; thence northerly along the arc of a curve with a radius of 50.00 ft., a distance of 142.32 ft. to the point of beginning be and the same is hereby vacated. (Ord. 2481-A, §§1-2, 3-3-86).



Sec. 42-124. Vacating Chris Court and certain easements shown on the plat of Forum Lakes Subdivision.
(a) That the street known as Chris Court shown on the plat of Forum Lakes Subdivision, an Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, be and the same is hereby vacated.

(b) That the 20 foot ingress and egress easement running from the north line of tract no. 7 of Forum Lakes Subdivision, an Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, to the north line of the Chris Court cul-de-sac, be and the same is hereby vacated.

(c) That a 15 foot drainage easement running from the west line of tract no. 6 of Forum Lakes Subdivision to the east line of the Chris Court cul-de-sac be and the same is hereby vacated. (Ord. 2482, §§ 1-3, 3-3-86).



Sec. 42-125. Vacating a portion of Maple Street in the McEntees Addition.
That a portion of Maple Street in the McEntees Addition to the city of Rolla, Missouri described as follows, to-wit:

Beginning at the southwest corner of Block No. 5 of the McEntees Addition to the city of Rolla, Missouri; thence north 89° 47' west 5 feet; thence north 0° 03' 20" west 139.24 feet; thence south 89° 47' east 5 feet; thence south 0° 03' 20" east 139.24 feet to the point of beginning.

be and the same is hereby vacated. (Ord. 2490, §1; 7-7-86).



Sec. 42-126. Vacating a portion of Coventry Lane.
That the portion of Coventry Lane situated in Steeplechase Hills Subdivision and more particularly described in Exhibit "A"* attached hereto be and the same is hereby vacated. (Ord. 2505, §1, 12-1-86.)

*Editors Note: Exhibit A - Development Plan for the Resubdivision of Lots 44, 44, 45, 46 and 47 of Steeplechase Hills Subdivision.



Sec. 42-127. Vacating an easement in Ann's Acres 2nd Addition to the city.
That a five (5) foot wide utility easement situated on the following described real property, located in Ann's Acres 2nd Addition to the City of Rolla, more particularly described as follows:

The West 5 feet of the east 10 feet of Lot 13 of Ann's Acres 2nd Addition to the City of Rolla be and the same is hereby vacated. (Ord. 2548, § 1, 8-3-87.)



Sec. 42-128. Vacating a portion of Wakefield Drive.
(a) That the following described portion of Wakefield Drive described below and as shown in the plats of Harvest Field Resubdivision and Eastmeadow Subdivision additions to the City of Rolla, Missouri, to-wit:

That portion of Wakefield Drive situated between lot 16 Eastmeadow Subdivision and lot 1 of Harvest Fields original plat. be and the same is hereby vacated.

(b) This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.

(c) It is the intent and purpose of this Ordinance to correct a mistake that was made in the replatting of Harvest Fields Subdivision so that the resubdivision of Harvest Fields which indicates that a portion of said road has been vacated is correct and further that the remaining half of said road shall become the property of the owners of lot 16 Eastmeadow Subdivision. (Ord. 2566, §§1-3, 10-5-87.)



Sec. 42-129. Vacating a portion of Park Street.
(a) That the following described portion of Park Street situated between the intersection of Park Street and Tenth Street and the intersection of Park Street and Eleventh Street be and the same is hereby vacated.

(b) This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after May 1, 1988. (Ord. 2572, §§1-2, 11-2-87.)



Sec. 42-130. Vacating a utility easement in the Original Lakeview Addition.
That a fifteen (15) foot wide utility easement situated on the following described real property, located in the Original Lakeview Addition, more particularly described as follows:

The west fifteen (15) ft. of Lots 1, 2, and 3 and the north fifteen (15) ft. of Lot 3, less the north ten (10) of Lot 3.

be and the same is hereby vacated. (Ord. 2594, §1, 4-4-88.)



Sec. 42-131. Vacating a portion of the alley running north and south through Block 42, Bishop's Addition.
A part of the alley through Block 42 of Bishop's Addition, Rolla, Missouri, and being more particularly described as follows:

Beginning at the Southwest Corner of Lot 8 of said Block 42; thence North 1°-05' East, 100.56 feet along the east side of said alley to a point 10 feet southerly from the Northwest Corner of Lot 5 of said Block 42,; thence North 89°-06' West, 10.00 feet to the west side of said alley; thence South 1°-05' West, 100.56 feet to the Southeast Corner of Lot 7 of said Block 42; thence South 89°-06' East, 10.00 feet to the point of beginning, per plat of survey R-2424, dated April 15, 1988, by Elgin Surveying and Engineering, Inc.,

serves no useful purpose and it is necessary and expedient to vacate said portion of said alley. (Ord. 2612, §1, 6-7-88.)



Sec. 42-132. Vacating a portion of Sheron Street in Newcastle Place Plat 1 Subdivision.
That the portion of Sheron Street located in Newcastle Place Plat 1, a Subdivision to the City of Rolla, Missouri and described as follows:

Beginning at the northwest corner of "Newcastle Place (Plat No. 1)", an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri; thence southeasterly along the arc of a curve (curve data: Delta=60°00', radius=230.00 feet), 190.14 feet; thence S.60°00'E., 141.41 feet; thence southeasterly along the arc of a curve (curve date: Delta=30°00', radius=170.00 feet), 89.01 feet; thence N.30°00'W., 33.35 feet; thence northeasterly along the arc of a curve (curve data: Delta=119°15', radius=91.72 feet), 190.90 feet; thence S.89°15'W., 180.23 feet; thence N.60°00'W., 41.61 feet; thence northwesterly along the arc of a curve (curve data: Delta=60°00', radius=170.00 feet), 127.77 feet to the north subdivision line of "Newcastle Place (Plat No. 1):" Thence S.89°15'W. along said north subdivision line, 7.38 feet; thence S.89°16'W. along said north subdivision line, 54.43 feet to the point of beginning. Containing 23,668 sq. ft., 0.543 acre; be and the same is hereby vacated. (Ord. 2647, §1; 10-3-88.)



Sec. 42-133. Vacating the alley running northeast-southwest between Block 11, Bishops 4th Addition and Block 49, Bishops Addition.
That the alley running northeast-southwest between Block 11, Bishops 4th Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri and Block 49, Bishops Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, be and the same is hereby vacated. (Ord. 2658, §1, 11-7-88.)



Sec. 42-134. Vacating a portion of a utility easement and a water line easement adjacent to Williams Road.
That a portion of a 40-foot wide utility easement and a 4-foot by 100-foot water line easement adjacent to Williams Road in the City of Rolla, Missouri as shown on the attached Exhibit "A" be and the same is hereby vacated. (Ord. 2659, §1, 11-7-88.)



Sec. 42-135. Vacating a portion of an unnamed stub street north of Lynwood Drive located between Lot 1 in Block 2, Ridgeview Subdivision and Lot 10 in Block 1 - Ridgeview Addition.
The portion of the unnamed stub street north of Lynwood Drive located between Lot 1, Block 2, Ridgeview Subdivision and Lot 10, Block 1, Ridgeview Subdivision, an Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as shown by the plat of said addition of record in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Phelps County, Missouri, with the exception of a 15-foot wide strip of land adjacent and parallel to the railroad right of way as shown on Exhibit "A" is hereby vacated. (Ord. 2671, §1; 1-6-88.)



Sec. 42-136. Vacating Asher Street at its present location between 10th and 11th Streets and accepting the dedication of Asher Street to be constructed 276.99 feet east of its present location.
(a) Asher Street at its present location between 10th and 11th Streets is hereby vacated and the dedication of Asher Street to be constructed 276.99 feet east of the present location as shown on Exhibit "A" is hereby accepted.

(b) This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of construction and acceptance of a new street located as shown on the attached Exhibit "A" and upon the date of filing the attached Exhibit "A" with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 2698, §§1-2; 9-5-89.)



Sec. 42-137. Vacating utility easement in the resubdivision of Tract No. 2 Forum Lakes Addition.
That (10) ten feet of the existing (20) twenty foot wide utility easement situated on the following described real property, located in the Resubdivision of Tract No. 2 Forum Lakes Addition, more particularly described as follows:

A fractional part of Tract "2C" of "Resubdivision of Tract No. 2, 'Forum Lakes'", an Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri (being the North 10' of an existing easement) more particularly described as follows: Beginning at the Southeast Corner of said Tract No. 2 (said point lying on the West right-of-way, 249.26 feet to the Southeast Corner of Tract "2C" and the true point of beginning of this description; thence South 80°-08'-31" West along the south line of said Tract "2C", 85.43 feet to the east line of an existing easement; thence North 14°-52'-53" East, 11.01 feet; thence North 80°-08'-31" East, 82.63 feet to the West right-of-way of McCutchen Drive; thence South 0°-23' West along said West right-of-way, 10.16 feet to the point of beginning, containing: 840 sq. ft., 0.0193 acre.

be and the same is hereby vacated. (Ord. 2699, §1; 9-5-89.)



Sec. 42-137.1. Vacating a waterline easement along north property line of 700 South Olive Street.
That the unspecified width of an existing waterline easement situated on the following described real property, located on the north property line of 700 South Olive Street, more particularly described as follows:

Fractional part of the Southeast Quarter (SE 1/4) of the Southeast Quarter (SE 1/4) of Section Eleven (11), Township Thirty-seven (37) North of Range Eight (8) West, more particularly described as follows: Commencing at the Southeast corner of said SE 1/4 of SE 1/4 of Section 11, Township 37 North, Range 8 West, thence North a distance of 1699 feet; thence West 633 feet to an iron pin; thence South along the West line of Olive Street extended South, 637 feet to the Southeast corner of the tract conveyed by Henry H. Davis and Mahulda Davis, his wife, to Marie H. Stultz, of record in Book 93, page 536, of the Deed Records of Phelps County, Missouri; thence continuing South along the West line of Olive Street extended, 40 feet, to the point of beginning of the description of the real estate herein conveyed. Thence continuing South along the said West line of Olive Street extended, 90 feet, to the Northeast corner of the Shelby Sherman tract; thence West along the North line of the Shelby Sherman tract 200 feet, more or less, to an iron pin; thence Northerly, parallel to the West line of Olive Street extended, 90 feet, more or less, to an iron pin; thence Easterly parallel to the North line of the Shelby Sherman tract, 200 feet, more or less, to the place of beginning. There is hereby reserved an easement for water main running Easterly and Westerly along the North portion of the tract conveyed, as the same is now located.

be and the same is hereby vacated. (Ord. 2700, §1; 9-5-89.)



Sec. 42-137.2 Vacating Ninth Street between the Burlington Railroad tracks and Olive Street.
Ninth Street between the Burlington Railroad tracks and Olive Street is hereby vacated with the exception that a twenty foot wide sanitary sewer easement is retained centered on the present alignment of a City-owned sanitary sewer. (Ord. 2712, §1.)



Sec. 42-137.3. Vacating an existing sanitary sewer easement and accepting a new sanitary sewer easement.
That the (20) twenty-foot wide sanitary sewer easement situated on the following described real property:

A strip of land for sewer purposes in Lot 84, Railroad Addition, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, lying 10.0 feet on each side of the hereinafter described centerline of easement: Commencing at the Southeast Corner of said Lot 84; thence South 89°-53'-20" West, 161.23 feet along the South line of said Lot 84 to the point of beginning of the hereinafter described centerline of easement: Thence North 16°-37'-40" East, 245.65 feet; thence North 5°-06' East, 225.64 feet; thence North 55°-14'-40" East, 106.99 feet to the ending point of the centerline of easement, as per plat of survey R-564, dated June 10, 1985, by Elgin Surveying and Engineering, Inc.

Also a strip of land for sewer purposes in Lot 83 and Lot 84, Railroad Addition, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, lying 10.0 feet on each side of the hereinafter described centerline of easement: Commencing at the Southeast Corner of said Lot 84; thence South 89°-53'-20" West, 161.23 feet along the South line of said Lot 84; thence North 16°-37'-40" East, 10.44 feet to the point of beginning of the hereinafter described centerline of easement: Thence South 89°-53'-20" West, 664.35 feet to the East right-of-way of U.S. Highway 63, the ending point of the centerline of easement, as per plat of survey R-564, dated June 10, 1985, by Elgin Surveying and Engineering, Inc. be and the same is hereby vacated. (Ord. 2741, §1.)

This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date the new sewer is completed and approved by the Public Works Department and the new sanitary sewer easement is executed and delivered to the city on the following described tract:

A sanitary sewer easement, (20) twenty feet wide situated and being located in a fractional part of the Southeast 1/4 of the Northwest 1/4, and a fractional part of the Northeast 1/4 of the Southwest 1/4 of Section 14, Township 37 North, Range 8 West of the 5th P.M., and a fractional part of Lots 83 and 84 of Railroad Addition, Rolla, Missouri, more particularly described as follows: Beginning at the Southwest corner of the Southeast 1/4 of the Northwest 1/4 of Section 14, Township 37 North, Range 8 West; thence run South 89°-55'-50" West, 506.99 feet; thence North 10°-36'-50" East 1.22 feet; thence South 78°-14'-00" East 9.91 feet; thence North 10°-36'-20", 6.88 feet to the Point of Beginning for said Sanitary Sewer Easement 20 feet wide and lying 10 feet either side of a centerline; thence North 89°-55'-50" East, 431.44 feet; thence South 22°-50'-04" East 76.00 feet; thence North 89°-55'-50" East, 275.00 feet; thence North 00°-04'-10" West, 490.00 feet; thence North 69°-49'-03" East, 75.00 feet; thence North 26°-41'-05" East, 75.07 feet to a Point of Ending on the Easternmost boundary of aforementioned Lot Number 84. Said point lying North 01°-52'-00" East, 144.01 feet from the Northeast corner of Railroad Lot Number 84. (Ord. 2741, §2.)



Sec. 42-137.4. Vacating utility easement in Lot A of Forum Commercial Resubdivision and accepting utility easement in said Lot A.
That the (15) fifteen-foot wide utility easement situated on the following described real property, located in Lot A, of the Forum Commercial Resubdivision, more particularly described as follows:

A strip of ground lying in Lot A, Forum Commercial Resubdivision, Rolla, Missouri, more particularly described as follows: Commencing at the Southeast corner of Lot A; thence N-5°30'-W, 116 feet, along the East line of said Lot A to the True Point of Beginning; thence S-84°23'20"-W, 97.38 feet to a point on the East line of a 25-foot wide drainage easement; thence N-25°24'30"-E, 17.50 feet to a point on a 32.5 foot wide drainage easement; thence N-84°-23'-20"-E, 88.38 feet to a point on the East line of Lot A; thence S-5°-30'-E, 15 feet along said East lot line back to the true point of beginning used for the purpose of an electric power line be and the same is hereby vacated. (Ord. 2744, §1.)

The existing sanitary sewer and the buried telephone line located in the tract described in Section 1 will remain in their present location and the easement for those purposes remains in force. Since property owner has agreed to pay all construction material costs related to the installation of new ductile steel sewer pipe that will be under the proposed building and further agrees to pay costs to move the electric lines to the new easement, the City covenants that should said sewer line and telephone line fail, it will not require excavation so as to interfere with the property owner's building improvements. (Ord. 2744, §2.)

This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date the above mentioned improvements are made and a new utility easement is executed and delivered on the following described tract:

A strip of ground for utility purposes in Lot A, Forum Commercial Resubdivision, Rolla, Missouri, lying 5.00 feet North and 10.00 feet South of the following described line: Commencing at the Southeast Corner of said Lot A; thence North 5°30'-West, 179.60 feet along the East line of said Lot A to the point of beginning of the hereinafter described line; thence South 84°23'-20"-West, 121.77 feet to the West line of said Lot A, the ending point of the easement. Per plat of survey R-3790, dated May 30, 1990, by Elgin Surveying &Engineering, Inc. (Ord. 2744, §3.)



Sec. 42-137.5 Vacating a portion of 5th Street from Rolla Street East to Railroad Tracks.
(a) The portion of 5th Street from Rolla Street east to the railroad tracks be and the same is hereby vacated.

(b) The south thirty feet of the above description shall remain as an utility easement. (Ord. 2762, §§1 & 2.)



Sec. 42-137.6 Vacating an alley adjacent to Lots 8 &9, Block 1 in the Townsend Addition.
(a) The alley located adjacent to Lots 8 and 9, Block 1 in the Townsend Addition be and the same is hereby vacated.

(b) The 12-foot strip of the above description shall remain as a utility easement. (Ord. 2769, §§1 &2)



Sec. 42-137.7 Vacating an alley in Block 16 of the Holloway Addition.
(a) The alley located in Block 16 of the Holloway Addition be and the same is hereby vacated.

(b) The 12-foot strip of the above description shall remain as a utility easement. (Ord. 2770, §§1 &2)



Sec. 42-137.8 Vacating a portion of Park Street between 9th Street and 10th Street.
That the portion of Park Street between 9th Street and 10th Street be and the same is hereby vacated. (Ord. 2776, §1)



Sec. 42-137.9 Vacating a portion of Sharp Road.
The following portion of Sharp Road is hereby vacated:

All that part of Sharp Road, a 40-foot wide street, lying immediately adjacent to the Viola Sharp property and being in the Northwest Quarter (NW 1/4) of the Northwest Quarter (NW 1/4) and the Northeast Quarter (NE 1/4) of the Northwest Quarter (NW 1/4) of Section 1, Township 37 North, Range 8 West of the 5th P.M. in Phelps County, Missouri, the centerline of which is more particularly described as follows:

Commencing at the Southeast Corner of the Northwest Quarter (NW 1/4) of the Northwest Quarter (NW 1/4) of said Section 1 thence west, 150 feet, more or less, along the south line of said Quarter Quarter to its intersection with the centerline of Sharp Road and the True Point of Beginning; thence Northeasterly along said centerline, 395 feet, more or less, to a point on the East line of the Northwest Quarter (NW 1/4) of the Northwest Quarter (NW 1/4) being 360 feet, more or less, north of the Southeast corner of the Northwest Quarter (NW 1/4) of the Northwest Quarter (NW 1/4); thence continuing Northeasterly along said centerline into the Northeast Quarter (NE 1/4) of the Northwest Quarter (NW 1/4) a distance of 15 feet, more or less to the point of termination said point lying 10 feet, more or less, east of and 365 feet, more or less, north of the Southeast corner of the Northwest Quarter (NW 1/4) of the Northwest Quarter (NW 1/4) of said Section 1.

That the 40-foot width of this portion of Sharp Road be retained as an utility easement. (Ord. 2778, §§1 &2)



Sec. 42-137.10 Vacating an easement for an alley located in Block 87, Bishops Addition.
(a) That the 12-foot wide alley located in Block 87, Bishops Addition be and the same is hereby vacated.

(b) That the 12-foot wide alley vacated in Subsection (a) be retained as an utility easement. (Ord. 2779, §§1 &2)



Sec. 42-137.11 Vacating an alley located in Block 8, of the Newmans Addition.
(a) That the 16-foot wide alley located in Block 8, of the Newmans Addition be and the same is hereby vacated.

(b) That a 20-foot wide sanitary sewer easement centered on the existing 10-inch sanitary sewer line that crosses the alley from west to east be retained. (Ord. 2794, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-137.12 Vacating an easement for an alley located in Block 45, Bishops Addition.
(a) That the sixteen (16) foot wide alley located in Block 45, of the Bishops Addition to the City of Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri, be and the same is hereby vacated.

(b) That the 16-foot wide alley vacated in Subsection (a) be retained as an utility easement. (Ord. 2802, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-137.13 Vacating an easement across land of Frank B. Powell Lumber Company, Inc.
Parcel No. 1: All of the interest of First Party in a 50 foot right-of-way and easement as described in an easement dated May 4, 1971, recorded May 11, 1971, in Book 222 at Page 129-130 of the Deed Records of Phelps County, Missouri, the land subject to said easement being more particularly described as follows: A fractional part of Railroad Lot 83 lying in NW 1/4 of Section 14, Township 37 North, Range 8 West, an easement 50 foot in width lying 25 feet on each side of the following described centerline. Beginning at the intersection of the North line of Railroad Lot No. 83, NW 1/4, Sec. 14, T37N, R8W and the West ROW of US Highway 63, thence West along the North line of said Railroad Lot No. 83, 375.3 feet; thence S. 7° 54' W, 30.3 feet to the South ROW of a County road and the point of beginning of this description; thence S. 7° 54' W, 208.5 feet.

Parcel No. 2: All of the interest of First Party in a 20 foot right-of-way and easement as described in an easement dated May 4, 1971, recorded May 11, 1971, in Book 222 at Page 131-132 of the Deed Records of Phelps County, Missouri, the land subject to said easement being more particularly described as follows: A fractional part of Railroad Lot 83 lying in NW 1/4 of Section 14, Township 37 North, Range 8 West, an easement 20 foot in width lying 10 feet on each side of the following described centerline. Beginning at the intersection of the North line of Railroad Lot No. 83, NW 1/4, Sec. 14, T37N, R8W and the West ROW of US Highway 63, thence S. 7°54' W. along the West ROW of US Highway 63, 226 feet; thence West and parallel to the North line of said Railroad Lot No. 83, 350 feet to the point of beginning of this description; thence West and parallel to the North line of said Railroad Lot No. 82 and Lot No. 83 to the East line of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Book 298, Page 172. (Ord. 2822)



Sec. 42-137.14 Vacating an existing utility easement and accepting a new utility easement.
(a) That the 20-foot wide existing utility easement situated on the following described real property more particularly described as follows:

An electrical utility line easement 20.0 feet in width, situated in Railroad Lots 37 and 38 in the City of Rolla, Missouri and more particularly described as follows: Commencing at the Southeast corner of said Railroad Lot 37; thence North 0°-42' East, 28.6 feet along the East line of said Railroad Lot 37 to the North right-of-way of Phelps County Route "E"; thence South 89°-20' West, 60.33 feet to the True Point of Beginning of the easement hereinafter described: thence North 0°-29'-20" West, 472.44 feet. Said easement is situated adjacent to and 20.0 feet East of the above described line and along and adjacent to a chain link fence on the East line of easement; thence North 89°-39' East, 361.07 feet to the West right-of-way of Missouri Highway No. 63. Said easement is situated adjacent to and 20.0 feet South of the above described line be and the same is hereby vacated.

(b) That a 20-foot wide utility easement situated on the following described real property more particularly described as follows:

A 20.0 foot wide utility easement in a fractional part of Lots 37 and 38 of Railroad Addition, Rolla, Missouri, lying 10.0 feet on each side of the following described line: Commencing at the southeast corner of said Railroad Lot 37, thence North 0°-42' East, 28.60 feet along the East line of said Railroad Lot 37 to the North right-of-way of Phelps County Route "E"; thence South 89°-20' West, 39.41 feet along said North right-of-way to the Point of Beginning of the hereinafter described centerline of easement: Thence North 0°-24' West, 507.04 feet; thence North 89°-34' West, 204.26 feet; thence South 89°-34' East 204.26 feet; thence South 0°-24' East, 44.77 feet; thence North 89°-39' East, 340.75 feet to the westerly right-of-way of U.S. Highway No. 63, the ending point of said centerline of easement. Per plat of survey R-4535, dated September 18, 1991, by Elgin Surveying &Engineering, Inc. be and the same is hereby accepted. (Ord. 2823, §§1 & 2)



Sec. 42-137.15 Vacating an existing utility easement and accepting a new utility easement.
That the 10-foot wide existing utility easement situated on the following described real property more particularly described as follows:

An easement 10 feet in width lying 5 feet each side of the following described centerline: Beginning at the Northeast Corner of Lot 37 of Resubdivision of Harvest Fields, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri; thence N 4°14' W, 101.42 feet to the South right-of-way of Bittersweet Lane,

be and the same is hereby vacated.

That a 10-foot wide utility easement situated on the following described real property more particularly described as follows:

An easement 10 feet in width lying 5 feet each side of the following described centerline: Beginning at the Southeast Corner of Lot 38 of Resubdivision of Harvest Fields, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri; thence N 89°01' W, 5.00 feet to the True Point of Beginning of the centerline of the easement herein described; thence N 0°59' E, 101.00 feet to the South right-of-way of Bittersweet Lane.

be and the same is hereby accepted. (Ord. 2836, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-137.16 Vacating utility easement on Lot 38 in the Newcastle Place Plat No. 1 Subdivision.
That 105.38 feet of the existing (7.5) seven and one-half foot wide utility easement situated on Lot 38 of Newcastle Place Plat No. 1, more particularly described on the attached Exhibit "A".

be and the same is hereby vacated. (Ord. 2843, §1)

Sec, 42-137.17 Vacating existing utility and sewer easements and accepting new utility and sewer easements.

That the utility and sanitary sewer easements more particularly described on the attached plat of survey by Buescher Frankenberg Associates, Inc. and marked "Exhibit A":

be and the same is hereby vacated and dedicated. (Ord. 2844, §1)



Sec. 42-137.18 Vacating Fourth Street between Kroger's west property line and the Missouri State Highway 63 right-of-way.
(a) That Fourth Street between Kroger's west property line and the Missouri State Highway 63 right-of-way is hereby vacated.

(b) That portion of Fourth Street between Kroger's west property line and the Missouri State Highway 63 right-of-way be retained as an utility-drainage easement. (Ord. 2850, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-137.19 Vacating an as-platted 60-foot street right-of-way and accepting an as-built 60-foot street right-of-way located on the Cantex property in the Rolla Industrial Park.
(a) A 60-foot street right-of-way located in a fractional part of Lots 1 and 2 of the Rolla Industrial Park, Rolla, Missouri, and as shown on Survey No. 4848, by Elgin Surveying &Engineering, Incorporated, is hereby vacated.

(b) A 60-foot street right-of-way located in a fractional part of Lots 1 and 2 of the Rolla Industrial Park, Rolla, Missouri, more particularly described as follows: Commencing at the Center of Section 31, Township 38 North, Range 7 West of the 5th P.M.; thence North 89°-11'-10" West, 187.61 feet along the quarter line to the true point of beginning of the hereinafter described road: Thence continuing North 89°-11'-10" West, 60.20 feet along said quarter line; thence North 3°-49'-10" West, 45.19 feet; thence northwesterly, 257.55 feet along the arc of a curve, concave southwesterly with a radius of 180.00 feet; thence North 85°-48' West, 153.18 feet; thence northwesterly, 211.01 feet along the arc of a curve, concave northeasterly with a radius of 455.00 feet; thence North 59°-13'-50" West, 134.73 feet; thence North 0°-48'-50" East, 69.25 feet; thence South 59°-13'-50" East, 169.31 feet; thence southeasterly, 183.18 feet along the arc of a curve concave northeasterly with a radius of 395.00 feet; thence South 85°-48' East, 153.18 feet; thence southeasterly, 343.40 feet along the arc of a curve, concave southwesterly with a radius of 240.00 feet; thence South 3°-49'-10" East, 50.06 feet to the true point of beginning. Above described road contains 1.17 acre, more or less, per plat of survey R-4848, dated March 18, 1992, by Elgin Surveying &Engineering, Incorporated, is hereby accepted. (Ord. 2851, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-137.20 Mayor is authorized to exchange property by deed.
The mayor of the City of Rolla is authorized to convey the real property owned by the City and described in the copy of the deed attached hereto as Exhibit "A" to Douglas C. Harvey and Ina J. Harvey in return for Douglas C. and Ina J. Harvey conveying the real property owned by them and described in the deed attached hereto as Exhibit "B" to the City. (Ord. 2900, §1)



Sec. 42.137.21 Vacating a portion of the alley running north and south through Block 42 in Bishop's Addition.
(a) The portion of the alley running North and South through Block 42 in Bishop's Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as shown by the plat of said Addition of record in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Phelps County, Missouri, more particularly described as follows:

A part of the alley running North and South through Block 42 of Bishop's Addition, Rolla, Missouri, and being more particularly described as follows: Beginning at a point that is North 1°05' East, 100.56 feet from the Southwest Corner of Lot 8 of said Block 42 (said point being 10 feet Southerly from the Northwest Corner of Lot 5 of said Block 42); thence proceed Northerly along the East line of said alley and along the East lines of Lots 5 and 4 in said Block to a point on the East line of Lot 4 that is 47 feet North of the Southwest Corner of said Lot 4; thence proceed North 89°06' West 10 feet to the West side of said alley on the East line of Lot 3 of said Block 42; thence proceed Southerly along the West line of said alley and along the West line of Lots 3 and 6 in said Block to a point that is North 1°05' West 100.56 feet from the Southeast corner of Lot 7 of said Block 42; thence proceed Easterly to the point of beginning,

serves no useful purpose and it is necessary and expedient to vacate said portion of said alley.

(b) Said portion of said alley above described is vacated reserving, however, unto the City of Rolla, Missouri, and unto its franchised utility companies, any easements under, across and above the vacated portion of said alley which are presently being used for sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, water lines, electrical lines, telephone lines, cable television lines, utility poles and guy wires. (Ord. 2912, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-137.22. Vacating an easement for an alley located in Block 89 of the Bishops Second Addition.
That the north half of the alley located in Block 89 of Bishops Second Addition, more particularly described on the attached plat marked Exhibit "A", and of Bishops Third Addition and the same is hereby vacated. (Ord. 2930, §1; Ord. 2976, §1)



Sec. 42-137.23. Vacating a street right-of-way easement located adjacent to Lots 1 thru 10 of the Heritage Height's Subdivision.
That the 25-foot street right-of-way easement located along the north boundary and adjacent to Lots 1 thru 10 of the Heritage Heights Subdivision, more particularly described on the attached plat marked Exhibit "A", be and the same is hereby vacated. (Ord. 2931, §1)



Sec. 42-137.24 Vacating a 6-foot easement for an alley located in Block 89
Bishop's Second Addition and also recorded in Bishops Third Addition.

That a portion of the 6-foot wide alley located in the North 125 feet of the East Half of Block 89, Bishop's Second Addition and also recorded in Bishops Third Addition, more particularly described on the attached plat marked Exhibit "A", be and the same is hereby vacated. (Ord. 2983, §1)



Sec. 42-137.25 Vacating Ninth Street between Cedar and Olive Streets.
(a) That Ninth Street between Cedar Street and Olive Street is hereby vacated.

(b) That the entire portion of Ninth Street between Cedar Street and Olive Street be retained as an utility easement (Ord. 2985, §§1 & 2)



Sec. 42-137.26 Vacating a drainage easement across Lot 1 of Ramsey Place Subdivision.
That the drainage easement across Lot 1 of the Ramsey Place Subdivision is hereby vacated. (Ord. 2992, §1)



Sec. 42-137.27 Vacating a portion of Third Street between Main Street and the Burlington/Northern Railroad right of way and a portion of Main Street between Second Street and Third Street and retaining a 15-foot wide utility easement.
That the portion of Third Street between the west right-of-way line of Main Street and the south right-of-way line of the Burlington/Northern Railroad, be and the same is hereby vacated.

That the portion of Main Street between the north right-of-way line of Second Street and the south right-of-way line of Third Street, be and the same is hereby vacated.

That a 15-foot wide utility easement running adjacent to and along the east right-of-way line of Main Street between the north right-of-way of Second Street and the south right-of-way of Third Street be retained.

This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date that all utilities have been relocated and approved by the Public Works Director. (Ord. 2807, §§1-4)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 42-137.28 Vacating an alley running east and west, bounded by 12th Street, 13th Street, Spring Avenue and Poole Avenue.
(a) That the alley running east and west, bounded by 12th Street, 13th Street, Spring Avenue and Poole Avenue is hereby vacated.

(b) That the entire width and length of the alley is retained as an utility easement. (Ord. 3001, §§1-2)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 42-137.29 Vacating and dedicating sanitary sewer easements located across the K-Mart/Karsch Outlot.
(a) That the sanitary sewer easement described as follows: A 20.0 foot wide sanitary sewer easement in a fractional part of the Southeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter, and, a fractional part of the Northeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of Section 14, Township 37 North, Range 8 West of the 5th P.M. AND, a fractional part of Lots 83 and 84 of Railroad Addition, Rolla, Missouri, lying 10.0 feet on each side of the following described line: Commencing at the Southwest Corner of the Southeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of said Section 14; thence North 89°55'50" East, 506.99 feet to the easterly right of way of U.S. Highway 63; thence North 10°36'50" East, 1.22 feet, and, North 78°14' West, 9.91 feet, and, North 10°36'20" East, 6.88 feet, all along said easterly right of way to the point of beginning of the hereinafter described centerline of easement: Thence North 89°55'50" East, 190.35 feet to the ending point of said centerline of easement is hereby vacated.

(b) That the sanitary sewer easement described as follows: A 20.0 foot wide sanitary sewer easement in a fractional part of the Southeast quarter of the Northwest Quarter, and, a fractional part of the Northeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of Section 14, Township 37 North, Range 8 West of the 5th P.M., AND, a fractional part of Lots 83 and 84 of Railroad Addition, Rolla, Missouri, lying 10.0 feet on each side of the following described line:

Commencing at the Southwest Corner of the Southeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of said Section 14; thence North 89°55'50" East, 506.99 feet to the easterly right of way of U.S. Highway 63; thence North 10°36'50" East, 1.22 feet, and, North 78°14' West, 9.91 feet, and, North 10°36'20" East, 6.88 feet, all along said easterly right of way to the point of beginning of the hereinafter described centerline of easement. Thence North 89°55'50" East, 15.95 feet; thence South 19°15'20" East, 42.37 feet; thence North 89°55'50" East, 150.47 feet; thence North 0°04'10" West, 50.02 feet to the ending point of said centerline of easement is hereby dedicated. (Ord. 3006, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-137.30 Vacating and dedicating utility easements crossing the Chrysler Addition.
(a) That the existing utility easement is hereby vacated.

(b) That a new utility easement (see attached) is hereby dedicated. (Ord. 3023, §§1 &2)



Sec. 42-137.31 Vacating the remaining portion of Ashwood Circle.
(a) That that remaining portion of Ashwood is hereby vacated.

(b) That the south ten feet running along the north right of way of Soest Road be retained for a street right of way easement. (Ord. 3026, §§1 &2)



Sec. 42-137.32 Vacating utility easement between Lots 11 and 12 of the Ponzer Addition.
(a) That the existing utility easement is hereby vacated. (Ord. 3027, §1)



Sec. 42-137.33 Vacating a portion of Cypress Drive right-of-way adjacent to Lot 43 of the Ponzer Second Addition.
(a) That the existing right-of-way described as follows is hereby vacated.

A fractional part of the Northwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 13, Township 37 North, Range 8 West of the 5th Principal Meridian in Phelps County, Missouri. More particularly described as follows:

Commencing at the Northwest corner of said Section 13; thence S0°45'46" W, 360 feet, along the West line of said Quarter Section to the Northwest corner of the Ponzer 2nd Addition to Rolla; thence East, 180 feet; thence N0°45'46" E, 60 feet; thence East, 1,060.25 feet; thence S0°45'46"W, 60 feet; thence East, 170 feet, all along said North line to the Northeast corner of said Addition, thence S0°45'46"W, 257.78 feet, along the East line of said Addition to the Southeast corner of Lot 43 of said Addition; thence S59°00'00" W, 58.64 feet, along the South line of said Lot 43 to the True Point of Beginning; thence continue along said South line, Northwesterly 37.94 feet, along the arc of a curve to the right whose Radius is 25 feet and Delta is 86°56'53", thence N 31°07'51" W, 6.51 feet, along said South line to a point; thence Southwesterly, 33.39 feet, along the arc of a curve to the right whose Radius is 108 feet and Delta is 87°57'19" to a point on the South line of the Ponzer 2nd Addition to Rolla; thence N 59°00'00" E, 39.28 feet, along said South line back to the Point of Beginning. Above tract contains 323 Square feet or 0.007 Acre, more or less. (See Exhibit "A" Attached)

(b) That the entire area is retained as an easement. (Ord. 3042, §§1 &2)



Sec. 42-137.34 Vacating a portion of the right-of-way at Bishop Avenue and Pine Street and deeding same to adjoining property owners.
(a) That the existing right-of-way is hereby vacated and deeded to Gary Heavin by special warranty deed attached as follows:

Tract 1: A fractional part of the Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of Section 2, Township 37 North, Range 8 West of the 5th P.M. described as follows: Commencing at the Northeast Corner of Lot 3, Block 16 of Schuman's Addition, Rolla, Missouri; thence South 89° 15' 50" West 103.25 feet along the North line of said Lot 3 to its northwest corner, also being a point on the existing easterly right of way of Pine Street, the true point of beginning of the hereinafter described tract: Thence continuing South 89° 15' 50" West, 28.18 feet; thence North 16° 44' East, 47.54 feet; thence North 21° 08' 10" East, 11.13 feet; thence northeasterly along the arc of a curve, concave southeasterly with a radius of 420.00 feet; the chord of which is North 58° 12' 30" East, 130.59 feet to the West right of way of Elm Street, extended; thence South 1° 16' 10" East, 27.13 feet along said West right of way to the aforesaid existing easterly right of way of Pine Street; thence southwesterly along the arc of a curve, concave southeasterly with a radius of 461.96 feet, the chord of which is South 46° 07' 40" West, 140.27 feet along said existing easterly right of way to the true point of beginning. Above described tract contains 0.128 acre, more or less, per plat of survey R-6455, revised July 20, 1995, by Elgin Surveying &Engineering, Inc.

(b) That the existing right of way is hereby vacated and deeded to Epsilon Alpha Chapter of Kappa Delta House Sorority Inc. by special warranty deed attached as follows:

Tract 2: A fractional part of the Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of Section 2, Township 37 North, Range 8 West of the 5th P.M. described as follows: Commencing at the Northeast Corner of Lot 3, Block 16 of Schuman's Addition, Rolla, Missouri; thence South 89° 15' 50" West, 103.25 feet along the North line of said Lot 3 to its northwest corner, also being a point on the existing easterly right of way of Pine Street, the true point of beginning of the hereinafter described tract: Thence southwesterly along the arc of a curve, concave southeasterly with a radius of 461.96 feet, the chord of which is South 30° 14' 30" West, 115.05 feet along said existing easterly right of way; thence North 16° 44' East, 103.41 feet; thence North 89° 15' 50" East 28.18 feet to the true point of beginning. Above described tract contains 0.026 acre, more or less, per plat of survey R-6455, revised July 20, 1995, by Elgin Surveying &Engineering, Inc.

(c) That the land vacated and deeded shall have the resolution that no public advertisement for signs shall be displayed on the conveyed property; provided, nevertheless, that this restriction shall not apply to signs intended to warn travelers and passers by of dangerous conditions on the subject property so long as said dangerous condition is expeditiously corrected.

(d) That Gary Heavin is to construct a sidewalk along the entire length of the west line of tract 1 and tract 2. (Ord. 3079, §§1-4)



Sec. 42-137.35 Vacating the south half of an alley between Lots 5 through 8, Block 35 Bishop's Addition.
(a) That the south half of the alley, between lots 5 through 8, block 35, Bishop's Addition is hereby vacated.

(b) That the entire width and length of the south half of the alley be retained as an utility easement. (Ord. 3083, §1-2)



Sec. 42-137.36 Vacating existing utility and sewer easements.
That the utility and sanitary sewer easements more particularly described as follows:

The west 1' (one foot) of the north 70' of a 10' wide sewer easement running along the east side of Lot 1, Woodcrest Estates, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri is hereby vacated. (Ord. 3092, §1)



Sec. 42-137.37 Vacating and dedicating easements located in the Newcastle Place Plat No. 3 Addition.
(a) That the following described existing sanitary sewer easement is hereby vacated.

A uniform 15 foot wide strip of land lying in the North one-half of the Northeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter and the Northwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of Section 13, Township 37 North, Range 8 West, Phelps County, Missouri, the centerline of said strip being more particularly described as follows: Commencing at the Northwest corner of the Southwest quarter, Northeast Quarter, Northwest Quarter, Section 13, Township 37 North, Range 8 West; thence North 0° 30' 43" East, 331.0 feet to a point, thence North 41° 02' 43" East 131.0 feet to the point of beginning of this description; thence continuing North 41° 02' 43" East 288.0 feet; thence South 85° 59' 17" East, 695 feet to the point of termination.

The express purpose of this description is to nullify a section of the sanitary sewer easement filed November 30, 1977 in Book 287 at Page 71 in the records of the office of the Phelps County Recorder.

(b) That the following described utility easement is hereby dedicated.

A uniform 20 foot wide strip of land lying 10 feet on either side of the line between lot 129 and lot 130 of the Newcastle Place Plat No. 3 Addition to the City of Rolla.

(c) This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of passage, subject to the relocation of the existing sewer line and the approval of all construction by the Public Works Director. (Ord. 3102, §§1-3)



Sec. 42-137.38 Vacating existing utility easement between Lots 116 and 117 of Ponzer 4th Addition.
That the utility easement more particularly described as follows:

The 10' foot utility easement between lots 116 and 117 of the Ponzer 4th Addition, a subdivision addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri is hereby vacated. (Ord. 3121, §1)



Sec. 42-137.39 Vacating an easement in vacated Rolla Street between Fourteenth (14th) and Sixteenth (16th) Streets.
(a) That an easement presently in the vacated portion of Rolla Street lying between Fourteenth (14th) Street and Sixteenth (16th) Street is hereby vacated.

(b) Said easement is vacated in favor of the Curators of the University of Missouri-Rolla. (Ord. 3131, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-137.40 Vacating a portion of Richard Drive, Scottsvale Drive and all of Sherwood Drive in the amended Scottsvale Subdivision.
(a) That the streets to be vacated are as follows (see attached exhibit A):

Richard Drive to be vacated from the east right-of-way line of Curtis Drive and the east right-of-way line of Redbud Lane and bounded on the north side by Lots 25-27 and bounded on the south side by lots 28, 46, 47, 61 and 62 of the amended plat of Scottsvale Subdivision, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, filed in the Phelps County Missouri Courthouse.

Sherwood Drive to be vacated from the southerly right-of-way line of Richard Drive to the north right-of-way line of Scottsvale Drive and bounded on the west side by lots 38-46 and bounded on the east side by lots 47-54 of the amended plat of Scottsvale Subdivision, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, filed in the Phelps County Missouri Courthouse.

Scottsvale Drive to be vacated to the east of a line running from the northeast corner of Lot 76 to the southeast corner of Lot 37 of the amended plat of Scottsvale Subdivision an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, said Scottsvale Drive bounded on the south and east side by Lots 62-75 and bounded on the north and west side by Lots 38, 54-61, of the amended plat of Scottsvale Subdivision an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, filed in the Phelps County Missouri Courthouse.

(b) The city clerk is hereby directed to record this ordinance with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 3133, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-137.41 Vacating existing alley between Lots 1-4 and 9-12 of Townsend Addition.
(a) That the alley being vacated, more particularly described as follows:

The 12' foot alley between lots 1-4 and 9-12 of Block 6 of Townsend Addition, a subdivision addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri is hereby vacated.

(b) That the 12' foot vacated alley between lots 1-4 and 9-12 be retained as a 12' foot utility easement. (Ord. 3135, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-137.42 Vacating 4th Street between Kroger's west property line and the west right-of-way of Beech Street.
(a) That 4th Street between Kroger's west property line and the west right-of-way of Beech Street is hereby vacated.

(b) That the entire width and length of 4th Street between Kroger's west property line and the west right-of-way of Beech Street be retained as an utility easement. (Ord. 3177, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-137.43 Vacating an existing drainage easement and accepting a new drainage easement on Lots 15, 17 and 18, in Scottsvale Subdivision, a resubdivision of Lots 12, 15-19.
(a) That the existing drainage easements located on lots 15, 17 and 18 in Scottsvale Subdivision more particularly described as follows:

Beginning at the Southeast corner of said lot 17; thence North 0°41'46" East 159.99 feet to the point of the beginning of the centerline; thence North 88°48' West, 189.53 feet; thence South 70°12' West 98.0 feet; thence South 54°12' West, 127.05 feet to the ending point of the centerline.

Be and the same is hereby vacated. (Ord. 3192, §1)

(b) That a drainage easement on lots 15, 17 and 18 in Scottsvale Subdivision more particularly described as follows:

Beginning at the Southeast corner of said lot 17; thence North 0°10'26" West, 167.09 feet to the point of beginning of the centerline; thence South 54°12'50" West, 134.29 feet, thence South 68°10'24" West 57.81 feet; thence North 85°29'24" West, 68.45 feet; thence North 68°59'23" West 58.97 feet; thence South 68°26'28" West, 103.58 feet to the ending point of the centerline.

Be and the same is hereby accepted. (Ord. 3192, §2)



Sec. 42-137.44 Vacating an existing utility easement in the vacated right of way of 9th Street between Cedar and Olive Street. (First Baptist Church)
That the existing utility easement located in the vacated right of way on 9th Street between Cedar and Olive Street is hereby vacated. (Ord. 3195, §1)



Sec. 42-137.45 Vacating existing utility easements and accepting new utility easements located at 511 South Highway 63. (Applebee's)
(a) That the existing sewer and electric easements located at 511 South Highway 63, more particularly described as follows:

EASEMENT #1

A fractional part of the Southeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of Section 11, Township 37 North, Range 8 West, more particularly described as follows: Beginning at a point on the East right of way line of Highway 63, 391.5 feet West of the Northwest corner of the Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of said Section 11, Township 37 North, Range 8 West; thence South along the East line of Highway 63, 389 feet for a point of beginning of this description. Thence East 272.5, thence Southerly 102.5 feet to an iron pin; thence East 272.5, thence Southerly 102.5 feet to an iron pin; thence Southwesterly 284 feet to the East line of Highway 63; thence North along the East right of way line 118.5 feet to a point of beginning.

EASEMENT #2

A fractional part of the Southeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of Section 11, Township 37 North, Range 8 West, more particularly described as follows: Beginning at a point of the East right of way line of Highway 63, 391.5 feet West of the Northwest corner of the Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of said Section 11, Township 37 North, Range 8 West, thence South along an East line of said Highway 63, 289 feet for place of beginning of this description. Thence East 433 feet, thence south parallel with East line of said Highway 63, 100 feet, thence West 433 feet more or less to East line of Highway 63, thence North along said East right of way line 100 feet to place of beginning, and containing an acre, more or less.

That the above easements are hereby vacated once the owners of the property have relocated, at their expense, all existing utilities. (Ord. 3197, §1)

(b) That the sewer and electric easements located at 511 South Highway 63, more particularly described as follows:

EASEMENT #1

(For conveyance from Applebee's to City of Rolla)

a fractional part of the southeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter, and, a fractional part of the Southeast Quarter of the southeast Quarter of Section 11, Township 37 North,Range 8 West of the 5th P.M. described as follows: Commencing at the Northeast Corner of the Southeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of said Section 11; thence South 81°26'30" West, 394.89 feet to the East right of way of US Highway 63 (South Bishop Avenue), also being the northwest corner of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Book 277, Page 40; thence South 0°18'40" West, 128.86 feet along the aforesaid East right of way and along the West line of the aforesaid Book 277, Page 40 parcel to its Southwest corner; thence South 0°49'10" West, 99.89 feet along the aforesaid East right of way to the Southwest corner of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Document No. 9507458, the true point of beginning of the hereinafter described tract: Thence North 89°37' East, 432.17 feet along the South line of said Document No. 9507458 parcel and along the South line of parcels described in Phelps County Deed Records at Book 324, Page 282 and Book 254, Page 78 to the West line of Pecan Grove Addition; thence South 0°28'40" West, 20.00 feet along said West line; thence South 89°37' West, 412.19 feet; thence South 0°32'20" West, 173.05 feet; thence North 86°22'50" East, 261.16 feet to the West line of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Book 243, Page 324; thence South 5°09'10" East, 20.01 feet along the West line of said Book 243, Page 324 parcel to the northeast corner of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Book 366, Page 196; thence South 86°22'50" West, 283.20 feet along the North line of said book 366, page 196 parcel and along the North line of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Book 348, Page 73 to the aforesaid East right of way of U.S. Highway 63 (South Bishop Avenue); thence North 0°32'20" East, 214.24 feet along said East right of way to the true point of beginning. Description derived from survey R-7392, revised February 25, 1997, by Elgin Surveying &Engineering, Inc.

EASEMENT #2

(For conveyance from Applebee's to City of Rolla)

A fractional part of the Southeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of Section 11, Township 37 North, Range 8 West of the 5th P.M. described as follows: Commencing at the Northeast Corner of the Southeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of said Section 11; thence South 81°26'30" West, 394.89 feet to the East right of way of U.S. Highway 63 (South Bishop Avenue), also being the Northwest corner of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Book 277, Page 40; thence South 0°18'40" West, 128.86 feet along the aforesaid East right of way and along the West line of the aforesaid Book 277, Page 40 parcel to its Southwest corner; thence South 0°49'10" West, 99.89 feet along the aforesaid East right of way to the southwest corner of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Document No. 9507458; thence North 89°37' East, 192.62 feet along the South line of said document No. 9507458 parcel; thence South 1°18'30" West, 20.01 feet to the true point of beginning of the hereinafter described easement. Thence continuing South 1°18'30" West, 163.47 feet; thence South 86°22'50" West, 44.74 feet; thence North 60°26'20" East, 22.81 feet; thence North 1°18'30" East, 154.87 feet; thence North 89°37' East, 25.01 feet to the true point of beginning. Description derived from survey R-7392, revised February 25, 1997, by Elgin Surveying &Engineering, Inc.

That the above utility easement are hereby accepted. (Ord. 3197, §2)



Sec. 42-137.46 Vacating all of 7th Street east of Holloway Street and south of Murry
2nd Addition and north of Block 3 of Hargis Addition. (Phelps County Habitat for Humanity)

That all of 7th Street east of Holloway Street and south of Murry 2nd Addition and north of block 3 of the Hargis Addition is hereby vacated. (Ord. 3207, §1)



Sec. 42-137.47 Vacating an alley between Oak and Olive Street, north of Highway 72 and south of Phelps Avenue.
That the existing alley between Oak and Olive Street, north of Highway 72 and south of Phelps Avenue is hereby vacated. (Ord. 3213, §1)



Sec. 42-137.48 Vacating Olive Street between platted Hickory Hills Drive and Christy Drive in Hickory Hills Subdivision, but retaining a utility easement as described (Powell).
That the portion of Olive Street between platted Hickory Hills Drive and Christy Drive in Hickory Hills Subdivision is hereby vacated, except that the following described area be retained as a utility easement:

Commencing at the Northwest corner of Lot 16 and the Southwest corner of Lot 7 of Hickory Hills Subdivision, being the true point of beginning, thence North 10 feet to a point on the West line of Lot 7, thence West to a point that is 20 feet East of the East line of Lot 6, thence North and parallel to the East line of Lot 6 to the South right?of?way of Hickory Hills Drive, thence West 20 feet to the Northeast corner of Lot 6, thence South to a point that is 30 feet South of the Northeast corner of Lot 17 and the Southeast corner of Lot 6, thence East to a point that is 10 feet West of the West property line of Lot 16, thence South and parallel to the West property line of Lot 16 to the North right?of?way of Christy Drive; thence East to the Southwest corner of Lot 16, thence North back to the true point of beginning. (Ord. 3255, §1)



Sec. 42-137.49 Vacating a 10 foot utility easement on the west side of Lot 84 in the Ponzer 3rd Addition at 908 Mallard Square (Giustra).
That the 10 foot utility easement on the west side of lot 84 in the Ponzer 3rd Addition at 908 Mallard Square is hereby vacated. (Ord. 3268, §1)



Sec. 42-137.50 Vacating all of the right-of-way of Leslie Drive in the Parkview Third Subdivision except the South 60 feet at the intersection of Basswood Drive (Young).
(a) That the portion of Leslie Drive in the Parkview Third Subdivision except the south 60 feet at the intersection of Basswood Drive is hereby vacated. (Ord. 3271, §1)



Sec. 42-137.51 Vacating a one foot right-of-way easement on the north side of Lot 1, Block 9 of Newman's Addition (Woessner).
That a 1-foot right-of-way easement on the north side of lot 1, Block 9 of Newman's Addition be hereby vacated. (Ord. 3323, §1)



Sec. 42-137.52 Vacating an alley in Bishops Addition at 7th Street between Bishop and State Street.
(a) That an alley in Bishops Addition at 7th Street between Bishop and State Street be hereby vacated.

(b) Said vacation to be contingent upon the property owner conveying a utility easement (for all existing utilities) which is acceptable to Rolla Municipal Utilities or payment to Rolla Municipal Utilities for relocation of all existing utilities located within the vacated alley to an alternate location acceptable to Rolla Municipal Utilities. (Ord. 3344, §§1 &2)



Sec. 42-137.53 Vacating Bishop's Alley between 2nd Street and the Railroad right-of-way (Phelps County Commission).
That Bishops Alley between 2nd Street and the Railroad right-of-way be hereby vacated. (Ord. 3362, §1)



Sec. 42-137.54 Vacating utility easements in Lots 17, 18, 22 and 23 of the plat of Forum Lakes 1 Subdivision and approving the utility easements as shown in the attached Exhibit A.
(a) That all existing utility easements in Lots 17, 18, 22 and 23 of Forum Lakes 1 Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla, Missouri be hereby vacated and the following described areas as shown in Exhibit A, be retained as utility easements: Lot 17: the west 5.0 feet. Lot 18: the east 5.0 feet and the north 10.0 feet. Lot 22: the north 10.0 feet, and the east 5.0 feet, and the south 10.0 feet. Lot 23: the west 5.0 feet, the south 10.0 feet, the east 10.0 feet and the north 10.0 feet. (Ord. 3382, §1)

(b) The property owner shall be responsible for all cost incurred in the relocation of utilities. (Ord. 3382, §2)



Sec. 42-137.55 Vacating the portion of Olive Street south of Christy Drive (Olive Street stub) and the southernmost fifteen (15) feet be retained for a utility easement (Senne/Whitecotton).
That the portion of Olive Street south of Christy Drive be hereby vacated and the southernmost fifteen (15) feet of the vacated street be retained for a utility easement (Ord. 3405, §1)



Sec. 42-137.56 Vacating an alley between Lots 1 &8 and 2 &7 of Block 17 in Schuman's Addition (Town and Country Bank).
That the alley in between Lots 1 &8 and 2 &7 of Schuman's Addition be hereby vacated. (Ord. 3460, §1)



Sec. 42-137.57 Vacating the portion of Iowa Street from 10th Street to a point 163 feet north of 7th Street and maintaining the vacated street as a utility easement (Rolla School System and the City of Rolla).
(a) That the portion of Iowa Street from 10th Street to a point 163 feet north of 7th Street be hereby vacated.

(b) Said vacation of this portion of Iowa Street shall be retained as a utility easement. (Ord. 3491, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-137.58 Vacating part of original Pine Street right-of-way and the alley adjoining between Lots 3, 4, 9 and 10 of Block 17 Schuman's Addition (Town and Country Bank).
(a) That the alley adjoining Lots 3, 4, 9 and 10 of Block 17 Schuman's Addition be hereby vacated.

(b) That part of original Pine Street right-of-way adjoining Bishop Avenue at 18th Street be hereby vacated. (Ord. 3524, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-137.59 Vacating the alley between 5th and 6th and Cedar and Olive Streets in Block 69 of County Addition (Elgin).
(a) That the alley between 5th and 6th and Cedar and Olive Streets in Block 69 of County Addition be hereby vacated.

(b) That a quit-claim deed form be executed by the City. (Ord. 3531, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-137.60 Vacating the north half of the alley between 11th and 14th and Bishop Avenue and State Street, between Townsend and Ladd Subdivisions (UMR).
(a) That the north half of the alley between 11th and 14th and Bishop Avenue and State Street, between Townsend and Ladd Subdivision, be hereby vacated.

(b) That a quit-claim deed form be executed by the City to UMR. (Ord. 3534, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-137.61 Vacating the alley running north and south between 6th and 7th Street, on the east side of Block 10 of Bishops Fourth Addition and on the west side of Lot 2 of Copperfield Subdivision and maintaining the vacated alley as a utility easement. (Denny Ford Lincoln Mercury, Inc.)
(a) That the alley running north and south between 6th and 7th Street, on the east side of Block 10 of Bishops Fourth Addition and on the west side of Lot 2 of Copperfield Subdivision be hereby vacated.

(b) Said vacation of this alley shall be retained as a utility easement. (Ord. 3560, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-137.62 Vacating the alley between 5th and 6th Street and Main Street and Rolla Street and retaining the vacated alley as a utility easement. (Bahr).
(a) That the alley between 5th and 6th Street and Main Street and Rolla Street be hereby vacated.

(b) Said vacation of this alley shall be retained as a utility easement. (Ord. 3573, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-137.63 Vacating part of University Drive and State Street (UMR).
(a) That University Drive from Highway 63 to State Street, approximately 510 lineal feet be hereby vacated. That State Street, south from University Drive, approximately 510 lineal feet be hereby vacated.

(b) The following conditions shall apply: All utility easements shall be in effect until abandoned or removed. Emergency vehicle access shall be provided along the existing right-of-way of University and State Streets with a minimum of 20-foot wide corridor. The promenades and pathways shown on the graphic shall be constructed to accommodate at least 60,000 lbs. UMR shall insure that fire truck access is maintained to Harris Hall and the power plant. Any newly planted street trees placed as part of the landscaping plan shall not reach more than 20 feet in height at maturity. Fire Sprinkler connections must remain in McNutt Hall. University and State Streets shall remain open until such time the 12th Street extension between State Street and Highway 63 is completed to meet City development standards for roads. (Ord. 3585, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-137.64 Vacating Spring Avenue from University Drive south to the existing alley, a distance of approximately 170 linear feet. (UMR)
(a) That Spring Avenue from University Drive south to the existing alley, a distance of approximately 170 linear feet be hereby vacated.

(b) Said vacation of this street shall be retained as a utility easement until abandoned or removed. (Ord. 3609, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-137.65. Vacating utility easements located at the Southeast Corner of Highway 63 and Vichy Road. (Wallis Oil)
(a) That utility easements located at the southeast corner of Highway 63 and Vichy Road more particularly described as All of lands described in easement recorded at Book Q, Page 195 (1939) and also all of lands described in easement recorded at 359/194 (1987) that are included within the following tract: A fractional part of Lots 29 and 30 of Railroad Addition, Rolla, Missouri more particularly described as follows: Commencing at the Southeast Corner of Lot 30 of said Railroad Addition; thence South 89°18'40" West, 35.04 feet along the South line of said Lot 30 to the East right of way of Vichy Road; thence North 0°26'20" West, 157.77 feet along said East right of way to the northwest corner of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Document No. 9506713, the true point of beginning of the hereinafter described tract: Thence North 0°39'10" West, 142.19 feet, and, North 0°40'10" West, 62.13 feet, all along said East right of way to its intersection with the southeasterly right of way of U.S. Highway 63 (Bishop Avenue); thence North 57°45'10" East, 312.24 feet along said southeasterly right of way to the northwest corner of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Book 311, Page 51; thence South 1°01'East, 225.85 feet along the West line of said Book 311, Page 51 parcel to the North line of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Book 365, Page 274; thence South 89°49'30" West, 142.64 feet along said North line to the northwest corner of said Book 365, Page 274 parcel; thence South 0°40'40" East, 143.07 feet along the West line of said Book 365, Page 274 parcel and also along the West line of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Book 385, Page 165 to the northeast corner of the aforesaid Document No. 9506713 parcel; thence South 89°16' West, 124.80 feet along the North line of said Document No. 9506713 parcel to the true point of beginning. Above described tract contains 1.29 acre, more or less, per plat of survey R-9740E1, dated April 16, 2002, by Elgin Surveying &Engineering Inc. (see Exhibit A) be hereby vacated.

(b) The petitioner shall be responsible for the cost of relocating the utilities and filing fees associated with the vacation of the easements. (Ord. 3618, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-137.66. Vacating an unnamed street in Meadowbrook Subdivision. (City of Rolla Public Works Department)
(a) That an unnamed street in Meadowbrook Subdivision described as follows: a 20 foot wide un-named road starting at its intersection with Brook Drive on its western most end; thence easterly along and adjacent to lots 29-35 of the Meadow Brook Subdivision an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri; thence continuing along said roads easterly extension to its intersection with Vienna Road at its eastern most end; be hereby vacated.

(b) Said vacation of this street shall be retained as a utility easement until abandoned or removed. (Ord. 3712, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-137.67. Vacating Duane Avenue from 11th Street to Joyce Avenue. (Phelps County Regional Medical Center)
(a) That Duane Avenue from 11th Street to Joyce Avenue described as follows: all that part of Duane Avenue lying West of Block 3 and East of Block 2, all in Powell Second Addition to Rolla, Missouri described as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the southwesterly right of way of Joyce Avenue extended and the East line of said Block 2; thence southerly along the East line of said Block 2 to the North right of way of Eleventh Street; thence easterly along the North right of way of Eleventh Street to the West line of the aforesaid Block 3; thence northerly along the west line of said Block 3 to the southwesterly right of way of Joyce Avenue; thence northwesterly along the extension of said southwesterly right of way of Joyce Avenue to the point of beginning; be hereby vacated.

(b) Said vacation of this street shall be retained as a utility easement until abandoned or removed. (Ord. 3713, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-137.68. Vacating existing utility and sewer easements.
(a) That the utility and sanitary sewer easements more particularly described as follows: Abandon part of an existing 20 foot wide sewer easement with centerline described as follows: commencing at the Northeast corner of Block 9, Rolla Mill Addition; then N 0°9'00" W. 30.14 feet; thence S 86°30'47" W, 132.12 feet; thence S 10°18'45" W, 22.62 feet to the South line of abandoned 9th Street is hereby vacated. (Ord. 3743, §1)



Sec. 42-137.69. Vacating existing water easement.
That the water easement more particularly described as follows:

Beginning at the Northeast corner of the tract of land conveyed to Sho-Me Power by deed of record in Book 132 Page 149, Office of the Recorder of Deeds, Phelps County, Missouri; thence South 381.55 feet; thence West 10 feet to the point of beginning; thence West 40 feet; thence South 60 feet; thence West 10 feet; thence North 70 feet; thence East 50 feet; thence South 10 feet to the point of beginning be vacated. (Ord. 3751, §1)



Sec. 42-137.70. Vacating the east half of the Alley in Block 2 of Townsend Addition. (Dairy Queen)
(a) That the east half of the alley in Block 2 of Townsend Addition, from Bishop Avenue extending west for 3 lots, is hereby vacated.

(b) That the east half of the alley in Block 2 of Townsend Addition, from Bishop Avenue extending west for 3 lots, shall be retained as a utility easement. (Ord. 3802, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-137.71. Vacating a 15' utility easement between Lots 1 and 2 of Timber Creek Subdivision and a dedication of a 10' utility easement on the north side of Lot 2 of Timber Creek Subdivision. (Cheng)
(a) That the existing 15' utility easement between Lot 1 and Lot 2 of Timber Creek Subdivision, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri, hereby be vacated.

(b) That a 10' utility easement on the North side of Lot 2 of Timber Creek Subdivision hereby be dedicated. (Ord. 3825, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-137.72. Vacating the utility easement in Arwood Hills Subdivision and retaining the utility easements as storm water easements. (Chapman)
(a) That the existing alley in Arwood Hills Subdivision, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri, more particularly described as follows: A 20.0 foot wide utility easement in a fractional part of Lots 10 through 16 and Lots 19 through 26 of Arwood Hills No. 1, Rolla, Missouri, lying 10.0 feet on each side of the following described line (side lines of the strip prolonged or shortened to terminate at a point 10.0 feet measured perpendicular to and southerly of the northerly lines of the aforesaid Lots 10 and 26 and at a point 10.0 feet measured perpendicular to and northwesterly of the southeasterly lines of the aforesaid Lots 16 and 19); Commencing at the westernmost corner of Lot 10 of said Arwood Hills No. 1; thence South 46°01'40" East, 14.00 feet along the southwesterly line of said Lot 10 to the point of beginning of the hereinafter described centerline of easement: Thence continuing South 46°01'40" East, 553.51 feet along the southwesterly line of the aforesaid Lots 10 through 16 to the ending point of said centerline of easement. Per plat of survey R-11806F, revised May 25, 2006, by Elgin Surveying & Engineering, Inc. And, a utility easement in a fractional part of Lots 31 through 38 of Arwood Hills No. 1, Rolla, Missouri, lying 10.0 feet measured perpendicular to, northeasterly of, parallel with and adjacent to the following described line (side line of the strip prolonged or shortened to terminate at a point 10.0 feet measured perpendicular to and southeasterly of the northwesterly line of the aforesaid Lot 31 and at a point 10.0 feet measured perpendicular to and northwesterly of the southeasterly line of the aforesaid Lot 38): Commencing at the westernmost corner of Lot 31 of said Arwood Hills No. 1; thence South 46°01'40" East, 10.66 feet along the southwesterly line of said Lot 31 to the point of beginning of the hereinafter described easement: Thence continuing South 46°01'40" East, 617.53 feet along the southwesterly line of the aforesaid Lots 31 through 38 to the ending point of said centerline of easement. Per plat of survey R-11806F, revised May 25, 2006, by Elgin Surveying & Engineering, Inc., hereby be vacated.

(b) That the existing utility easements in Arwood Hills Subdivision, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri, be dedicated as storm water easements. (Ord. 3834, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-137.73. Vacating the alley in Block 21 of Schuman's Addition and retaining the alley as a utility easement. (Meramec Oil Company Inc. and Fisher Properties Inc.)
(a) That the existing alley in Block 21 of Schuman's Addition, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri, hereby be vacated.

(b) That the existing alley in Block 21 of Schuman's Addition, a subdivision in Rolla, Missouri, be hereby dedicated as a utility easement. (Ord. 3835, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-137.74. Vacating a portion of the Northeast corner of Bishop Avenue and Elm Street. (Thompson Thrift Development Inc.)
(a) That a portion of the Northeast corner of Bishop Avenue and Elm Street more particularly described as follows: A part of the Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of Section 2, Township 37 North, Range 8 West in the City of Rolla, Missouri described as follows: Commencing at the Northwest Corner of the Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 2, thence South 0°02'32" East 212.93 feet along the West line of said Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter; thence with same South 0°01'47" East 250.00 feet to the Northerly right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 63; thence along said Northerly right-of-way line North 57°32'12" East 15.49 feet; thence with same along a curve to the right having a radius of 1176.28 feet and an arc length of 203.10 feet with a chord of North 62°28'59" East 202.85 feet to the point of beginning of the tract hereinafter described: thence leaving said Northerly right-of-way line North 38°50'17" East, 117.50 feet; thence along a curve to the left having a radius of 55.00 feet and an arc length of 54.57 feet with a chord of South 10°24'44" West 52.36 feet; thence along a curve to the right having a radius of 15.00 feet and an arc length of 23.12 feet with a chord of South 26°08'41" West 20.90 feet to the Northerly right-of-way line of U.S. 63; thence with said Northerly right-of-way line along a curve to the left having a radius of 1176.28 feet and an arc length of 58.99 feet with a chord of South 68°51'58" West 58.99 feet to the true point of beginning. Containing 0.04 acres, hereby be vacated.

(b) The vacated right-of-way shall be retained as a utility easement. (Ord. 3836, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-137.75. Vacating approximately 310 feet of Spilman Avenue, North of Ridgeview Road. (Batis Development)
(a) That approximately 310' (feet) of Spilman Avenue, North of Ridgeview Road be hereby vacated.

(b) That the street vacation shall not be effective until the real estate contracts for the subject property has been executed and the subject property has changed ownership to Batis Development. (Ord. 3840, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-137.76 Vacating 5 feet of Southbrook Drive adjacent to Lots 2 and 3 of Rolla Park 2nd Addition. (Auto Craft/City of Rolla Public Works Department)
(a) That 5 feet of Southbrook Drive, adjacent to Lots 2 and 3 of Rolla Park 2nd Addition, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, be hereby vacated.

(b) Said vacation of this street right of way contain utility easements, they shall be retained as a utility easement until abandoned or removed. (Ord. 3869, §1-2)



Sec. 42-137.77 Vacating a 15 foot wide utility easement located on Tract 3, in Heritage Heights Subdivision. (Gingerbread House Inc).
That a 15 foot wide utility easement, more particularly described as: All that part of an existing 15 foot wide utility easement in Tract 3, Heritage Heights Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, as per plat filed April 14, 1970, lying 7.5 feet on each side of the following described centerline of easement: Commencing at the Southwest Corner of Lot 3 of the Southwest Quarter of Section 6, Township 37 North, Range 7 West of the 5th P.M.; thence North 0°11' East, 1060.00 feet along the West line of said Lot 3 of the Southwest Quarter; thence South 89°49' East, 30.00 feet to the East right of way of McCutchen Drive also being the Northwest Corner of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Document No. 2008-3847; thence continuing South 89°49' East, 209 feet, more or less, along the North line of said Document No. 2008-3847 parcel to the centerline of the aforesaid existing 15 foot wide utility easement, the point of beginning of the hereinafter described centerline of easement: Thence South 0°11' West, 278 feet, more or less, to the ending point of easement as shown on the aforesaid Heritage Heights Addition plat; be hereby vacated. (Ord. 3880, §§1)



Sec. 42-137.78 Vacating a 15 foot wide utility easement located between Lot 3 of Paul's Addition and Lot 4A of Paul's Addition Replat Lots 4, 6, 7 and 8. (Akers).
That no utilities are currently located within the easement.

That utility easements described as 7.5 feet on each side of a line commencing at the southeast corner of Lot 4A of Paul's Addition, a Subdivision in Rolla, Missouri, extending N 21 degrees, 16'52" E., 108.25 feet, be hereby vacated. (Ord. 3893, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-137.79 Vacating a portion of Juliene Street and all of a 28 foot wide alley in the Kelly Addition. (City of Rolla)
That a portion of Juliene Street described as follows: Commencing at the Southeast corner of said Railroad Lot 120; thence N 0°01'47" East, 137.43 feet (described) along the East line of said Railroad Lot 120 to a point on the Northerly right of way of Kingshighway (Business Loop I-44); thence South 69°34'47" West, 32.06 feet along said Northerly right of way of Kingshighway (Business Loop I-44) to the intersection of said Northerly right of way of Kingshighway (Business Loop I-44) and the West right of way of Juliene Street; thence North 0°07'25" West, 2.15 feet along said West right of way of Juliene Street to the point of beginning; thence continuing North 0°07'25" East, 290.58 feet along said West right of way of Juliene Street to a point being the Northeast corner of Lot 5, Kelley Addition, thence North 89°45'49" East, 16.00 feet, thence South 0°07'25" West, 88.31 feet; thence South 6°08'10" West, 100.24 feet; thence South 0°07'25" West, 88.95 feet; thence around a curve to the right having a radius of 20.00 feet, an arc length of 15.14 feet, a chord bearing of South 21°57'44" West and a chord length of 14.78 feet to the point of beginning, containing 3,025 square feet or 0.069 acres of land, more or less; be hereby vacated.

That a 28 foot wide alley, located west of and adjacent to Lots 1 through 7 of the Kelly Addition; be hereby vacated.

This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of passage. (Ord. 3970, §§1-3)



Sec. 42-137.80 Vacating two 10 foot utility easements located between Lots 13 and 14 and Lots 15 and 16 of the Maxwell Subdivision and dedicating two 10 foot wide utility easements adjacent to the north line of Lots 14 and 15 of the Maxwell Subdivision.
That the fractional part of Lot 1 of the Northwest Quarter of Section 1, Township 37 North, Range 8 West and being more particularly described as follows: the 10 foot wide utility easements that are centered on the property line between Lots 13 and 14 and on the line between Lots 15 and 16, all of the Re-subdivision of Lots 3 through 26 of the Maxwell Subdivision, an addition to the City of Rolla, are hereby vacated.

That the attached utility easement marked Exhibit “A” is hereby accepted.

This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of passage.

(Ord. 3981, §§1-3)



Sec. 42-137.81 Vacating a 10 foot easement located on the west side of Lot 31 of Rich Fountain Place Plat No. 3, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri (Fuller)
That the 10-foot utility easement located along the west property line of Lot 31 of Rich Fountain Place Plat No. #, an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, shall be hereby vacated.

This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of passage..
 (Ord. 4012, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-137.82 Vacating a 20-foot utility easement located along the east side of Block 10 of Bishop's  Fourth Addition and along the west side of Lot 2 Copperfield Subdivision to the City of Rolla, Missouri (Denny Ford Lincoln, Inc)
That the 20-foot utility easement located along the east side of Block 10 Bishop's Fourth Addition and along the west side of Lot 2 Copperfield Subdivision to the City of Rolla, Missouri, shall be hereby vacated.

This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of passage.
(Ord. 4027, §§1-2)


Sec. 42-137.83  Vacating a 12 x 120 foot parcel of Olive Street right-of-way located between 19th Street and U.S. Highway 63 along the west side of Lots 1 & 2, Block 21 of Schuman's Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri (Heavin)
That the 12' x 120' foot parcel of Olive Street right-of-way located along the west side of Lots 1 & 2, Block 21 of Schuman's Addition, between 19th Street and U.S. Highway 63 right-of-way, shall be vacated. (Ord. 4037, §1)

That the use of the vacated parcel shall be limited to off-street parking spaces, or driveway space, and as a utility easement. (Ord. 4037, §2)

No landscape material, wall, fence, sign, or other structure shall be used within the vacated parcel if it, in the opinion of the City Engineer, shall obstruct the view of pedestrians and motorists at the corner of Olive Street and U.S. Highway 63/Bishop Avenue. (Ord. 4037, §3)

The curb abutting Olive Street on the vacated parcel shall be improved by the property owner(s) to prevent parked vehicles from extending over the property line. (Ord. 4037, §4)

This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of passage. (Ord. 4037, §5)

Sec. 42-137.84 An Ordinance vacating Brewer Science Drive right-of-way in its entirety, located beginning at a point east of HyPoint Boulevard, east of HyPoint Drive, and north of Commerce Drive. (RCDC)      
That Brewer Science Drive roadway is hereby vacated in its entirety, beginning at a point east of HyPoint Boulevard, east of HyPoint Drive, and north of Commerce Drive. (Ord. 4038, §1)

That the vacated roadway comprising the former Brewer Science Drive shall be retained as a utility easement and shall be maintained as a private, hard surfaced drive open to the public for emergency, service or delivery vehicles. (Ord. 4038, §2)

This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of passage. (Ord. 4038, §3)

Sec. 42-137.85 An Ordinance vacating a 20 ft. wide utility easement originally dedicated from Lot #1 of Deer Crossing East Subdivision, and a 10 ft. wide utility easement originally dedicated from Lot #8 in La Chateau Place Subdivision and to substitute said utility easements with a 10 ft. wide replacement utility easement also dedicated from Lot #8. (Robinson)
That an Ordinance which vacates a 20 ft. wide utility easement originally dedicated from Lot #1 of the Deer Crossing East Subdivision and vacates a 10 ft. wide utility easement originally dedicated from the La Chateau Place Subdivision and hereby provides a substitute 10 ft. wide utility easement also dedicated from the La Chateau Place Subdivision in the City of Rolla, Missouri as submitted to the City Council on this date, is hereby approved. (Ord. 4066, §1)

Legal Description:

Vacated 20 ft. Utility Easement - All of the South 240 Feet of the East 20 feet except for the South 10 feet of Lot 1, Deer Crossing East, a plat recorded in the Phelps County Recorder’s Office in Document 2001-5168.

Vacated 10 ft. Utility Easement - All of the West 10 feet except for the North 10 feet of Lot 8, La Chateau Place, a plat recorded in the Phelps County Recorder’s Office in Document 2004-4971.

New 10 ft. Utility Easement - All of the East 10 feet except for the North 10 feet of Lot 8, La Chateau Place, a plat recorded in the Phelps County Recorder’s Office in Document 2004-4971.
(Ord. 4066, §2)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the final plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4066, §3)

Sec. 42-137.86 Vacating part of Bland Street (Ridgeview Road) lying between Block 9 and Block 12 of Cowan’s Addition and all of that part of the 12 foot wide alley in Block 9 of the Cowan’s Addition, an addition to Rolla, Missouri. (City of Rolla Public Works)
That a portion of Bland Street (Ridgeview Road) lying between Block 9 and Block 12 of the Cowan’s Addition to the City of Rolla located in the Northeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of Section 11, Township 37 North, Range 8 West of the 5th P.M., Phelps County, Missouri and being more particularly described as follows:  Beginning at the Northwest corner of said Block 12; thence East, 141.81 feet, along the North Line of said Block 12 to a point; thence Northeasterly, 71.44 feet, along the arc of a curve concave to the Southeast and having a chord that bears North 58°19’47” East, 71.03 feet, to a point; thence North, 3.32 feet, to the Southwest corner of Lot 10 of Block 9 of said Cowan’s Addition; thence West, 202 feet, along the South line of said Block 9 to its Southwest corner; thence South, 40 feet, back to the Point of Beginning is hereby vacated. (Ord. 4154, §1)

A Utility/Sidewalk easement shall be retained on the East 10 feet of the above-described tract.  Said described tract containing 6,822 square feet or 0.16 acres. (Ord. 4154, §2)

That a portion of a 12 foot wide alley in Block 9 of the Cowan’s Addition to the City of Rolla located in the Northeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of Section 11, Township 37 North, Range 8 West of the 5th P.M., Phelps County, Missouri and being more particularly described as follows: Beginning at the Southeast corner of Lot 20 of said Block 9; thence North, 254 feet, along the West line of said 12 foot wide alley to be vacated to a point that is 6 feet North of the Southeast corner of Lot 16 of said Block 9; thence East, 12 feet, to a point on the East line of said alley; thence South, 254 feet, along said East line to a point that is the Southwest corner of Lot 10 of said Block 9; thence West, 12 feet, back to the point of beginning is hereby vacated. (Ord. 4154, §3)

A Utility/Sidewalk Easement shall be retained on the above described tract that is more particularly described as follows:  Beginning at the Southeast corner of Lot 20 of said Block 9; thence North, 2.55 feet, along the West line of said Lot 20 to a point; thence North 68°10’21” East, 12.93 feet, to a point on the West line of Lot 10 of said Block 9; thence South, 7.36 feet, along said West line to a point that is the Southwest corner of said Lot 10; thence West, 12 feet, back to the point of beginning.

Also, a utility easement shall be retained on the above described vacated alley, more particularly described as follows:  Commencing at the Southeast corner of said Lot 20; thence North, 2.55 feet, along the West line of said Lot 20 to the True Point of Beginning; thence North, 251.45 feet, along the West line of the 12 foot wide alley to be vacated; thence East, 12 feet, to a point on the East line of said alley; thence South, 246.64 feet, along the East line of said alley; thence South 68°10’21” West, 12.93 feet, back to the Point of Beginning.
Said described tract containing 3,048 square feet, or 0.07 acres. (Ord. 4154, §4)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  (Ord. 4154, §5)


Sec. 42-137.87 Vacating a 20.76 foot wide by 54.37 foot long utility easement of Gracie Place Subdivision,  Lot 21. (Sowers)
 
That an Ordinance approving the vacation of a 20.76 by 54.37 foot utility easement, being a portion of the Gracie Place Subdivision Lot 21, Rolla, Missouri, having been reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission at their July 14, 2015, meeting. (Ord. 4219, §1)

The applicant has submitted a letter requesting a first and final reading of this Ordinance so that nearby construction may commence. (Ord. 4219, §2)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4219, §3)

Sec. 42-137.88 Vacating of a utility easement being a fractional part of Lots 16 and 17 of the amended final plat of Lexington Place a Planned Unit Development (PUD) in Rolla, Missouri. (Lexington Place).
That the re-plat of Lexington Place PUD, forming a Minor Subdivision consisting of Lots 16 and 17, an addition to Rolla, Missouri, being a minor subdivision in Rolla, Missouri, having been reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the City Council. (Ord. 4250, §1)

That the following legal description applies to this re-plat of LEXINGTON PLACE Planned Unit Development, an Addition to Rolla, Missouri a minor subdivision in Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 4250, §2)

UTILITY EASEMENT VACATION
A fractional part of Lots 16 and 17 of the Amended Final Plat of LEXINGTON PLACE, a Planned Unit Development in Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri (Plat Cabinet D, Number 129) more particularly described as follows:  Commencing at the Northeast Corner of Lot 17 of said Lexington Place; thence South 0°15’10” East, 15.01 feet along the East line of said Lot 17; thence South 88°12’30” West, 10.00 feet to the true point of beginning of the hereinafter described tract:  Thence South 88°12’30” West, 10.00 feet; thence South 0°15’10” East, 180.71 feet; thence North 89°44’50” East, 10.00 feet; thence North 0°15’10” West, 180.98 feet to the true point of beginning.  Per plat of survey J-1622, dated November 10, 2015, by Archer-Elgin Surveying and Engineering, LLC.

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4250, §3)

Sec. 42-137.89 Vacating a part of a 10 foot utility easement located in Township 37 North, Range 8 West, Section 1 of the 5th P.M. and also being a part of the Forum Addition, Tract 2, an addition to Rolla, Missouri. (City Easement)
That no utilities are currently located within the easement. (Ord. 4273, §1)

Part of a 10 foot Utility Easement, as described in Book 279 Page 059, recorded on Dec 23, 1976, lying 5 feet on each side of the following described centerline: Commencing at the Southeast corner of Section 1, Township 37 North, Range 8 West of the 5th P.M., Phelps County, Missouri, thence N 0°11’E, 35 feet; thence S89°23’W, 1213.4 feet; thence N09°23’E, 239.04 feet; thence N04°50’W, 529.16 feet to the Point of Beginning of the easement herein described; thence S89°49’E, 232.3 feet; thence S50°29’E, 136.10 feet to the end of said easement, be hereby vacated. (Ord. 4273, §2)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  (Ord. 4273, §3)


Sec. 42-137.90 Vacating in its entirety a 10 foot drainage easement located in Township 37 North, Range 8 West, Section 12 of the 5th P.M. and also being a part of the Barnitz Addition, an addition to Rolla, Missouri. (City Easement).
That no utilities are currently located within the easement. (Ord. 4274, §1)

A 10 foot Drainage Easement, as described in Book Q Page 138, recorded on May 15, 1939, lying 5 feet on each side of the following described centerline: Beginning at the Southeast corner of Lot ten (10), in block six (6) of the Barnitz Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri; thence North 78 feet; thence North 74°30’00”East 15 feet; thence North 53°20’East 122 feet, thence North 3°10’ West 13 feet; thence North 72° East 97 feet; thence North 32°35’ East 52 feet; thence North 57°45’ East 74 feet; thence North 18°10’ East 21 feet; thence North 51° 45’ East 41 feet to the line fence on the East side of Barnitz Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, being the end of said easement, be hereby vacated. (Ord. 4274, §2)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  (Ord. 4274, §3)


Sec. 42-137.91 Vacating of 14th Street West of Pine Street comprising a 493’ x 60’ parcel to the Missouri University of Science & Technology. The vacated right-of-way shall be retained as a utility easement. (Missouri S&T).
The location of the right-of-way to be vacated is shown on the attached map.  The section of 14th Street proposed for vacation runs 493’ west of Pine Street.  The vacated right-of-way shall be retained as a permanent utility easement. (Ord. 4287, §1)

All utilities are available in the right-of-way proposed to be vacated with this ordinance.  The vacated right-of-way will promote more efficient land use.  MS&T will maintain a fire lane along the right-of-way to be vacated. (Ord. 4287, §2)

A fire apparatus access road shall be provided and maintained per International Fire Code 2000 Section 502 and 503 or any update of that Code or its equivalent for a portion 14th Street running 493’ west of Pine Street. (Ord. 4287, §3)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage. (Ord. 4287, §4)


Sec. 42-137.92 Vacating of Faulkner Ave. between 106 and 111 Faulkner Ave. subject to final plat approval.

The location of the right-of-way to be vacated is shown on the attached map.  The section of Faulkner Ave. proposed for vacation runs a distance of 186 feet between 106 and 111 Faulkner Ave. (Ord. 4354, §1)

Said vacation will not take effect until a subdivision plat that addresses all utility easements is approved.  No building permits will be issued until all platting issues, easements, and utility relocations are addressed.  If the building is not completed within three years from the date of issuance of the building permit, the street right-of-way reverts to the City. (Ord. 4354, §2)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage and approval. (Ord. 4354, §3)

Sec. 42-137.93 Vacating of all of Asher Street, all of Joyce Avenue from the northern boundary of Lot 9 of Block 4 of the Powell Second Addition to 11th Street, and all of the stretch of 12th Street situated between the northern edge of Lot 14 of Block 1 of the Powell Second Addition to the eastern edge of Lot 18 of Block 1 of the Powell Second Addition; and that the vacated streets shall be retained as utility easements. (Phelps County Regional Medical Center).

That the street known as Asher Street described in the following legal description be vacated.  A fractional part of the Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of Section 2, Township 37 North, Range 8 West of the 5th P.M. described as follows:  Commencing at the Southwest Corner of the Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of said Section 2; thence North 0°49'40" West, 29.64 feet along the West line of said Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter to the North right of way 10th Street; thence North 89°48' East, 269.62 feet along said North right of way to the true point of beginning of the hereinafter described tract:  Thence North 0°38'30" West, 250.11 feet to the South right of way of 11th Street; thence North 89°33'20" East, 50.00 feet along said South right of way; thence South 0°38'30" East, 250.32 feet to the aforesaid North right of way of 10th Street; thence South 89°48' West, 50.00 feet along said North right of way to the true point of beginning.  Above described tract contains 0.29 acre, more or less, per plat of survey R 12564P, dated August 23, 2007, by Elgin Surveying & Engineering, Inc. (Ord. 4403, §1)

That the section of the street known as 12th Street described in the following legal description be vacated.  All that part of 12th Street lying between Blocks 1 and 4 of POWELL SECOND ADDITION, Rolla, Missouri more particularly described as follows:  Beginning at the Northeast Corner of Lot 21, Block 4 of said POWELL SECOND ADDITION, also being the southwesterly right of way of the aforesaid 12th Street; thence northwesterly, 131.74 feet along the arc of a curve, concave northeasterly with a radius of 249.24 feet, the chord of which is North 52°06' West, 130.21 feet, and, North 36°57'30" West, 186.59 feet, and, North 37°01'30" West, 145.20 feet, all along said southwesterly right of way of 12th Street; thence North 52°58'30" East, 59.52 feet to the westernmost corner of Lot 14, Block 1 of the aforesaid POWELL SECOND ADDITION, also being on the northeasterly right of way of the aforesaid 12th Street; thence South 37°16'10" East, 65.19 feet, and, South 37°18'40" East, 43.96 feet, and, South 37°01'10" East, 128.81 feet, and, South 36°56'30" East, 92.65 feet, and, southeasterly, 80.21 feet along the arc of a curve, concave northeasterly with a radius of 192.00 feet, the chord of which is South 48°57'20" East, 79.63 feet, all along said northeasterly right of way of 12th Street to the southwest corner of Lot 19, Block 1 of the aforesaid POWELL SECOND ADDITION; thence South 4°02'10" West, 64.98 feet to the point of beginning.  Per plat of survey J 2402, dated January 19, 2018, by CM Archer Group, P.C. (Ord. 4403, §2)

That the section of the street known as Joyce Avenue described in the following legal description be vacated.  All that part of Joyce Avenue lying between Block 4 of POWELL SECOND ADDITION and REVISED SUBDIVISION OF BLOCK 3 OF POWELL SECOND ADDITION, Rolla, Missouri more particularly described as follows:  Beginning at the Westernmost Corner of Lot 9, Block 4 of said POWELL SECOND ADDITION, also being on the northeasterly right of way of Joyce Avenue; thence South 43°30'50" East, 119.93 feet, and, South 43°29'10" East, 271.21 feet, and, southeasterly, 123.70 feet along the arc of a curve, concave northeasterly with a radius of 150.00 feet, the chord of which is South 67°06'30" East, 120.22 feet, all along said northeasterly right of way of Joyce Avenue to its intersection with the North right of way of 11th Street; thence South 89°03'10" West, 180.31 feet along said North right of way to its intersection with the southwesterly right of way of the aforesaid Joyce Avenue; thence northerly, 34.71 feet along the arc of a curve, concave westerly with a radius of 15.00 feet, the chord of which is North 22°46' East, 27.47 feet, and, North 43°31'30" West, 120.65 feet, and, North 43°33'20" West, 151.99 feet, and, North 43°32' West, 95.64 feet, all along said southwesterly right of way of Joyce Avenue; thence North 46°28' East, 59.83 feet to the point of beginning.  Per plat of survey J 2402, dated January 19, 2018, by CM Archer Group, P.C. (Ord. 4403, §3)

That all three vacations described in Section 1, Section 2, and Section 3 of this ordinance shall be retained as utility easements until abandoned, surrendered, or otherwise extinguished. (Ord. 4403, §4)

That the street known as Asher Street shall not be vacated until the proposed private driveway that connects 10th Street to 11th Street and is located between 1011 and 1007 West 11th Street is accessible to thru traffic. (Ord. 4403, §5)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. (Ord. 4403, §6)

 


Sec. 42-137.94 Vacating a section of Bryant Road and dedicate a 6.15-acre right-of-way tract to Missouri Route 72 through the consolidation of 12 deeded parcels that consist of parts of Lot 98 and Lot 103 of the Railroad Addition Subdivision and all of Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 5A, 6A, 7, 8, 9, 11, and 14 of the Revised Park Plaza Subdivision into two right-of-way tracts and three reconfigured lots. (Highway 72 Ext. West)

An ordinance to vacate a section of Bryant Road and dedicate a 6.15-acre right-of-way tract to Missouri Route 72 through the consolidation of 12 deeded parcels that consist of parts of Lot 98 and Lot 103 of the Railroad Addition Subdivision and all of Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 5A, 6A, 7, 8, 9, 11, and 14 of the Revised Park Plaza Subdivision into two right-of-way tracts and three reconfigured lots. (Ord. 4409, §1)

That the section of Bryant Road that is located within the tract of land that is labeled as “Right-of-Way Tract” on the Final Plat of HIGHWAY 72 EXTENSION WEST be vacated from and after the date that this ordinance is enacted. (Ord. 4409, §2)

That the 6.15-acre tract of land that is labeled as “Right-of-Way Tract” on the Final Plat of HIGHWAY 72 EXTENSION WEST, which includes the section of Bryant Road vacated in Section 2 of this ordinance, be dedicated to Missouri Route 72 from and after the date that this ordinance is enacted. (Ord. 4409, §3)

That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4409, §4)

 


Sec. 42-137.95 Vacating an existing sewer easement in the 2400 Block of North Bishop Avenue.

That the sanitary sewer easement more particularly described as follows:

A 20.0 foot wide sewer easement in a fractional part of the Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of Section 36, Township 38 North, Range 8 West of the 5th P.M., lying 10.0 feet on each side of the following described line: Commencing at the Southeast Corner of the Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of said Section 36; thence North 00°01 '30" West, 626.12 feet along the East line of said Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter; thence North 64°06'30" West, 278.90 feet; thence North 71 °29'00" West, 168.78 feet; thence North 70°45'00" West, 188.88 feet to the Point of Beginning of the hereinafter described centerline of easement; thence South 86°05'10" West, 144.53 feet; thence South 27°06'10" West, 122.36 feet to the southerly line of Lot 2 of the RCP Subdivision; thence South 25°33’34” West, 63.73 feet along said centerline to the Point of Ending of centerline of easement, is hereby vacated. (Ord. 4418, §1)

This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. (Ord. 4418, §2)

 


Sec. 42-137.96 Vacating of a utility easement being a fractional part of the South half of Lot 1 of the Northwest Quarter of Section 30, Township 38 North, Range 7 West of the 5th P.M., Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri. (City of Rolla)

That the utility easement, more particularly described as follows is hereby vacated:

UTILITY EASEMENT VACATION
A fractional part of the South Half of Lot 1 of the Northwest Quarter of Section 30, Township 38 North, Range 7 West of the 5th P.M. described as follows: Commencing at the Northwest Corner of the South Half of Lot 1 of the Northwest Quarter of said Section 30; thence North 89°57'10" East, 1026.58 feet along the North line of said South Half of Lot 1 of the Northwest Quarter to the northwest corner of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Document No. 2009-3229; thence South 0°09' West, 220.45 feet along the West line of said Document No. 2009-3229 parcel to the true point of beginning of the hereinafter described tract: Thence continuing South 0°09' West, 85.83 feet along said West line; thence South 44°29'50" West, 1287.91 feet to the northerly line of a utility easement described in the aforesaid Document No. 2009-3229; thence South 89°45'40" West, 23.90 feet, and, North 0°02'20" East, 61.43 feet, all along said northerly line; thence North 44°29'50" East, 1322.27 feet to the true point of beginning. (Ord. 4459, §1)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. (Ord. 4459, §2)

Sec. 42-137.97 Vacating of the entire alley that connects Rolla Street to the Northeastern End of Houston Road. (Houston/Rolla Alley Vacation)

That the entire alley that connects Rolla Street to the northeastern end of Houston Road be vacated. (Ord. 4474, §1)

That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage and approval. (Ord. 4474, §2)

 Chapter 42 - Planning & Zoning: Article III - Zoning
Article III - Chapters 138-412 (Zoning)
Article III - Chapters 413-8xx (Rezoning)
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page


Chapter Contents:
DIVISION 1. TITLE, PURPOSE, DEFINITIONS, GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 42-138. Title and Purpose.
§ 42-139. Regulated Activities.
§ 42-140. Rules of Interpretation.
§ 42-141. Definitions.
§ 42-142. General Provisions.
§ 42-142.1 Zoning Districts.
§ 42-142.2 Zoning Map and Rules for Interpretation.
§ 42-142.3 Annexations.
§ 42-142.4 Separability.
§ 42-142.5 Penalties.
§ 42-142.6 Effective Date.
§ 42-143 Public Notification Procedures and Land Use Action Fee Schedule.
§ 42-143.1 Fee Schedule for Land Use Action.
§§ 42-144 to 42-167. Reserved.

DIVISION 2. "R-R" RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 42-168. Purpose of the rural Residential District.
§ 42-168.1 Uses Permitted.
§ 42-168.2 Conditional Uses.
§ 42-168.3 Area Requirements.
§§ 42-169 to 42-170. Reserved.

DIVISION 3. "R-1" SINGLE FAMILY DISTRICT
§ 42-171. Purpose of the Single Family Residential District.
§ 42-171.1 Uses Permitted.
§ 42-171.2 Conditional Uses.
§ 42-171.3 Area Requirements.
§§ 42-172 to 42-173. Reserved.

DIVISION 4. "R-2" TWO FAMILY DISTRICT
§ 42-174. Purpose of the Two Family District.
§ 42-174.1 Uses Permitted.
§ 42-174.2 Conditional Uses.
§ 42-174.3 Area Requirements.
§§ 42-175 to 42-176. Reserved.

DIVISION 5. "R-3" MULTI-FAMILY DISTRICT
§ 42-177. Purpose of the Multi-Family District.
§ 42-177.1 Uses permitted.
§ 42-177.2 Area Requirements.
§ 42-177.3 Separation and Access to Buildings.
§ 42-177.4 Buffer-Yard Requirements.
§ 42-177.5 Site Plan Required.
SUBDIVISION II. "R-3b" MULTI-FAMILY DISTRICT
§ 42-178. Purpose of the "R3-b" Multi-Family District.
§ 42-178.1 Uses permitted.
§ 42-178.2 Area Requirements.
§ 42-178.3 Separation and Access to Buildings.
§ 42-178.4 Site Plan Required.
SUBDIVISION III. "RMH" RESIDENTIAL MANUFACTURED HOME DISTRICT
§ 42-179. Purpose of the "RMH" Residential Manufactured Home District.
§ 42-179.1 Uses permitted.
§ 42-179.2 Area Requirements.
§ 42-179.3 Skirting.

DIVISION 6. "GI" GOVERNMENT AND INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT
§ 42-180. Purpose of the Government and Institutional District.
§ 42-180.1 Uses Permitted.
§ 42-180.2 Area Requirements.
§§ 42-181 to 42-182. Reserved.

DIVISION 7. "C-O" OFFICE DISTRICT
§ 42-183 Purpose of the Office District.
§ 42-183.1 Uses Permitted.
§ 42-183.2 Area Requirements.
§§ 42-184 to 42-185. Reserved.

DIVISION 8. "C-1" NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT
§ 42-186 Purpose of the Neighborhood Business District.
§ 42-186.1 Uses Permitted.
§ 42-186.2 Conditional Uses.
§ 42-186.3 Area Requirements.
§ 42-186.4 Buffer-yard Requirements.
§§ 42-187 to 42-188. Reserved.

DIVISION 9. "C-2" GENERAL RETAIL DISTRICT
§ 42-189 Purpose of the General Retail District.
§ 42-189.1 Uses Permitted.
§ 42-189.2 Conditional Uses.
§ 42-189.3 Area Requirements.
§ 42-189.4 Buffer-yard Requirements.
§§ 42-190 to 42-191. Reserved.

DIVISION 10. "C-3" HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
§ 42-192 Purpose of the Highway Commercial District.
§ 42-192.1 Uses Permitted.
§ 42-192.2 Conditional Uses.
§ 42-192.3 Area Requirements
§ 42-192.4 Buffer-yard Requirements.
§ 42-193. Reserved.

DIVISION 11. "CC" CENTER CITY DISTRICT
§ 42-194 Purpose of the Center City District.
§ 42-194.1 Uses Permitted.
§ 42-194.2 Area Requirements.
§ 42-195 Reserved.

DIVISION 12. "M-1" LIGHT MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
§ 42-196 Purpose of the Light Manufacturing District.
§ 42-196.1 Uses Permitted.
§ 42-196.2 Environmental Standards.
§ 42-196.3 Area Requirements.
§ 42-196.4 Buffer-yard Requirements.
§ 42-197 Reserved.

DIVISION 13. "M-2" HEAVY MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
§ 42-198 Purpose of the Heavy Manufacturing District.
§ 42-198.1 Uses Permitted.
§ 42-198.2 Conditional Uses.
§ 42-198.3 Permitted and Conditional Uses shall comply.
§ 42-198.4 Area Requirements.
§ 42-198.5 Buffer-yard Requirements.
§ 42-199 to 42-200 Reserved.

DIVISION 14. "PUD" PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
§ 42-201 Purpose of the Planned Unit Development District.
§ 42-201.1 Effect of PUD Approval.
§ 42-201.2 Uses and Densities Permitted.
§ 42-201.3 Application and Fee.
§ 42-201.4 Procedure.
§ 42-201.5 Sketch Plan.
§ 42-201.6 Preliminary Development Plan Purpose and Intent.
§ 42-201.7 Preliminary Development Plan Application.
§ 42-201.8 Effect of Preliminary Development Plan Approval.
§ 42-201.9 Final Development Plan Purpose and Application.
§ 42-201.10 Substantial Conformity Defined.
§ 42-201.11 Effect of Final Development Plan Approval and Amendments.
§ 42-201.12 Landscape Plans.
§§ 42-202 to 42-203 Reserved.

DIVISION 15. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
§ 42-204 Accessory Structures and Uses - Purpose and Definition.
§ 42-204.1 Permitted Accessory Structures .
§ 42-204.2 Location of Accessory Buildings or Structures in a Residential District.
§ 42-204.3 Accessory Buildings or Structures in Commercial or Manufacturing Districts.
§§ 42-205 to 42-206. Reserved.
§ 42-207 Customary Home Occupations - Purpose and Definition.
§ 42-207.1 Customary Home Occupations Permitted.
§ 42-207.2 Use Limitations.
§ 42-207.3 Particular Occupations Prohibited.
§§ 42-208 to 42-209 Reserved.
§ 42-210 Supplemental Open Space and Yard Regulations.
§ 42-210.1 Front Yard Regulations.
§ 42-210.2 Side Yards - Corner Lots.
§ 42-210.3 Yards Open.
§ 42-210.4 Exceptions to Yard Regulations.
§ 42-210.5 Permitted Projections and Structures in Required Yards.
§ 42-210.6 Permitted in Any Yard, Except Front Yards.
§ 42-211 Vision Obstruction Restrictions - Purpose.
§ 42-211.1 Obstructions in Required Yards.
§ 42-212 Zero Lot Line Construction - Purpose.
§ 42-212.1 Zero Side Yard.
§ 42-212.2 Zero Rear Yard.
§ 42-212.3 Location of Zero Yards.
§ 42-212.4 Recording Maintenance and Use Easements.
§ 42-212.5 Placement of Zero Yard Wall.
§ 42-212.6 Application and Review.
§ 42-213 Exterior Lighting Standards - Purpose.
§ 42-213.1 Standards.
§ 42-213.2 Exemptions.
§ 42-214 Noncommercial Not-For-Profit Neighborhood Facilities - Purpose.
§ 42-214.1 Standards.
§§ 42-215 to 42-216 Reserved.
§ 42-217 Common Open Space and Improvement Regulations.
§ 42-217.1 General Provisions.
§ 42-217.2 Condominium Property Act.
§ 42-217.3 Subdivision Approval Required.
§ 42-218 Property Owner's Association.
§ 42-218.1 Covenants, Rules and By-Laws.
§ 42-218.2 Maintenance of Common Open Space and Improvements.
§ 42-218.3 Maintenance Responsibility.
§§ 42-219 to 42-220 Reserved.
§ 42-221 Urban Conservation and Redevelopment Areas.
§ 42-222 Family Child Care Homes.
§ 42-223 Reserved.
§ 42-224 Residential Group Homes - Purpose.
§§ 42-225 to 42-226 Reserved.
§ 42-227 Screening and Fencing - Purpose.
§ 42-227.1 Location and Height.
§ 42-227.2 Screening and Fencing Standards.
§ 42-227.3 Maintenance.
§ 42-227.4 Additional Screening and Fencing.
§ 42-227.5 Buffer Areas.
§§ 42-228 to 42-229 Reserved.
§ 42-230 Landscaping and Buffer-yards - Purpose.
§ 42-230.1 Screening and Fencing.
§ 42-230.2 Enforcement.
§ 42-230.3 Maintenance.
§ 42-230.4 General Standards for Trees.
§ 42-230.5 Minimum Requirements for Off-Street Parking Areas.
§ 42-230.6 Buffer-Yard Standards.
§ 42-230.7 Buffer-Yard Definitions.
§ 42-230.8 Sight Distance and Utility Easements.
§ 42-231 Boundary Description of the Rolla Arts & Entertainment Overlay District.
§ 42-231.1 Purpose of the Rolla Arts & Entertainment Overlay District.
§ 42-231.2 General Provisions.
§ 42-231.3 Definitions.
§ 42-231.4 Uses Permitted.
§ 42-231.5 Site Plan Review.
§ 42-231.6 Parking.
§ 42-231.7 Sign Standards.
§ 42-231.8 Litter Control.
§ 42-231.9 Other Zoning Regulations.

§ 42-232Family Entertainment and Recreation Complex – Purpose
§ 42-232.1Definitions
§ 42-232.2 License Required; Application and Fee
§ 42-232.3Operation Requirements for a FERC
§ 42-232.4Revocation or Suspension of a FERC License
§ 42-232.5Request for Hearing
§ 42-232.6 Penalties for Offenses
§ 42-232.7Exemptions.

§ 42-233.Reserved.


DIVISION 16. CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
§ 42-234 Purpose of Conditional Use Permits.
§ 42-234.1 Procedures.
§ 42-234.2 Burden of Proof/Standards.
§ 42-234.3 Public Hearing.
§ 42-234.4 Approval or Denial by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
§ 42-234.5 Appeal of Denial Recommendation.
§ 42-234.6 Protest of the Commission's Decision.
§ 42-234.7 City Council Review.
§ 42-234.8 Permit Effective - When.
§ 42-234.9 Final Site Plans.
§ 42-234.10 Procedures to Amend a Conditional Use Permit or Site Plan.
§ 42-234.11 Time Limit of Conditional Use Permits.
§ 42-234.12 Failure to Commence Construction.
§ 42-235 Bed and Breakfasts - Purpose.
§ 42-235.11. Approval Standards.
§§ 42-236 to 42-238 Reserved.

DIVISION 17. OFF STREET PARKING
§ 42-239 Parking Spaces Provided.
§ 42-239.1 Parking Space Defined and Computed.
§ 42-239.2 Shared Parking Areas.
§ 42-239.3 What Various Terms Include.
§ 42-239.4 Cooperative Parking Facilities.
§ 42-239.5 Cooperative Parking Plan Application.
§ 42-239.6 Cooperative Parking Plan Approval/Amendment.
§ 42-239.7 Location of Parking Facilities.
§ 42-239.8 Nonconforming Parking and Applicability
§ 42-240 Required Parking Spaces.
§ 42-241 Parking Area Surface.
§ 42-241.1 Parking Area Lights.
§§ 42-242 to 42-243 Reserved.

DIVISION 18. SIGNS
§ 42-244. Purpose of Sign Regulations.
§ 42-244.1 Definitions.
§ 42-244.2 Exempt Signs.
§ 42-244.3 Prohibited Signs.
§ 42-244.4 General Sign Provisions.
§ 42-244.5 Sign Regulations for Residential Zoning Districts.
§ 42-244.6 Sign Regulations for Non-Residential Zoning Districts.
§ 42-244.7 Temporary and Portable Signs.
§ 42-244.8 Off-Premise Sign (Third-party sign, billboard, or outdoor advertising).
§ 42-244.9 Non-Conforming Signs.
§ 42-244.10 Electronic Message Center Signs.
§§ 42-245 to 42-246. Reserved.

DIVISION 19. NON-CONFORMING BUILDING AND USE REGULATIONS
§ 42-247 Nonconforming Buildings and Structures.
§§ 42-248 to 42-249. Reserved.

DIVISION 20. CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
§ 42-250. Map and Text Amendments.
§ 42-250.1 Recommendations.
§ 42-250.2 Findings by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
§ 42-250.3 Report of Action Taken.
§ 42-250.4 Notice of Hearings before City Council.
§ 42-250.5 Action of City Council.
§ 42-250.6 Two-Thirds Majority Necessary when Protested.
§ 42-250.7 Limitation on Applications for Rezoning.
§§ 42-251 to 42-252. Reserved.

DIVISION 21. ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND REVIEW
§ 42-253.1 Duties of the Codes Administrator.
§ 42-253.2 Duties of the Community Development Director.
§ 42-253.3 Building Permit Required.
§ 42-253.4 Certificate of Occupancy Required.
§ 42-253.5 Zoning Enforcement.
§ 42-253.6 Inspection and Right of Entry.
§ 42-253.7 Permits Required for Construction of Building - Annexation.
§ 42-254. Board of Adjustment - Composition.
§ 42-254.1 Procedures.
§ 42-254.2 Powers.
§ 42-254.3 Appeals.
§ 42-254.4 Appeals to Stay Proceedings.
§ 42-254.5 Notice of Appeals.
§ 42-254.6 Limitation on Re-Filing.
§ 42-255. Exceptions and Variances.
§ 42-255.1 Notice of Hearings.
§ 42-255.2 Hearings.
§ 42-255.3 Duration.
§ 42-255.4 Special Exceptions.
§ 42-255.5 Variances.
§ 42-255.6 Variance Standards.
§ 42-255.7 Use Variances.
§ 42-255.8 Appeal from Ruling of Board of Adjustment.
§§ 42-256 to 42-359. Reserved.


DIVISION 22. AMENDMENTS TO THE OFFICIAL ZONING DISTRICTS MAP
SUBDIVISION I. USE PERMITS
§ 42-360. Use permit granted to Darrell G. Bradford and Robert Fitzsimmons to conduct photographic business on a tract of land zoned R-3 (multi-family) district.
§ 42-361. Use permit grant to Dan Woodward to conduct an art gallery and museum on property at 1705 North Oak Street.
§ 42-362. Use permit granted to Renick Enterprises, Inc. permitting property located in Eastmeadow Tract A to be used for general office buildings.
§ 42-363. Approving a Conditional Use Permit at 1056 Kingshighway for Carol Pruett.
§ 42-364. Approving a conditional use permit for property located 1100 Hwy 72 East, to permit the establishment of a Family Recreation and Entertainment Complex (FERC) (Noe)
§ 42-365. Approving a conditional use permit for the establishment of a massage therapy business located at 904 Turkey Run Drive.
§ 42-366. Approving the establishment of a Family Entertainment and Recreation Complex (FERC) at 1100 Highway 72 East.
§ 42-367. Approving a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) to allow the operation of a nursing home facility in an R-1 (Single Family District) zoned area at 1000 Lions Club Drive. (Clearpath)
42-368. Approving a Conditional Use Permit to the property known as 1501 Martin Springs Drive for the use of a “Concrete batching or transit mix plant (temporary use only)” in the Highway Commercial (zoning) District (C-3). (Lehman)
§ 42-369 to 42-372. Reserved.


SUBDIVISION II. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
§ 42-373 Approving a community or neighborhood development plan affecting lands situated on the northwest corner of the intersection of Pershing Place and Independence Drive known as Pershing Village.
§ 42-374 Approving a community or neighborhood development plan for the Charles Maize property affecting lands situated in Lot 3 of the Railroad Addition located in the NE 1/4 of the NW 1/4 of the NE 1/4 of Section 2.
§ 42-375 Amending the site plan of the Vienna Woods neighborhood or community unit development.
§ 42-376 Approving a Planned Unit Development plan submitted for consideration according to the provisions of Article III, Chapter 42 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, affecting lands situated north of 10th Street and abutting the east corporate limits in the City of Rolla, Missouri.
§ 42-377 Approving a Planned Unit Development plan submitted for consideration according to the provisions of Article III, Chapter 42 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, affecting lands situated west of Forum Drive and South of Old St. James Road (Oak Tree Apartments).
§ 42-378 Approving North Brook, a Planned Unit Development according to the provisions of Article III, Chapter 42.278 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri.
§ 42-379 Approving the rezoning and final plat of Park Place Senior Housing, a Planned Unit Development. (Brown)
§ 42-380 Approving the rezoning and final plat of Jordan's Pass, a Planned Unit Development. (Jordan)
§ 42-381 Approving the rezoning and final plat of North Meadow, a Planned Unit Development (Sally/Brown).
§ 42-382 Approving North Ridge Planned United Development (Sally/Brown).
§ 42-383 Approving Lexington Place as a Planned Unit Development. (Brown)
§ 42-384 Approving Cedar Trail Planned Unit Development. (Timber Ridge Builders)
§ 42-385 Approving real estate known as 1551 Highway 72 East from R-1 (Single Family) to PUD (Planned Unit Development) District zoning. (Bahr)
§ 42-386 Approving the rezoning of real estate known as 8.43 acres South of Victoria Hills Plat No. 2 from R-1 (Single Family) District to PUD (Planned Unit Development. (Forness)
§ 42-387 Approving the rezoning of real estate known as Lot 1 of VBC Inc Subdivision from C-2 (General Retail District) zoning to PUD (Planned Unit Development District) zoning. (Lincoln Hotel Group Inc.)
§ 42-388 Approving rezoning real estate known as Lots 1-4 and the north half of the vacated alley of Block 9, Holloway Addition from R-3 (Multi Family) Zoning to PUD (Planned Unit Development District) Zoning. (Chapman)
§ 42-389 Approving the rezoning of real estate known as 400 East 6th Street (Block 70, County Addition) from C-1 (neighborhood business district) to PUD (planned unit development district) zoning. (Marge & Mavis LLC)
§ 42-390 Approving the rezoning of real estate known as part of Tract 3, Heritage Heights Addition from R-3 (Multi-Family) zoning to PUD (Planned Unit Development District) zoning. (Gingerbread House)
§ 42-391 Approving rezoning of real estate known as 207 West 9th Street from G-1 to PUD. (Wands)
§42-392 Rezoning of real estate known as 600-602 North Elm Street and 604 North Elm Street, from CC (Center City District) zoning and C-3 (Highway Commercial District) zoning to PUD (Planned Unit Development District) zoning. (Wands)
§42-393 Rezoning of real estate known as Lot 4 of the Heritage Height Subdivision, A 1.3 acre tract located at the intersection of Pershing Place and Truman Avenue, from C-O (Commercial Office District) to PUD (Planned Unit Development District) zoning. (Woessner)
§ 42-394 Amending the Planned Unit Development known as the Pebble Stone PUD by amending certain elements found in Exhibit 1 of said PUD (Forness).
§ 42-395.      Reserved.
SUBDIVISION IIa. WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES CODE

§ 42-396.      Purpose.
§ 42-397.      Definitions.
§ 42-398.      Application Procedures; Timing.
§ 42-399.      General Requirements.
§ 42-400.      Permitted Use.
§ 42-401.      Administrative Approval.
§ 42-402.      Conditional Use Permits.
§ 42-403.      Commercial Operation of Unlawful Wireless Communications Facilities.
§ 42-404.      Removal of Support Structure.
§ 42-405.      Penalty.
§ 42-406.      Appeals.
§§ 42-407 to 42-412.  Reserved.
Article III - Chapters 413-8xx (Rezoning)


DIVISION 1. TITLE, PURPOSE, DEFINITIONS, GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 42-138. Title and Purpose.
This Article, and the Official Zoning Map made a part hereof, shall be known and may be cited as the Rolla Planning and Zoning Code.

This Article is adopted in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and the general welfare of the community by regulating the height, number of stories, and the size or bulk of buildings and other structures, lot coverage, the size of yards and other open spaces, the density of population and the location and use of buildings and structures for trade, industry, residences or other purposes. Additional purposes include the conservation and protection of property values and the economic use of property as well as the prevention of traffic congestion and the mitigation of adverse environmental impacts from the conduct of business in Rolla. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-139. Regulated Activities
Territorial Application of Regulations: The regulations and restrictions in this Article shall apply to all buildings, structures, and land uses within the corporate limits of the City of Rolla, unless otherwise exempted or grand-fathered by other provisions of this Article.

Land Use Review: The following type of requests will be reviewed for compliance with Chapter 42 of the Rolla City Code and a record shall be kept in the Community Development Department that indicates the findings and conclusions of such land use reviews:

New Commercial Buildings and Additions to or Expansions of Commercial Buildings
New Industrial Buildings and Additions to or Expansions of Industrial Buildings
New Multi-family Buildings and Additions to or Expansions of Multi-family Buildings
Change in Use, Increase of Intensity of Use, and Establishment of a New Use
Home Occupation Applications
Sign Applications
Land use actions that are reviewed by City Council such as rezonings, subdivisions, lot consolidations, lot reconfigurations, planned unit developments, conditional use permits and other land use actions also require land use review and record-keeping. All of the other applications of the regulations of Chapter 42 of the Rolla City Code that are not explicitly listed above shall be enforced through the building permitting process, unless, at the discretion of the Community Development Director, land use review is needed. The above-listed types of requests and other land use reviews may require the applicant to submit applications and additional information as reasonably needed before approving such a land use review.

Application to Change of Use, Increase of Intensity of Use, and Establishment of a New Use: A zoning inspection for a business license that results in a change of use (as listed in the permitted/conditional use lists of each district, not as described in building codes), increase of intensity of use, or the establishment of a new use shall only be approved if the use and parking regulations of this Article are met. Regardless of application for a business license, a change of use, increase of intensity of use, or the establishment of a new use is permitted only when the provisions of this Article are met. Unless exempted by other provisions of this Article, no building permits shall be issued until the use and parking regulations and standards are met.

Application for Expansions, Additions and Enlargements: Unless otherwise exempted by provisions of this Article, any expansion of, addition to, or enlargement of an existing structure must conform to the provisions of this Article, including parking requirements and standards. Otherwise, no building permits shall be issued. If an existing building is located on a lot that does not conform to minimum lot size and width requirements, the building shall not be expanded, or receive additions, nor shall the lot receive additional primary or accessory structures.

Application to Existing Uses, Buildings and Structures: Any use, building, or structure that does not conform to the regulations of this Article, but were lawful and conforming when established or constructed, may continue, but shall be subject to the limitations of Division 20, which pertain to nonconforming uses, and any other exemptions or limitations provided by this Article.

Application to Existing Variances, Special Exceptions, Conditional Use Permits, and Planned Unit Developments: Any exceptions or alternative development standards granted through Variances, Special Exceptions, Conditional Use Permits, and Planned Unit Developments remain valid until otherwise made invalid by any provision of this Article or other method authorized by the City Council of Rolla. (Ord. 3414; Ord. 4428, §§1-2)


Sec. 42-140. Rules of Interpretation.
When referring to this Article, the following rules of interpretation shall be applied, except when the context clearly requires otherwise.

The word shall is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word may is permlsslve.

Words used in the present tense shall include the future and words used in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.

The use of the male pronoun includes the use of the female pronoun.

The word person includes individuals, firms, corporations, associations and any other similar entities.

The words parcel, site, or tract are synonymous and are general terms for the description of land.

The word City means the area of jurisdiction of the City of Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 3414)
(Return to Contents)

Sec. 42-141. Definitions.
Words found in the text or tables of this Article shall be interpreted in accordance with the provisions set forth in this Section. Where words have not been defined, the standard dictionary definition shall prevail. The following terms are hereby defined:

Accessory structure or building: A structure which is subordinate to and serves a principal structure; is subordinate in area, extent or purpose; and is located on the same lot with the main use or building.

      Acre: A measure of land area containing forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet.

      Adult day care home: That portion of a residence wherein the owner or occupier of the residence provides care and supervision to meet the needs of up to eight (8) functionally impaired adults for periods of less than twenty-four (24) consecutive hours, without overnight accommodations.  (Ord. 3748, §1)

      Agricultural activity: The provisions of Chapter 5 Rolla City Code - Animals & Fowl notwithstanding, the production, keeping or maintenance, for sale, lease or personal use, of any bovines or equines, excluding feed lots, stockyards, and animal slaughter or meat processing facilities.  (Ord. 3891, §1).

      Alley: A public way that extends only secondary means of access to abutting property.

      Alteration, structural: Any alteration to any component of a structure that supports any vertical load in addition to its own weight.

      Apartment: A room or suite of rooms in an apartment house arranged, designed or occupied as the residence of an individual or family.

      Apartment structure: Same as "Dwelling, multi-family."

Attached Single Family or Townhouse:  An attached single family dwelling unit or townhouse with at least one private exterior entrance, constructed in a group of two or more attached single family units or townhouse in which each unit extends from the foundation to roof with open space on at least two sides.  Attached single family or townhouse shall be limited to 35 (thirty-five) feet in height (2 stories) or 45 (forty-five) feet in height (3 stories), provided a secondary means of egress shall be constructed on the third floor with an automatic sprinkler system throughout the building as required per International Building Code (IBC), Residential Group R-2. (Ord. 4212, §1)

      Automobile sales: An open area, other than a street or required automobile parking space used for the display or sale of new or used automobiles or trailers, and where no repair work is done except minor incidental repair of automobiles or trailers to be displayed and sold on the premises.

      Automobile service station: Any premises used for supplying gasoline, oil, diesel and liquefied petroleum gases, at retail direct to the customer, including minor accessories and services for vehicles.

      Automobile wrecking or salvage yard: An open area used for dismantling or wrecking of any type of used vehicles or the storage, sale or dumping of dismounted or wrecked vehicles or their parts and accessories.

      Bar: See Tavern.

      Berm: A mound of earth, typically located in a buffer-yard to shield or block noise, lights or other nuisances.

      Boarding, rooming and lodging house: A building other than a motel where lodging and/or meals is provided by the owner or operator for three (3), but not more than five (5) persons for compensation.

      Buffer-yard: Land area typically containing trees, shrubs and other plants, berms, fences or walls and used to visibly separate one use from another or to limit nuisances.

      Building: A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls.

      Building codes: The Building Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri together with electrical, plumbing, fire, and any related code(s), including any regulations adopted in conformance therewith.

Building Design Standards.  Buildings designed for Attached Single Family or Townhouse  

Buildings shall not exceed (150) one hundred fifty linear feet in total frontage;
The building fronts of attached townhomes that exceed groups of four (4) units that have unbroken wall and roof planes surfaces of (60) sixty feet or more are prohibited.  At least every 60 linear feet, wall or roof planes shall contain offsets or setbacks of at least two (2) feet.
A change in texture, material or the use of architectural features to differentiate individual units to ensure that buildings have a multi-faceted exterior in which building fronts are combined with window and door placements as well as other architectural details, such as the use of dormers, gabled roof front stoops, flower boxes, and or shutters may be used in-lieu of 2 above.  (Ord. 4212, §2)
      Building unit, group: Two or more buildings (other than dwellings) grouped upon a lot and held under single ownership, such as universities, hospitals, and institutions.

      Building line: A line located a minimum horizontal distance from the center of the street and parallel thereto, beyond which no part of a building shall extend.

      Building, front of: The side of a building most nearly parallel with and adjacent to the front of the lot on which it is situated.

      Building, principal: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated.

      Bulk requirements: Bulk requirements (synonymous with bulk regulations) provide a zoning envelope for buildings by horizontal measurement. Such regulations include setbacks, minimum street frontage, maximum lot coverage, and minimum lot size.

      Bulk storage: The storage of chemicals, petroleum products and other materials in aboveground containers for resale to distributors or retail dealers or outlets.

      Cemetery: Property used for the interring of the dead, including mausoleums.

      Child care center: A state licensed child day care facility permitted to serve more than ten (10) unrelated children and required to utilize a commercial grade kitchen.

      Child day care: The care of a child away from his own home on either a commercial or noncommercial basis for any part of a twenty- four (24) hour period.

      Child care home, family: A state licensed child care facility permitted to serve no more than ten (10) unrelated children.

      Child day care home: An unlicensed child day care facility permitted to serve no more than four (4)-unrelated children.

      Church: A building or structure, or groups of buildings or structures, which by design and construction are primarily intended for the conducting of religious services and associated accessory uses.

      Clinic, medical or dental: An institution or station for the examination and treatment of all ill and affected out patients where overnight lodging is limited to one (1) night.

      College: An institution that provides post-secondary educational program, including classrooms, laboratory and administration buildings, libraries, dormitories, dining halls, student centers, auditoriums, chapels, gymnasiums, stadiums, fraternities, sororities, etc.

      Community center: A building for social, educational, and recreational activities of a neighborhood or community, provided any such use is not operated primarily for commercial gain.

      Community treatment center: Structures and land used for the inpatient and/or outpatient treatment of alcohol and other drug abuse, for the evaluation of treatment needs, and /or for services to family members of patients in a program accredited by the Department of Mental Health/Division of Alcohol and Drug Abuse, the Commission for the Accreditation of Rehabilitation Facilities, the Joint Commission for the Accreditation of Hospitals, or the American Osteopathic Association.

      Convenience store: A retail establishment typically having a gross floor area of five thousand (5,000) square feet or less; primarily selling petroleum products, foods, as well as other household goods customarily sold in larger food markets and supermarkets.

      Conditional use: A use permitted in a particular zoning district only upon showing that such use in a specific location will comply with all the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use as specified in this Article and authorized by City Council.

      Condominium: A building, groups of buildings or property in which units are owned individually and all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis own the common elements.

      Curb grade: The elevation of the established curb in front of the building measured at the center of such front. Where no curb grade has been established, the city engineer shall establish such curb grade or its equivalent for the purpose of this Article.

      Dance hall: Any place open to the public in which persons move with either backward, forward or side steps, accompanied by music.

      Depth of rear yard: The horizontal distance between the rear line of the main building nearest the rear property line, otherwise the rear lot line.

      District: A section of the City of Rolla, for which the regulations governing the areas, heights or uses of buildings or lots are uniform.

      Drive-in facility: A facility, typically accessory to a principal use, which encourages or permits customers to order, receive and consume goods and services while remaining in their motor vehicles.

      Duplex: A structure on a single lot containing two dwelling units, each of which is totally separated from the other.

      Dwelling: A building or portion thereof designed exclusively for residential occupancy, each with separate toilets and kitchen facilities and intended to function as separate dwelling units with, for example, individual utility meters, addresses, etc., but not including hotels, motels, boarding, rooming and lodging houses; and institutional care facilities.

      Dwelling, single-family detached: A detached building surrounded by open space on the same lot designed exclusively for occupancy by one family or a foster home which provides 24 hour care for seven or less unrelated children.

      Dwelling, two-family: See Duplex

      Dwelling & single-family semi-detached: A dwelling unit attached to one or more dwelling units by common vertical walls without opening, each unit located on a separate lot of record.

      Dwelling, multi-family: A building or portion thereof arranged, designed or occupied as a residence by three or more individuals or families having separate quarters and living independently of each other.

      Economic hardship: When the landowner cannot economically utilize the property and it is impractical to sell or lease it or no market exists for it at a reasonable price.

      Efficiency apartments: A building occupied or designed for living units in apartments containing not less than three hundred (300) square feet per apartment; excluding public halls, corridors, or stairways.

      Family: The following living arrangements shall constitute a “Family”:

Eight (8) or fewer unrelated persons, or four (4) or fewer unrelated persons plus their biological, adopted or foster children or other minors, for whom they have legally established custodial responsibility, living as a single housekeeping unit in areas zoned R-3 (Multi-Family District) with single kitchen facilities and no more than (8) eight bedrooms per unit; or 
Four (4) or fewer unrelated persons, plus their biological, adopted or foster children or other minors, for whom they have legally established custodial responsibility, living as a single housekeeping unit in areas zoned RR (Rural Residential District), R-1 (Single Family District), and R-2 (Two Family District) with single kitchen facilities; or
One (1) or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or custodial relationship living as a single housekeeping unit; or
The term family shall not be construed to mean fraternity, sorority, club, or institutional group. (Ord. 4211, §1)
      Farming or truck gardening: A tract of land cultivated by an owner or tenant for the purpose of supplying provisions or food.

      Feedlot: A confined land area for fattening cattle or other animals or temporarily holding such animals for sale or shipping.

      Flashing light: A continuously intermittent light or sequential light; but not including animation or lighting that changes the copy of a sign.

      Fraternity house: A building maintained exclusively by an incorporated fraternity for fraternity members and their guests or visitors and affiliated with an academic or professional college, university, or other institution of higher learning. (Ord. 4019, §1)

      Frontage: All the property fronting on one side of a street between the two nearest intersecting streets, or other natural barriers.

      Front lot line: The line of the lot adjacent to the street on interior lots. On corner lots it is the prolongation of the front lot line of an interior lot.

      Funeral home: A building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and display, with ceremonies connected therewith before burial or cremation, but shall not include facilities for cremation.

      Garage, private: A detached accessory building or portion of a main building for the parking or temporary storage of automobiles of the occupants of the premises.

      Glare: The effect produced by brightness sufficient to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility.

      Greenhouses: A building consisting of glazed frames or sashes, used for the purpose of cultivating plants too tender to endure open air.

      Gross floor areas: The gross floor area of an apartment house shall be measured by taking an outside dimension of the apartment building at each floor level excluding, however, the floor area of basements or attics when not occupied as living quarters.

      Group home, residential: A single family dwelling in which no more than ten ( 10) people reside, comprised of the following: eight or fewer unrelated mentally or physically handicapped persons, no more than two (2) persons acting as house parents or guardians who need not be related to each other or to any of the handicapped persons residing in the dwelling, and the children of the house parents or guardians.

      Guest house: Living quarters within a detached accessory building located on the same premises with the main building, for use by temporary guests of the occupants of the premises; such quarters having no kitchen facilities and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling.

      Height:  Dimensional and Story: Height shall be calculated as the number of stories in a building and by a dimension that is measured from a height that is equal to the lowest point along the intersection of the front(s) of the building (the side or sides of the building that faces the front lot line or lines) and the ground to the highest point of either the parapet line, cornice line, or eave line, whichever is applicable and highest. A story is limited to 14 feet from the finished floor to the ceiling, except that ground-floor stories used for commercial purposes may be as high as 20 feet. If there are multiple floor heights in one story, the lowest floor will be used for the calculation. Any story that exceeds these limitations will count as two stories. Basements that emerge four feet or less from the lowest ground level at the intersection of the front of the building and the ground and attics not exceeding four feet at the top of the kickwall shall not constitute an additional story. Any attic or basement that exceeds these limitations shall count as a story. When determining if a building meets maximum height regulations, both types of measurements, stories and dimensional height, shall be taken into consideration. Violation of either measurement constitutes a height violation.

      Home occupation: Same as Customary home occupations.

      Hospital: An institution or place where sick or injured patients are given medical or surgical care, whether at public or private expense.

      Hospital, animal: An establishment where there are facilities to lodge animals that are being treated by a veterinarian.

      Hotel: A building occupied as the more or less temporary abiding place of individuals who are lodged with or without meals in which, as a rule, the rooms are occupied singly for hire, in which provision is not made for cooking in any individual apartment, and in which there are more than twelve sleeping rooms.

      Hotel apartment: A building or portion thereof designed for or containing both individual guest rooms or suites of rooms and dwelling units.

      Impervious surface: Any part of a lot that is covered by buildings, structures, parking areas, driveways, and any other surfaces which reduce or prevent absorption of storm water.

      Kennel: Any lot or premises on which four or more dogs, more than four months of age, are kept for commercial purposes.

      Land Use: The purpose for which land, a structure, a building, or part thereof is being used. The term does not refer to building code categorization of use. Rather, the land use should be listed in the permitted/conditional use lists of each district in this Article or be similar to one of those uses listed. If the use cannot be found, the use should be added to the list through a code interpretation request.

      Loading space: An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials, and which abuts upon a street or other appropriate means of access.

      Lot: An undivided tract or parcel of land that is under one ownership, has frontage on a street or access to a street, and is designated as a separate tract of land by identifying its boundaries by a lot number or letter on a duly approved and recorded subdivision or by a metes and bounds description on a recorded instrument prior to November 1, 1973.

      Lot area: The total horizontal area within the boundary lines of a lot.

      Lot, corner: A lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets.

      Lot, depth: The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured along the median between the two (2) side lot lines.

      Lot, front of: The front of a lot shall be considered to be that side on the lot that fronts on a street. In the case of a corner lot, the narrowest side fronting on the street shall be considered to be the front of the lot. In case the corner lot has equal frontage on two or more streets, the lot shall be considered to front on that street with the greatest number of lots front.

      Lot, interior: A lot other than a corner lot.

      Lot lines: The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.

      Lot of record: A lot that exists as shown or described on a plat or deed in the records of the County Recorder of Deeds and as approved under Chapter 42, Article II, Subdivisions.

      Lot, reversed corner: A corner lot the side street line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot or lots to its rear.

      Lot, through or double frontage: A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets.

      Lot width: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lots lines.

      Luminaire: A complete lighting unit consisting of a light source and all necessary mechanical, electrical and decorative parts.

      Manufactured home: See “Mobile home”.  (Ord. 3748, §1)

      Mobile home: A transportable, factory-built home, designed to be used as a year-round residential dwelling containing the same water supply, waste disposal and electrical conveniences as immobile housing.

      Motel: An establishment providing transient accommodations on a daily rate to the general public with at least twenty five (25) percent of all rooms having direct access to the outside without the necessity of passing through the main lobby of the building.

      Natural or artificial barrier: Means any river, pond, canal, railroad, levee, embankment, or fence or hedge which prohibits a view of the use from the outside.

      Non-conforming structure: A building or structure or portion thereof that was lawfully erected, but does not conform to height, setback, or bulk regulations.

      Non-conforming use: A lawfully established use of land, a building, or a structure that does not conform to the current Planning and Zoning Code.

      Nurseries: A place where trees, shrubs, or flowering plants are raised from seed or otherwise in order to be transplanted or propagated for commercial purposes.

      Nursing home: An extended or intermediate care facility licensed or approved to provide full-time convalescent or chronic care to individuals who, by reason of advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves.

      Office, sales: An accessory office to a principal use where sales are primarily generated by telephone or off site by salespersons with only incidental retail sales on site.

      Office, retail/warehouse combination: A facility that provides combined office, retail and warehousing facilities for one or more businesses.

      Open space: Area included in any side, rear or front yard of any unoccupied space on a lot that is open and unobstructed to the sky except for the ordinary projection of cornices, eaves, porches or decks. Open space does not include driveways, internal streets and other forms of impervious surface. Water bodies that are not subject to public ownership may also be included as open space.
      Owner of record: The person, corporation, trustee or other legal entity listed as owner of a premise in the records of the County Recorder of Deeds.

      Package liquor store: An establishment where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption off premises.

      Parking space, automobile: Space within a building or a private or public parking area for the parking of one automobile.

      Person: Any individual, corporation, association, firm, partnership, institution or other legal entity, singular or plural.

      Pick-up facility: A facility typically accessory to a commercial establishment designed solely for the distribution of goods ordered before arriving at the establishment.

      Premise: A premise is any tract of land which operates as a functional unit regardless of ownership or the number of lots. When developed, a premise has one or more characteristics including shared parking, common management, common identification, common access, or shared circulation systems.

      Principal building or structure: A structure, or group of structures, in which the principal use of a premise is located.

      Principal use: The primary or predominant use of a premise.

      Print shop: A typically small retail establishment whose principal activity is to provide duplicating or document production services using photocopy, blueprint, word processing or offset printing equipment or small printing presses.

      Private club: An organization of persons for special purposes or the support of sports, arts, literature, politics and the like.

      Rear lot line: The line of the lot opposite the front lot line.

      Rear yard: A space unoccupied except by a building or accessory use as hereinafter permitted, extending the full width of the lot between the main building and the rear lot line. Where there is an alley the depth of the rear yard may be measured from the rear lot line.

      Restaurant: An establishment where food and drink is prepared and served for consumption on or off premise. If alcoholic beverages are sold, more than fifty (50) percent of gross income must be derived from the sale of food and non-alcoholic beverages for consumption on premise for the establishment to be classified as a restaurant.

      Self-service storage facility: A building consisting of individual, small, self-contained units that are leased or owned for the storage of business and household goods. (Ord. 3611, §1)

      Servants' quarters: An accessory building located on the same lot or grounds with the main building and used as living quarters for servants employed on the premises, not less than fifty percent of his or her time, and not rented or otherwise used as a separate domicile.

      Setback: The mandatory minimum or maximum distance between a lot line and an elevation of a building or the closest point of a structure that is not a building, unless otherwise indicated.
      Side line: Any lot line not a front line or a rear line.

      Sorority house: A building maintained exclusively by an incorporated sorority for sorority members and their guests or visitors and affiliated with an academic or professional college, university, or other institution of higher learning. (Ord. 4019, §1)

      Street: A public way that extends primary means of access to abutting properties. No street right-of-way in the City of Rolla shall be less than fifty (50) feet in width.

      Street, arterial: Those streets that are used primarily for high to moderate speed, high volume, extended trip length between activity centers traffic. Minimum right-of-way width shall be eighty (80) feet with sixty (60) feet required for an industrial arterial.

      Street, collector: A street or road primarily for the carrying of traffic from residential streets to the arterial streets and freeways.

      Street, freeway: A divided arterial highway for through traffic with full control of access and generally with grade separations at intersections.

      Street, minor residential:Astreet primarily for access to the abutting properties.

      Street width: The horizontal distance between the side lines of a street, measured at right angles to the back of the curb or side lines if no curb exists.

      Structure: A building or other object that has been constructed or erected on the ground or attached to or on top of another object or building. Walkways and driveways located on the ground are not considered structures.

      Tavern: An establishment where fifty (50) percent or more of gross income is derived from the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on premise and where the serving of food and non-alcoholic beverages, as well as the sale of package liquors, are accessory activities.

      Tea rooms: An establishment used primarily for the serving of non-alcoholic beverages for consumption on premise, with the sale of food as an accessory activity.

      Trailer: Any portable or mobile vehicle on wheels, skids, or rollers not structurally anchored to a foundation, either self-propelled, or propelled by an attached vehicle, animal, person or other propelling apparatus, which is used or may be used as living quarters or for commercial hauling and/or storage purposes, and herein referred to as a trailer.

      Trailer or mobile home park: Any plot of ground where accommodation is provided for two or more trailer coaches or mobile homes used as living or sleeping quarters.

      Used car safes yard: An area used for the display and sale of used automobiles in operating condition and where no repair work is done except the minor adjustments of the cars to be displayed or sold on the premises.

      Width of side yard: The horizontal distance between that portion of the main building nearest the side property line and the side line of the lot.

      Yard: An open space other than a court on the same lot between a building or group of buildings and the nearest lot line and which is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward.

      Yard, front: A yard extending across the full width of the lot, between the nearest main building and the front lot line. The depth of the required front yard shall be measured horizontally from the nearest part of the main building to the nearest point of the front lot line.

      Yard, rear: A yard extending the full width of the lot, between the nearest main building and the rear lot line. The depth of the required rear yard shall be measured horizontally from the nearest part of the main building to the nearest point of the rear lot line.

      Yard, side: An open unoccupied space between the main building and the side line of the lot extending from the front yard to the rear yard. No part of an alley shall be used as part of the side yard.

      Zero lot line: The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or more of the building’s sides rests directly on a lot line.  (Ord. 3414; Ord. 3611, §1; Ord. 3748, §1; Ord. 4398, §1; Ord. 4428, §1)




Sec. 42-142. General Provisions.
Permitted Uses: Unless otherwise exempt, no building, structure, or land shall be used or occupied or designed for use or occupancy after the effective date of this Article in a way that is not permitted by this Article.
Lot Size, Bulk, and Height Requirements: Unless otherwise exempt, and as of the effective date of this Article, no building or structure or part thereof shall be built, moved, expanded, added to, or enlarged, and no vacant land shall be used or occupied on a lot that does not conform to minimum lot size, lot width, and lot depth requirements.
Buffer-Yard Requirements: All buildings, structures, and uses shall provide and landscape the buffer-yards required under the requirements of this Article. No new construction, including additions, parking construction, and placement or construction of accessory or additional primary structures, shall be permitted in such buffer-yards.
Customary Home Occupations: No home occupation shall hereafter be established, altered, or enlarged in any residential district unless it is allowed as a use and complies with the conditions and restrictions imposed by Section 42-207.
Accessory Structures or Uses: No accessory building, structure, or use, as defined in Section 42-204 shall hereafter be built, moved, established or enlarged unless such accessory building, structure or use is permitted.
Signs: No sign shall be built after the effective date of this Article, and no existing sign shall be moved or remodeled, unless such sign complies, or will thereafter comply, with the restrictions imposed by Division 18.
Off-Street Parking: No building or structure shall be built, added to, expanded, or moved after the effective date of this Article unless the minimum off-street parking spaces are provided on the premises and in accordance with Division 17. Unless otherwise exempted by other provisions of this article, a change of use, an expansion of use, or an increase in a current use’s intensity shall trigger the site to conform to current parking requirements and standards.
Number of structures on a lot: Not more than one principal building shall be located on the same lot in the R-R, R-1, R-2, GI, C-O, C-1, C-2, C-3, CC, M-1 or M-2 zoning districts. In mobile home parks, self-service storage facilities, and in the R-3 and R-3B Multi-Family Districts, any number of buildings or structures may be established on a single lot as long as the other provisions of this or any other Article of the Rolla City Code is satisfied. (Ord. 3493, §1; Ord. 3611, §2)
Zoned Rights-of-Way: No use otherwise authorized in the respective zoning district shall be permitted in the rights-of-way that is not specifically authorized by the City’s rights-of-way regulations, specifically Chapter 36 of the Rolla City Code. Any provision of this Article that refers to being adjacent to, abutting, or within a certain distance of a residential zoning district or property zoned residential does not apply if the adjacent, abutting, or nearby zoning district or property is the City’s rights-of-way. (Ord. 4436, §2)
No Public Water or Sewer: No use, which requires potable water or sewerage disposal to operate, shall be established on a parcel of less than three (3) acres, unless both public water and public sewer are provided. (Ord. 3414; Ord. 3493, §1; Ord. 3611, §2; Ord. 4398, §§3-4; Ord. 4428, §§5-6; Ord. 4436, §§1-2)

Sec. 42-142.1. Zoning Districts.
The City of Rolla shall be divided into fourteen (14) zoning districts, the location and boundaries of which are shown on the Official Zoning Map, which Map is incorporated in this Article by this reference. The districts include:

1. "R R" Rural Residential District: A zone intended to accommodate low intensity residential uses on lots not less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet in area and to permit certain agricultural activities.

2. "R 1" Single Family District: A zone designed to support single family residential development at a maximum density of seven (7) dwelling units per acre.

3. "R 2" Two Family District: A district designed for single family or two-family dwellings (duplex) at a maximum density of ten (10) dwelling units per acre.

4. "R 3" Multi Family District: A zone designed for multi family dwelling units (apartments) with a maximum density of twenty six (26) dwelling units per acre.

5. "R-3b" Multi-Family District: A zone intended to provide medium density apartment or townhouse-type development at a maximum density of fourteen (14) dwelling units per acre.

6. "RMH" Residential Manufactured Home District: A zone intended to provide standards for the development of residential manufactured home subdivisions or parks.

7. "GI" Government and Institutional District: A zone designed for governmental buildings and uses, including public medical facilities and institutions of higher education.

8. "C-O" Office District: A zone intended for low intensity office development and serving as a transition zone from commercial uses to residential uses.

9. "C-1" Neighborhood Business District: A zone established to accommodate individual retail stores and personal service businesses that offer convenience goods and services normally considered a frequent or even daily necessity for residents of an adjoining neighborhood.

10. "C-2" General Retail District: A zone designed for uses that provide community wide personal and business services, small shopping centers and specialty retail shops.

11. "C-3" Highway Commercial District: A zone designed for businesses that provide essential commercial services and support activities of community and regional significance. These uses depend upon high visibility and convenient sites on arterial streets and near highways to accommodate customers or distribute goods.

12. "Center City District": A zone designed to accommodate the existing unique mix of uses and to encourage private investment in the Rolla Central Business District.

13. "M-1" Light Manufacturing District: A zone designed to accommodate less intensive industrial and warehousing uses that are conducted entirely within a building with no outdoor operations, except storage and display.

14. "M-2" Heavy Manufacturing District: A zone intended to accommodate intensive manufacturing uses that may have adverse impacts on nearby property unless properly located and buffered. (Ord. 3414; Ord. 3748, §2)



Sec. 42-142.2. Zoning Map and Rules for Interpretation.
(a) Incorporation of Official Zoning Map by Reference: The City of Rolla is hereby divided into the districts as listed in Section 42-141.2. of this Article and as shown on the Official Zoning Map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Article. Such map shall be in triplicate originals, each of which shall bear the signature of the Mayor and attestation of the City Clerk and bearing the Seal of the City. One of said originals shall be hung in the office of the Secretary of the Planning and Zoning Commission. It shall be the duty of the Secretary to keep up to date the originals, showing all changes, additions and amendments thereto and maintaining records of the date of passage by ordinance. Regardless of the existence of copies of the Official Zoning Map that from time to time may be published, the Official Zoning Map shall be located in the office of the Secretary of the Planning and Zoning Commission and this map shall be considered the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas in Rolla.

(b) Rules of Interpretation of District Boundaries: Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of zoning districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following shall apply:

Boundaries shown as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow centerlines.
Boundaries shown as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following lot lines.
Boundaries shown as following City Limit lines shall be construed as following such City Limits.
Boundaries shown as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks.
Boundaries shown as following shorelines of bodies of water shall be construed to follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline, shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streams, ponds, or lakes shall be construed to follow such center lines.
Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not covered by paragraphs (a) through (e) above, the Board of Adjustment shall interpret the district boundaries.
(c) Classification of Vacated Right-of-Way: Whenever any public right-of-way is vacated by official action of the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council, the zoning district adjoining each side of the vacated right-of-way shall automatically extend to the centerline of the vacated property; or, in the case where all of the vacated right-of-way shall revert to one property, the zoning district of the host property shall extend to the vacated area. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-142.3. Annexations.
All territory which may hereafter be annexed into the City of Rolla shall be considered zoned in the most restrictive classification consistent with the property use and the Comprehensive Plan unless the City Council or the applicant designates otherwise prior to the annexation. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-142.4. Separability.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the several provisions of this Article are separable, in accordance with the following rules:

(a) If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Article to be unconstitutional, invalid, or illegal, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions of this Article.

(b) If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge the application of any provision of this Article to a particular property, building or structure to be unconstitutional, invalid, or illegal, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other property. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-142.5. Penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any provisions of this Article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not more than three hundred (300) dollars, per day, for each day of noncompliance. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-142.6. Effective Date.
This Article shall be in full force and effect as Chapter 42, Article III, Rolla City Code, from and after its passage and approval in the manner required by law. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-143.  Public Notification Procedures and Land Use Action Fee Schedule.
When any land use action from the list below is proposed through the submittal of an application or initiated by the city or legislative body, the public notification procedures listed below shall be carried out by the Community Development Department at least fifteen days prior to the City Council-held public hearing for such a proposal. The failure to execute any notification procedure that goes beyond what is required by state law does not imply a failure on the City's part to notify the public.

Land Use Actions that Receive Public Notification upon Application
Major Subdivisions
Planned Unit Developments
Conditional Use Permits
Map and Text Amendments
Appeals to the Board of Adjustment
Variances
Special Exceptions
Use Variances
Subdivision Variances
Major Amendments to Conditional Use Permits, Site Plans, and Final Development Plans
Public Notification Procedures for the Above-listed Land Use Actions
These procedures listed below shall only be executed when the combined land subject to the land use action (the subject parcel) is less than five percent of Rolla's total size. At five percent of the City's area, the proposal becomes a general land use action that only requires online notification and newspaper notification.

Online Notification: On Rolla's government website and social media, staff shall post the location of the proposal; a description of the proposal; the physical and digital location of relevant documents; and the location, time, and date of the Planning & Zoning Commission meeting and the City Council-held public hearing.

Notification by Yard Sign: Staff shall post a yard sign on each street-facing side of the combined land subject to the land use action. The sign(s) shall convey that a land use action has been proposed and the contact information for the Community Development Department. 

Mail Notification: Through postal service, staff shall send an informational packet to the property owners of the subject parcel(s) and those owners of properties located within a 300-foot perimeter (non-rounded parallel lines that are drawn 300 feet from each side) around the subject parcel(s). The informational packet shall include a map that indicates where the subject parcel(s) is/are located and a letter that provides the following information: a description of the proposal; the physical and digital location of relevant case documents; and the location, time, and date of the Planning & Zoning Commission meeting and the City Council-held public hearing. When applicable, the letters shall explain the extraordinary majority requirements described in Section 89.060 of the Revised Statutes of Missouri.

Newspaper Notification: Staff shall post a legal advertisement in an official paper or a paper of general circulation in Rolla. This type of notification must only include the time and place of the City Council-held public hearing and the physical and digital location of relevant case documents. In addition, if space allows, a description and the location of such a proposal shall also be provided.

(Ord. 4401, §§6-7)
 


Sec. 42-143.1.  Fee Schedule for Land Use Actions.
LAND USE ACTION FEE SCHEDULE
Land Use Action Type	Fees
Major Subdivisions	$300
Minor Subdivisions	$100
Lot Consolidations & Reconfigurations	$100
Planned Unit Developments	$475
Conditional Use Permits	$375
Map & Text Amendments (e.g. rezones)	$375
Appeals to the Board of Adjustment	$350
Variances	$350
Special Exceptions	$350
Use Variances	$350
Subdivision Variances	$350
Major Amendments to Conditional Use Permits / Site Plans and to Final Development Plans (for PUD's)	$300
 

 

 



Secs. 42-144 to 42-167. Reserved.


DIVISION 2. ''R-R" RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT


Sec. 42-168. Purpose of the Rural Residential District.
This District is composed of those areas of the city whose principal use is large lot single-family and agricultural uses. The regulations are designed to ensure harmony between the primary uses of this District. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-168.1. Uses Permitted.
Single family-dwellings with no more than one dwelling per lot.

Golf courses, country clubs and other such membership clubs occupying an area of not less than forty (40) acres. Miniature golf and driving ranges are excluded as permitted uses.

Family child care homes for child, provided that no more than ten (10) children not related to the operator shall be kept at any one time, in accordance with Section 42-222.

Churches and other places of worship.

Customary home occupations, in accordance with Section 42-207.

Accessory structures and uses, in accordance with Section 42-204.

Residential group homes, in accordance with Section 42-224.

Noncommercial, private not-for-profit residential neighborhood facilities, including indoor and outdoor recreational facilities, community centers, offices of property owners associations and maintenance facilities operated by a neighborhood or community organization or property owners association, in accordance with Section 42-214.

Adult day care home, designed to provide care and supervision to meet the needs of eight (8) or fewer functionally impaired adults. (Ord. 3414; Ord. 3517, §2; Ord. 3748, §3)



Sec. 42-168.2. Conditional uses that may be permitted by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council in accordance with Section 42-234.
Parks, camp areas, recreation areas, arenas, or resorts owned by private organizations.

Private utilities.

Nursing homes.

Cemetery on ten (10) acres or more.

Medical institutions, such as hospitals.

Veterinarian services, animal hospitals and kennels.

Customary agricultural activities.

Bed and breakfasts, in accordance with Section 42-235. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-168.3. Area Requirements.
Lot frontage	150 feet at front lot line
Width	150 feet at building line
Maximum percentage of lot that may be occupied by buildings:
All buildings	25 percent
Maximum height of buildings
Three stories and fifty feet
Minimum setback dimensions
Front yard	35 feet measured from front lot line
Side yard	25 feet measured from side lot line
Rear yard	50 feet measured from rear lot line
Minimum size of lot:
Area	40,000 square feet
(Ord. 3414, Ord. 4398, §§5-6)



Secs. 42-169 to 42-170. Reserved.


DIVISION 3. "R-1" SINGLE FAMILY DISTRICT


Sec. 42-171. Purpose of Single Family Residential District.
This District is intended to promote and preserve urban single-family residential development at a maximum density of approximately seven (7) building lots per acre. The principal land use is the single-family dwelling. Certain other uses necessary to serve governmental, educational, religious, recreational and other needs are allowed as conditional uses subject to restrictions intended to protect the single-family character of the District. Internal stability, harmony, attractiveness, order and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air and open space for dwellings and related facilities as well as by considering the functional relationship between permitted uses in the District. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-171.1. Uses Permitted.
Single-family dwellings with no more than one dwelling per lot. . Refer to Sec. 42-141 for the definition of “Family”. (Ord. 4019, §2)

Churches and other places of worship.

Privately owned and operated golf courses, country clubs and other such membership clubs occupying an area of not less than forty (40) acres. Miniature golf and driving ranges are excluded as permitted uses.

Noncommercial, private not-for-profit residential neighborhood facilities, including indoor and outdoor recreational facilities, community centers, offices of property owners associations and maintenance facilities operated by a neighborhood or community organization or property owners association, in accordance with Section 42-214.

Customary home occupations, in accordance with Section 42-207.

Accessory structures and uses, in accordance with Section 42-204

Residential group homes, in accordance with Section 42-224.

Family child care homes for children, provided that no more than ten (10) children not related to the operator shall be kept at any one time, in accordance with Section 42-222.

Adult day care home, designed to provide care and supervision to meet the needs of eight (8) or fewer functionally impaired adults.

(Ord. 3414; Ord. 3517, §3; Ord. 3748 §3.)

Sec. 42-171.2. Conditional uses that may be permitted by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the City Council in accordance with Section 42-234.

Private utilities.
Nursing homes.
Cemetery on ten (10) acres or more.
Medical and healthcare services including massage therapy, physician, dentist, chiropractor, optometrist, mental healthcare practitioners, other healthcare practitioners offices, and outpatient care facilities, except animal hospitals, clinics or sanitariums for contagious, mental, drug or liquor addict cases.
Bed and breakfasts, in accordance with Section 42-235.
(Ord. 3414; Ord. 3517, §4; Ord. 3748, §5)



Sec. 42-171.3. Area Requirements.
Minimum size of lot:
Area	6,000 square feet
Lot frontage	40 feet at front lot line
Width	60 feet at the building line.
Maximum percentage of lot that may be occupied by buildings:
All buildings	40 percent for lots under 12,000 sq. ft. in area
All buildings	25 percent for lots over 12,000 sq. ft. in area
Maximum height of buildings
Three stories and fifty feet
Minmum setback dimensions

Front yard	25 feet, measured from front lot line
Each side yard	5 feet, measured from side lot line
Rear yard	10 feet, measured from rear lot line
Corner lots	See Section 42-292.2. Side yards-corner lots
(Ord. 3414; Ord. 3748, § 4; Ord. 4398, §§7-8)



Secs. 42-172 to 42-173. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. "R-2" TWO FAMILY DISTRICT


Sec. 42-174. Purpose of the Two-Family District.
This District is intended to accommodate a variety of housing types, including single family and duplex dwellings at low to moderate residential densities. The Two-Family District is also intended to serve as a transition between the single-family district and the Multifamily District. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-174.1. Uses Permitted.
(1) Any use permitted in the R-1 Single-Family District.

(2) Two-family dwellings.

(Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-174.2. Conditional uses, as listed in the preceding R-1 Single-Family District, as permitted by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council in accordance with Section 42-234.
(1) Sorority and fraternity houses. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-174.3. Area Requirements.
Minimum size of lot: 9,000 square feet.

Maximum Number of Bedrooms Permitted: 4 Bedrooms per unit.

Maximum number of occupants per dwelling unit:

Eight (8), except for incorporated fraternities, sororities, and clubs.
Lot frontage: 75 feet at front lot line.

Width: 75 feet at building line.

Maximum percentage of lot that may be occupied by buildings:

All buildings: 40 percent.
Minimum open space per lot:

Not less than twenty five (25) percent of the total lot area shall be devoted to open space including required yards and buffer yards. Open space shall not include areas covered by buildings, structures, parking areas, driveways, side walk, patio, accessory structures and internal streets. Open space shall contain living ground cover such as grass, plants, shrubs or trees. Decorative landscaping materials, such as rock, bark, and mulch are also permitted.

No open space shall be required on a lot if existing buildings and structures are replaced with new buildings and structures using the same floor area, provided a building permit for replacement is applied for within one (1) year after the existing buildings are removed. In addition, no open space is required if an existing use expands operations or is established in existing floor area that previously was unfinished or not otherwise available for occupancy.

Maximum height of buildings:

Three stories and fifty feet
Minimum setback dimensions:

Front yard: 25 feet from the front lot line.
Each side yard: 5 feet measured from side lot line.
Corner lot: See Sec. 42-210.2 Side yards – corner lots.
Rear yard: 10 feet from the rear lot line.
 (Ord. 3414; Ord. 4019, §3, Ord. 4213, §1; Ord. 4398, §§9-10)



Secs. 42-175 to 42-176. Reserved.
 



DIVISION 5. "R-3" MULTI-FAMILY DISTRICT


Sec. 42-177. Purpose of the Multi-family District.
The R-3 Multi Family District is intended to support apartment type development at a maximum density of twenty six (26) dwelling units per acre. Developments of this intensity should be established adjacent to and with vehicular access from collector or higher classified streets. Traffic circulation should be designed to minimize the impact on adjoining residential neighborhoods. (Ord. 3414; Ord. 3493, §2; Ord. 3748, §6)



Sec. 42-177.1. Uses Permitted.
Uses and conditional uses permitted in any of the foregoing R-1 or R-2 Districts.
Boarding, rooming, and lodging houses.
Child care centers.
Multi-Family dwellings and apartment houses, including efficiency apartments.
Private parking areas.
Private clubs, lodges, fraternities, sororities, and dormitories.
Private schools and academies.
Trailers and mobile homes located in the R-3 Multi-Family District at the date this Article is enacted shall not be considered as non-conforming uses.
(Ord. 3414; Ord. 3493, §2; Ord. 3748, §6)



Sec. 42-177.2 Area Requirements.
Minimum size of lot:

Area: 7,500 square feet plus 1,500 square feet for each dwelling unit in excess of two (2) dwelling units.
Maximum Number of Bedrooms Permitted: 8 Bedrooms per unit.    

Maximum number of occupants per dwelling unit:

Eight (8), except for incorporated fraternities, sororities, and clubs.
Lot frontage: 75 feet at front lot line.

Width: 75 feet at building line.

Maximum percentage of lot that may be occupied by buildings:

All buildings: 40 percent.
Minimum open space per lot:

Not less than twenty five (25) percent of the total lot area shall be devoted to open space including required yards and buffer yards. Open space shall not include areas covered by buildings, structures, parking areas, driveways, side walk, patio, accessory structures and internal streets. Open space shall contain living ground cover such as grass, plants, shrubs or trees. Decorative landscaping materials, such as rock, bark, and mulch are also permitted.

No open space shall be required on a lot if existing buildings and structures are replaced with new buildings and structures using the same floor area, provided a building permit for replacement is applied for within one (1) year after the existing buildings are removed. In addition, no open space is required if an existing use expands operations or is established in existing floor area that previously was unfinished or not otherwise available for occupancy.

Maximum height of buildings:

Four stories and sixty-four feet.
Minimum setback dimensions:

Front yard: 25 feet from the front lot line.
Each side yard: 5 feet measured from side lot line.
Rear yard: 10 feet from the rear property line.
(Ord. 3414; Ord. 3493, §2; Ord. 3748, §6; Ord. 4019, §4, Ord. 4213, §2; Ord. 4398, §§11-12)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 42-177.3 Separation and Access to Buildings.
All new development on parcels zoned R-3 Multi-Family District shall provide a minimum distance between all residential buildings of twelve (12) feet. All required driveways and parking areas shall be provided with a permanent dust-free paved surface and shall be constructed with curbs and gutters. Driveways shall be a minimum of sixteen (16) feet in width and no parking shall be allowed in the driveways. Driveways and buildings shall be located on the parcel in such a manner as to provide safe and convenient access for solid waste pick-up and emergency vehicles. (Ord. 3748, §6)



Sec. 42-177.4 Buffer-Yard Requirements.
Whenever any development in an R-3 Multi-Family District is located adjacent to an R-1 Single Family District, a buffer-yard shall be provided in accordance with Section 42-230.6 and meeting the width and landscaping standards for a "Buffer-Yard A". (Ord. 3748, §6)



Sec. 42-177.5 Site Plan Required.
All rezoning requests for R-3 Multi-Family District zoning for parcels one (1) acre in size or greater shall be accompanied by a site plan prepared in accordance with Sec. 42-234.1 (b) of the Planning and Zoning Code. (Ord. 3748, §6)



SUBDIVISION II. "R-3b" MULTI-FAMILY DISTRICT
Sec. 42-178 Purpose of the "R-3b" Multi-Family District.
The R-3b Multi-Family District is intended to provide for medium density apartment or townhouse-type development at a maximum density of fourteen (14) dwelling units per acre. Developments of this intensity should be adjacent to and have access from collector or higher classified streets. Traffic circulation should be designed to minimize the impact on adjoining residential neighborhoods. (Ord. 3748, §6)



Sec. 42-178.1 Uses Permitted.
Uses and conditional uses permitted in any of the foregoing R-1, R-2, or R-3 Districts. (Ord. 3748, §6)



Sec. 42-178.2 Area Requirements.
Minimum size of lot:

Area: 10,000 square feet plus 1,500 square feet for each dwelling unit in excess of two (2) dwelling units.
Maximum number of occupants per dwelling unit:

Eight (8), except for incorporated fraternities, sororities, and clubs.
Lot frontage: 75 feet at front lot line.

Width: 75 feet at building line.

Maximum percentage of lot that may be occupied by buildings:

All buildings: 40 percent.
Minimum open space per lot:

Not less than twenty five (25) percent of the total lot area shall be devoted to open space including required yards and buffer yards. Open space shall not include areas covered by buildings, structures, parking areas, driveways, side walk, patio, accessory structures and internal streets. Open space shall contain living ground cover such as grass, plants, shrubs or trees. Decorative landscaping materials, such as rock, bark, and mulch are also permitted.

No open space shall be required on a lot if existing buildings and structures are replaced with new buildings and structures using the same floor area, provided a building permit for replacement is applied for within one (1) year after the existing buildings are removed. In addition, no open space is required if an existing use expands operations or is established in existing floor area that previously was unfinished or not otherwise available for occupancy.

Maximum height of buildings:

Three stories and fifty feet.
Minimum setback dimensions:

Front yard: 25 feet from the front lot line.
Each side yard: 5 feet measured from side lot line.
Rear yard: 10 feet from the rear lot line.
 (Ord. 3748, §6; Ord. 4019, §5; Ord. 4398, §§13-14)



Sec. 42-178.3 Separation and Access to Buildings.
All development on parcels zoned R-3b Multi-Family District shall provide a minimum distance between all residential buildings of twelve (12) feet. All required driveways and off-street parking areas shall be provided with a permanent dust-free paved surface and shall be constructed with curbs and gutters. Driveways shall be a minimum of sixteen (16) feet in width and no parking shall be allowed in driveways. Driveways and buildings shall be located on the parcel in such a manner as to provide safe and convenient access for solid waste pick-up and emergency vehicles. (Ord. 3748, §6)



Sec. 42-178.4 Site Plan Required.
All rezoning requests for R-3b Multi-Family District zoning for parcels one (1) acre in size or grater shall be accompanied by a site plan prepared in accordance with Sec. 42-234.1(b) of the Planning and Zoning Code. (Ord. 3748, §6)



SUBDIVISION III. "RMH" RESIDENTIAL MANUFACTURED HOME DISTRICT
Sec. 42-179 Purpose of the "RMH" Residential Manufactured Home District.
The purpose of this district is to establish additional standards for the development and operation of residential manufactured home (mobile home) parks. The standards are intended to encourage affordable and diverse housing opportunities while promoting neighborhood improvement that minimizes conflicts with other zoning districts. A residential manufactured home park may provide sites (herein defined as manufactured home spaces) available for lease or rent or the property may be subdivided in accordance with the requirements of ARTICLE II of this Chapter. Regulations pertaining to Trailers and Mobile Home Parks found in Chapter 39, ARTICLES I through II of the Rolla City Code shall be followed where not specifically revised by this Section. (Ord. 3748, §6)



Sec. 42-179.1 Uses Permitted.
Single family attached and detached dwellings on individual lots not less than 8,000 square fee in area.
Manufactured homes for single-family residential occupancy on individual manufactured home spaces of not less than 4,000 square feet.
Recreational facilities for the exclusive use of the occupants of the manufactured home park.
Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above uses, which are required for the direct servicing and well-being of park residents and proper management and maintenance of the park, in accordance with Section 42-204.
Customary home occupations, in accordance with Section 42-207.
Outdoor storage areas, including storage areas for recreational vehicles. Such areas shall be screened from adjoining uses and shall occupy, in total, not more than five (5) percent of the area of the manufactured home park. Use of such storage area shall be limited to the occupants of the manufactured home park. (Ord. 3748, §6)


Sec. 42-179.2 Area Requirements.
Minimum size of lot:

Area:	4,000 square feet for each manufactured home.
Width:	45 feet at the building line.
Maximum percentage of space coverage for each manufactured home:

Individual manufactured home:	30 percent of the manufactured home space.
Maximum separation between manufactured homes:

Manufactured homes shall be separated from each other and from other buildings or structures by at least fifteen (15) feet; provided that manufactured homes placed end-to-end shall have a clearance of ten (10) feet where opposing rear walls are staggered.

Minimum setbacks:

All manufactured homes shall be located at least ten (10) feet from any park boundary line abutting a public or private street, or parking area, and at least twenty (20) feet from all perimeter park boundary lines not abutting a public or private street or parking area.

(Ord. 3748 §6)



Sec. 42-179.3 Skirting.
All manufactured homes shall be skirted within thirty (30) days of occupancy. The skirting shall be done so that it is compatible with the manufactured homes unit's exterior materials and it shall be of a finished nature. Composition building board and raw wood shall not be used as skirting unless finished with weatherproof and termite proof materials. (Ord. 3748, §6)



DIVISION 6. "GI" GOVERNMENT AND INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT


Sec. 42-180. Purpose of the Government and Institutional District.
The Government and Institutional District is established to apply to those lands where federal, state, or local government activities are conducted and where the government holds title to such lands, and to major public educational, medical, and recreational facilities. The District is also intended to classify land that is vacant but has been designated for activities listed above in an adopted plan. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-180.1. Uses Permitted.
(1) Governmental buildings and uses.

(2) Hospitals and related buildings and uses, such as medical offices, clinics, etc.

(3) Medical and dental laboratories and research facilities, not including the manufacture of pharmaceutical or other products for sale or distribution, provided no toxic substances, explosives, radioactive material, highly flammable substances or other materials that pose a threat to the public health and safety, due to their quantities or location, are used in the research operations.

(4) Stadiums, auditoriums, arenas, convention and cultural centers owned by a governmental or quasi-governmental entity.

(5) Public parks and recreation areas.

(6) Athletic clubs, fitness centers and indoor sports facilities.

(7) Cemeteries.

(8) Art galleries, libraries and museums.

(9) Colleges and universities, public schools - elementary and secondary.

(10) Public service and public utility uses, including central power or lighting plant.

(11) Accessory structures and uses, in accordance with Section 42-204.

(Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-180.2. Area Requirements.
Government and institutional buildings or uses in existence at the time the district is mapped shall be considered conforming uses.

Minimum size of lot:

Area: No maximum or minimum requirements.

Lot frontage: No minimum requirements.

Maximum lot coverage:

All buildings: Eighty (80) percent, not less than twenty (20) percent of the total lot area shall be devoted to open space, excluding parking lots or other paved areas and building sites.

Maximum height: No maximum or minimum requirements.

Minimum setbacks: None.

(Ord. 3414)



Secs. 42-181 to 42-182. Reserved.
DIVISION 7. "C-O" OFFICE DISTRICT


Sec. 42-183. Purpose of the Office District.
The C-O District is designed to be a restrictive district for low intensity office or professional uses to allow their location near any residential district without creating an adverse effect. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-183.1. Uses Permitted.
(1) All uses and conditional uses permitted in any residential district, excluding veterinarian services, animal hospitals, customary agricultural activities.

(2) Offices for professional and business use involving the sale or provision of services, but not the sale or rental of goods, including but not limited to:

(A) Accountant, appraiser, architects, brokers, engineers, insurance agents, interior decorators, landscape architects, lawyers, realtors, travel agency and similar types of professional uses.

(B) Artists, sculptors, photographers.

(C) Authors, writers, composers.

(D) Physicians, dentists, chiropractors, or other licensed medical practitioners, excluding facilities where significant diagnostic or out patient surgery is performed as normally associated with a clinic or hospital.

(E) Teachers of private lessons in art, music or dance.

(F) Museums, libraries, galleries and exhibit halls.

(G) Administrative offices of a single organization or by a single professional organization or society.

(Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-183.2 Area Requirements.
Minimum size of lot:
Area	6,000 square feet
Lot frontage	60 feet at front lot line
Width	60 feet at building line
Maximum percentage of lot that may be occupied by buildings:
All buildings	40 percent
Maximum height of buildings
Three stories and thirty-six feet
Minimum setback dimensions
Front yard	25 feet measured from front lot line
Side yard	5 feet measured from side lot line
Rear yard	10 feet measured from rear lot line
(Ord. 3414; Ord. 4398, §§15-16)



Secs. 42-184 to 42-185. Reserved.
DIVISION 8. "C-1" NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT


Sec. 42-186. Purpose of the Neighborhood Business District.
This District is intended for uses that provide convenience goods or personal services primarily to people residing in adjacent residential areas. It also includes selected retail and service uses that are similar in land use intensity and physical impact to the neighborhood sales and service uses permitted in this District. This District is designed to accommodate compact, freestanding commercial buildings or to function as a transition between more intense commercial uses and residential neighborhoods. Commercial uses permitted in this District are generally required to conduct business activities indoors. Because the permitted retail and personal service uses may be an integral part of the neighborhood, more restrictive requirements for light, air, open space, and building design are made than are provided in other commercial districts. This District should be located along or at the intersections of a collector or higher classification streets. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-186.1. Uses Permitted.
Conditional uses permitted in the R- 1 Single Family District.
Any residential dwellings that exist in the C- l District at the date this ordinance is enacted.
Antique shops
Banks and financial institutions including automatic teller machines and drive-in facilities.
Books or stationery stores.
Community and family fitness centers.
Child care centers.
Churches and other places of worship.
Offices and office buildings, administrative, business, finance, medical and professional uses.
Personal service establishments including beauty parlors, barber shops, dry cleaning and laundry pick-up, shoe repair, self-service laundromats, express or mailing offices and hearing aid and eye glass shops.
Commercial photography establishments.
Private parks, playgrounds, and golf courses, excluding miniature golf courses and driving ranges.
Restaurants and coffee shops, excluding drive-in facilities and on-site sales or consumption of alcoholic beverages.
Retail or service establishments for the following types of stand-alone uses: bakery, candy, dairy products, flowers, gifts, jewelry, hobby materials, meat, fish and poultry products, newsstands, pet grooming, toys, and video rental or sales, excluding drive-in facilities.
Studios; art, music, drama, reducing, dancing, interior decorating.
Tailor shops.
Shops dealing in customized clothing, including silk screening, iron-on transfers and all uses incidental thereto.
Accessory structures and uses, in accordance with Section 42-204.
Boarding, rooming, and lodging houses.
Those conditional uses listed below that exist in the C-1 District at the date this Article is enacted shall not be considered non-conforming uses.
(Ord. 3414; Ord. 3517, §5)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 42-186.2. Conditional uses that may be permitted by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council, in accordance with Section 42-234.
Pharmacies.
Commercial greenhouses, nurseries and garden stores.
Community treatment center.
Grocery stores
Wearing apparel and/or shoe stores
Hardware stores.
Print shops, photocopying.
Veterinarian services, animal hospitals, customary agricultural activities.
Trailers and mobile homes for residential use only, excluding sales and service (see Section 39 "Trailers and Mobile Homes").
(Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-186.3. Area Requirements.
Minimum size of lot:
Area	6,000 square feet
Lot frontage	60 feet at front lot line
Width	60 feet at building line
Maximum percentage of lot that may be occupied by buildings:
All buildings	40 percent
Maximum height of buildings
Three stories and fifty feet
Minimum setback dimensions
Front yard	10 feet measured from front lot line
Side yard	5 feet measured from side lot line
Rear yard	10 feet measured from rear lot line
(Ord. 3414; Ord. 4398, §§17-18)



Sec. 42-186.4. Buffer-Yard Requirements.
Whenever any development in a C-1 Neighborhood Business District is located adjacent to a residential, office, government or PUD zoning district, screening and buffer yards shall be provided in accordance with Section 42-231. (Ord. 3414)



Secs. 42-187 to 42-188. Reserved.
DIVISION 9. "C-2" GENERAL RETAIL DISTRICT


Sec. 42-189. Purpose of the General Retail District.
This District is intended for uses that provide community-wide personal and business services, shopping centers and specialty shops which depend upon high visibility, generate high traffic volumes or cater to the traveling public. The District is also intended for on-site production of hand crafted items in conjunction with retail sales. No un-screened outside display of merchandise is permitted, except where indicated. Commercial uses permitted in this District are generally required to conduct business activities indoors. The need for community-wide accessibility dictates that this district be located along or at the intersection of two or more arterial or higher classification streets. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-189.1. Uses Permitted.
(1)        Any use or conditional uses permitted in the foregoing C-l District, including existing single-family and two-family residential uses.
(2)        Any conditional use permitted in the R-R District.
(3)        Athletic clubs.
(4)        Auto repair, body and paint shops, radiator repair.
(5)        Auto laundries or car/truck wash establishments.
(6)        Automobile sales and service, including tire sales, and rental of new or used vehicles (outside display permitted).
(7)        Automobile service stations or garages, including sales of petroleum products.
(8)        Automobile parts and accessory stores, including installation and repair.
(9)        Boat and marine sales and service.
(10)      Bowling alleys.
(11)      Cold storage and self or mini-storage facilities.
(12)      Drive-in, pick-up, and drive-through restaurants.
(13)      Funeral homes, excluding crematoriums.
(14)      Furniture and/or appliance stores (new and used), sales and service, including rentals.
(15)      Heating and air-conditioning sales and service, including customized sheet metal fabrication as an accessory activity.
(16)      Hotels and motels, and hotel apartments.
(17)      Medical equipment and supplies sales and rental.
(18)      Miniature golf courses and driving ranges.
(19)      Monument sales, retail dealers (outside display permitted).
(20)      Parking garages, commercial.
(21)      Pest control services.
(22)      Pet shops, animal hospitals, clinics and kennels.
(23)      Plumbing shops.
(24)      Printing, publishing, book binding, and photo-processing, including drive-through facilities.
(25)      Produce market, retail (outside display permitted).
(26)      Radio-TV. repair shops.
(27)      Recreation vehicle or mobile home sales or service (outside storage permitted).
(28)      Restaurant, on-site sales and consumption of alcoholic beverages permitted.
(29)      Retail stores and other shops for custom work or making of articles to be sold at retail on the premises.
(30)      Retail establishments which provide supplies and/or services primarily to commercial and industrial customers, such as janitorial services, packaging and shipping service, locksmith services, lithographing and engraving, and blueprinting businesses.
(31)      Recording studios.
(32)      Second hand goods store and pawn shops.
(33)      Second hand or used car sales yard, not including wrecking and repairing (outside display permitted).
(34)      Skating rinks, swimming pools, gymnasiums, commercial.
(35)      Sporting goods sales.
(36)      Store and restaurant fixture sales.
(37)      Taxi and limousine transportation services.
(38)      Reserved. (Ord. 4470, §2)
(39)      Theaters, motion picture and performing arts.
(40)      Tobacco product sales.
(41)      Water, bottled, sales.
(42)      Video game arcades.
(43)      Seasonal businesses; such as fire works stands, Christmas tree lots, snow cone vendors, and similar outlets that are temporary uses.
(Ord. 3414; Ord. 3566, §1; (Ord. 4470, §2)

Sec. 42-189.2. Conditional uses that may be permitted by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council in accordance with Section 42-234.
Bars, cocktail lounges, and night clubs (including dance halls).
Billiard or pool halls.
Convenience stores, with or without gas pumps.
Package liquor stores.
Cabinet or carpentry shop.
Advertising services (sign shop).
Laboratories, offices and other facilities.
(Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-189.3. Area Requirements.
Minimum size of lot:
Area	6,000 square feet
Lot frontage	60 feet at front lot line
Width	60 feet at building line
Maximum percentage of lot that may be occupied by buildings:
All buildings	40 percent
Maximum height of buildings
Four stories and sixty-four feet
Minimum setback dimensions
Front yard	10 feet measured from front lot line
Side yard	0 feet measured from side lot line
Rear yard	10 feet measured from rear lot line
(Ord.. 3414; Ord. 4398, §§19-20)



Sec. 42-189.4 Buffer-Yard Requirements.
Whenever any development in a C-2 general retail district is located adjacent to a residential, office, government or PUD zoning district, screening and buffer-yard shall be provided in accordance with Section 42-231. (Ord. 3414)



Secs. 42-190 to 42-191. Reserved.
DIVISION 10. "C-3" HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT


Sec. 42-192. Purpose of the Highway Commercial District.
This District is intended for business uses which provide essential commercial services and support activities of community and regional significance that require high visibility and may have higher environmental impacts in terms of noise, dust, glare, etc. which may make them incompatible with office or some retail uses. This District is also intended for businesses that combine wholesale, retail, and light manufacturing (assembly) functions on site. Merchandise may be displayed outside without screening. This District is also intended to function as a transition between industrial development and strictly commercial development. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-192.1. Uses Permitted.
Any use or conditional uses permitted in any of the foregoing C 1 or C 2 Districts.
Agriculture implements sales and service, agri businesses.
Sexually oriented businesses, as defined in Chapter 29 of the Rolla City Code, provided such uses are prohibited within the area circumscribed by a circle which has a radius of seven hundred fifty (750) feet, as measured by a straight line drawn from the lot line of any proposed sexually oriented business, to any residential zoning district, school, park, or church.
Auction sales, flea markets and swap meets, permanent location; livestock sales not permitted
Archery and firearms ranges, commercial.
Battery shops, sales and service.
Builder's supply and lumber yards.
Bus stations.
Bottling plants.
Carpet cleaning.
Contractor's equipment, sales and service
Commercial laundry, dry cleaning, linen and towel or diaper supply service
Crematoriums
Dairy supply dealers
Dry ice storage.
Engine and transmission repair and rebuilding.
Electrical equipment repairs, sales and parts distribution.
Feed stores, no manufacturing or grinding or mixing of feed.
Frozen food lockers.
Glass and mirror sales.
Landscape company, sales and service.
Magazine and newspaper, printing and distribution agency.
Road machinery, heavy equipment and tools, sales and rental service.
Storage warehouses and baggage transfers.
Tire repair and recapping
Tattoo and/or body piercing parlors, palm reading, and fortune telling establishments.
Wholesale operations, sales office/warehouse combination.
(Ord. 3414; Ord. 3493, §3; Ord. 3611, §3)



Sec. 42-192.2. Conditional Uses.
In accordance with Division 16 of this Article and with the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit, the following uses are permitted in the C-3 zoning district.

Advertising services
Bus terminals, maintenance shops
Cabinet or carpentry shops
Canvas goods shops, tents and awnings, manufacture, sales and rental
Concrete batching or transit mix plant (temporary use only)
Irrigation sales and services
Laboratories, offices and other facilities for research, basic and applied
Private utilities
Produce markets, wholesale.
(Ord. 4414, §3)

Sec. 42-192.3. Area Requirements.
Minimum size of lot:
Area	6,000 square feet
Lot frontage	60 feet at front lot line
Width	60 feet at building line
Maximum percentage of lot that may be occupied by buildings:
All buildings	40 percent
Maximum height of buildings
Four stories and sixty-four feet
Minimum setback dimensions
Front yard	10 feet measured from front lot line
Side yard	0 feet measured from side lot line
Rear yard	10 feet measured from rear lot line
(Ord. 4414, §§ 4-6)

 


Sec. 42-192.4. Buffer-Yard Requirements.
Whenever any development in a Highway Commercial District is located adjacent to a residential, office, government, or PUD District, screening and buffer-yard shall be provided in accordance with Section 42-230 through Section 42-230.8.  (Ord. 3414; Ord. 4414, §§7-8)



Sec. 42-193. Reserved.
DIVISION 11. "CC" CENTER CITY DISTRICT


Sec. 42-194. Purpose of the Center City District.
The CC District is intended to be a mixed-use district that accommodates a variety of residential and commercial uses. It is intended to address the unique character of Rolla's traditional Central Business District, an area that developed early in the City's history, generally encompassing both sides of Rolla and Pine Streets between 6th and 12th Streets, and does not display the features of modern suburban development. This district is designed to support the transition that must occur if the CBD is to experience revitalization. (Ord. 3414; Ord. 3493, §4)



Sec. 42-194.1. Uses Permitted.
(1) Any use or conditional uses permitted in the foregoing GI and C-3 Districts, except trailers or mobile homes.

(2) Accessory structures and uses, in accordance with Section 42-204.

(3) Accessory residential uses, either to the rear or above the first floor of a building used for permitted business activities.

(Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-194.2. Area Requirements.
Minimum size of lot:
No minimum

Maximum number of occupants per dwelling unit:
Eight(8), except for incorporated fraternities, sororities, and clubs.

Lot frontage: No minimum

Width: No minimum.

Maximum percentage of lot that may be occupied by building footprint:
100 percent.

Maximum height of buildings:
No maximum

Minimum setback dimensions:
(a)Front yard: None
(b)Each side yard: None
(d)Rear yard: None

Minimum parking requirements:
None, except for new construction where sufficient land area exists to allow the provision of adequate parking consistent with the requirements of this Article.

(Ord. 3414; Ord. 3611, §4; Ord. 4019, §6)



Sec. 42-195. Reserved


DIVISION 12. "M-1" LIGHT MANUFACTURING DISTRICT


Sec. 42-196. Purpose of the Light Manufacturing District
This District is intended to allow industrial operations and activities that do not create applicable nuisances or hazards. Industrial operations and activities are permitted as long as they do not have an adverse impact on neighboring properties resulting from dust, fumes, noxious odors, glare, vibration, or other atmospheric influence. M-1 light manufacturing activities are generally conducted inside a building, although related outdoor storage and display is permitted. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-196.1 Uses Permitted.
(1)        All of the uses listed under Section 42-192.1, except for item "a".
(2)        Advertising services (sign shop)
(3)        Agri-businesses.
(4)        Asphalt storage.
(5)        Blacksmithing.
(6)        Broom manufacturing.
(7)        Builders supply, hardware and lumberyards.
(8)        Bus terminals, maintenance shops.
(9)        Cabinet or carpentry shops.
(10)      Candle manufacturing.
(11)      Canvas goods shops, tents and awnings, manufacture, sales and rental.
(12)      Carpet cleaning.
(13)      Child care centers.
(14)      Clothing, footwear, and leather goods manufacturing.
(15)      Cold storage plants.
(16)      Concrete batching or transit mix plant (temporary use only).
(17)      Construction materials manufacturing and storage.
(18)      Heavy machinery, including diesel engine, repairs.
(19)      Egg storage, candling or processing plants.
(20)      Electronic component manufacture and assembly.
(21)      Food products processing, storage, and distribution (except uses listed under the M-2 District).
(22)      Freight terminals.
(23)      Furniture packing and crating.
(24)      Hatchery, fish or fowl.
(25)      Ice manufacturing.
(26)      Insulation applicator.
(27)      Irrigation sales and service.
(28)      Laboratories, offices and other facilities for research, basic and applied.
(29)      Live stock sales.
(30)      Lumber mills and storage.
(31)      Machine shops.
(32)      Mattress and bedding manufacturer and renovator.
(33)      Magazine and newspaper printing.
(34)      Monument manufacture.
(35)      Motor freight terminals and depots.
(36)      Oil well equipment service, supply and storage.
(37)      Pharmaceutical manufacture.
(38)      Paper products manufacturing.
(39)      Plastic processing and converting.
(40)      Prefabricated house manufacture.
(41)      Printing, publishing, book binding.
(42)      Private utilities.
(43)      Produce markets, wholesale.
(44)      Sash and door manufacturing.
(45)      Seed storage and warehousing.
(46)      Sheet metal work shops.
(47)      Spray painting.
(48)      Store and restaurant fixture manufacturing.
(49)      Storage of baling or rags.
(50)      Textile manufacturing.
(51)      Welding shops, industrial equipment and supply sales.
(52)      Wholesale operations, sales office/warehouse combination.
(53)      Accessory structures and uses, in accordance with Section 42-204.

(Ord. 3414; Ord. 4414, §10)


Sec. 42-196.2. Industrial Environmental Standards.
Businesses located in the M-1 Light Industrial District shall meet the following environmental standards to remain conforming uses:

The emission of smoke, gases, particulate matter shall comply with the standards contained in the Air Quality Standards and Air Pollution Control Regulations for outstate Missouri as published by the Missouri Air Conservation Commission.

No hazardous waste, as defined and published in the list maintained by the Missouri Hazardous Waste Management Commission, shall be generated, unless such waste is limited to less than one hundred (100) kilograms of hazardous waste in one (1) calendar month. If the industry meets this small quantities test, it shall handle those wastes in a accordance with the published rules of the Missouri Hazardous Waste Management Commission.

The noise level at any point along the property line shall not exceed standards established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development Noise Assessment Guidelines. Sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and associated octave band analyzer manufactured in compliance with standards prescribed by the American Standards Association.

Certification shall be provided by the Fire Chief that all manufacturing, storage, and waste handling processes on the site shall meet the safety and environmental standards of the National Fire Code. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-196.3. Area Requirements.
Minimum size of lot:
Area: 10,000 square feet.
Lot frontage: 100 feet at front lot line.
Width: 100 feet at building line.

Maximum percentage of lot that may be occupied by building:
All buildings: 85 percent
Maximum height of buildings:
No maximum

Minimum setback dimensions:
Front yard: 35 feet measured from front lot line.
Side yard: 10 feet measured from side lot line.
Rear yard: 20 feet measured from rear lot line.

(Ord. 3414; Ord. 3493, §5; Ord. 3611, §5)



Sec. 42-196.4. Buffer-Yard Requirements.
Whenever any development in an M-1 light manufacturing district is located adjacent to a residential, office, government, commercial, or PUD zoning district, screening and buffer yard shall be provided in accordance with Section 42-231. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-197. Reserved.
DIVISION 13. "M-2" HEAVY MANUFACTURING DISTRICT


Sec. 42-198. Purpose of the Heavy Manufacturing District
This District is intended for heavy industrial uses and other uses not otherwise provided for in the light manufacturing district. The intensity of uses permitted in this District makes it necessary to separate it from residential districts wherever possible with good accessibility provided to rail and highways. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-198.1. Uses Permitted.
(1)        Any use permitted in the M-1 light manufacturing district.
(2)        Aluminum manufacture.
(3)        Asphalt manufacture or refining.
(4)        Blast furnaces.
(5)        Boiler making, repairing and boiler works.
(6)        Brick, tile, pottery or terra cotta manufacturing.
(7)        Canning or preserving manufacture.
(8)        Celluloid or similar cellulose material manufacture.
(9)        Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster manufacturing.
(10)      Central power or lighting plant.
(11)      Concrete products manufacturing.
(12)      Cooperage works.
(13)      Corrugated metal manufacture.
(14)      Cotton baling, compressing or ginning.
(15)      Cotton storage, open.
(16)      Cotton seed products manufacturing.
(17)      Curing, tanning or storage of hides.
(18)      Die casting manufacture.
(19)      Distillation of bones, coal or wood.
(20)      Dye stuff manufacture.
(21)      Electroplating.
(22)      Emery cloth and sandpaper manufacture.
(23)      Fat rendering.
(24)      Feed grinding and processing.
(25)      Fertilizer manufacture.
(26)      Flour mills.
(27)      Forge plants, foundry or smelter.
(28)      Galvanizing.
(29)      Glue or gelatin manufacture.
(30)      Match manufacture.
(31)      Milling, custom.
(32)      Oil cloth and linoleum manufacture.
(33)      Paint manufacture.
(34)      Paper and rag processing and storage.
(35)      Paving plants.
(36)      Railroad roundhouse, shops, and yards.
(37)      Refrigerator manufacture.
(38)      Rubber products manufacture or treatment.
(39)      Salt works.
(40)      Sand blasting.
(41)      Septic tank service.
(42)      Shoe polish manufacture.
(43)      Soap manufacture.
(44)      Soda and compound manufacture.
(45)      Steel fabrication plants.
(46)      Stone cutting.
(47)      Tank manufacture.
(48)      Reserved. (Ord. 4470, §2)
(49)      Tile roofing manufacture.
(50)      Wool pulling or scouring.
(51)      Yeast plants.
(Ord. 3414; (Ord. 4470, §2)



Sec. 42-198.2. Conditional uses that may be permitted by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council in accordance with Section 42-231.
Arsenals and munitions storage or manufacture.
Manufacture and bulk storage of flammable liquids or gases for wholesale, subject to the provisions of the National Fire Codes.
Scrap or salvage yards, including automobile wrecking or salvage yards.
Bleaching powder or chlorine manufacture.
Hazardous chemical manufacture, creosote treatment or manufacture, disinfectant and insecticide manufacture, poisonous gases, tar distillation, acid and ammonia production .
Coal yards, oil compounding, barreling or reclamation plants.
Collection and transfer facilities for hazardous wastes, solid wastes that contain hazardous substances from off-site sources and radioactive substances.
Permanent storage or disposal of hazardous substances (as defined under the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, Subpart D, 40 C.F.R. 261.30; 261.31; 261.32; 261.33), industrial and municipal sludge.
Processing, reprocessing and storage of PCB containing oils.
Quarries and mining operations.
Landfill operations, including waste compacting and incineration.
Mixing plant-paving materials.
Asphalt manufacture/refining.
(Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-198.3. Permitted and conditional uses in the M-2 (Heavy Manufacturing District shall comfy with Section 42-195.2.


Sec. 42-198.4. Area Requirements.
Minimum size of lot:
Area	25,000 square feet
Lot frontage	100 feet at front lot line
Width	100 feet at building line
Depth	250 feet from front lot of line
Maximum height of buildings
No maximum
Minimum setback dimensions
Front yard	35 feet measured from front lot line
Side / rear yards	20 feet from side / rear lot line
100 feet if adjoining a residential zoning district
 



Sec. 42-198.5. Buffer-Yard Requirements.
Whenever any development in an M-2 heavy manufacturing district is located adjacent to a residential, commercial, government, PUD, or M-1 zoning district, screening and buffer- yard shall be provided in accordance with Section 42-231. (Ord. 3414)



Secs. 42-199 to 42-200. Reserved.
DIVISION 14. "PUD" PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT


Sec. 42-201. Purpose of the Planned Unit Development District.
The intent of the Planned Unit Development (PUD) District is to encourage more creative, flexible, and imaginative land development than is possible under conventional zoning regulations. It is intended to permit, upon the approval of a Development Plan and subject to the procedures and standards in this Division, the creation of PUD Districts for any type of land use.

The suitability of each tract considered for PUD District designation shall be determined in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and designed to lessen congestion in the streets, to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers, to promote health and the general welfare, to provide adequate light and air, to prevent the over-crowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population, to preserve features of historical significance, to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water and sewerage service, schools, parks, and other public requirements, and with a reasonable consideration being given to among other things, the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses and with a view to conserving the land throughout the City.

The procedures and standards herein established are intended to replace protections for substantive regulations in recognition that traditional density, bulk, spacing and use regulations, which may be useful in protecting developed areas, may impose inappropriate and unduly rigid restrictions on the development or redevelopment of parcels which lend themselves to an individual, planned approach. Approval of a PUD should promote the following goals:

Implementation of the Rolla Comprehensive Plan.
Efficient use of land that will protect and preserve, where possible, natural features of the land such as mature trees, streams, and topographic features.
Harmonious and coherent site and building design that create a sense of place.
Direction of development to areas where existing public transportation facilities, utilities, and pubic services are adequate; provided that the applicant may make provision for such facilities or utilities which are not presently available. (Ord. 3414)


Sec. 42-201.1. Effect of PUD District Approval.
The approval of a PUD District shall constitute an amendment to the zoning ordinance. Designation of a parcel as a PUD District shall supersede all existing and prior zoning classifications and requirements. Requirements, such as density, bulk, spacing and use regulations, may vary from, and be more or less restrictive, than the prior zoning classification. Such property shall for zoning purposes be identified as a PUD on the zoning map. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-201.2. Uses and Densities Permitted.
The Development Plan and application shall specify for the entire project and/or for sub-areas within a project, those permitted primary and accessory uses and development densities. The City Council may include or exclude uses or attach conditions to achieve the intent of these regulations. The Council may consider land use compatibility and relationships between uses in the project area, outside the project area in relation to the PUD District, and the appropriateness of permitted uses given their impact on the entire community. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-201.3. Application and Fee.
Prior to submitting an application and fee, the applicant may provide a sketch plan. However, in order to initiate the review process for the approval of a PUD District designation and the accompanying Development Plan, the applicant, who may be the property owner(s) or any person having a contractual interest in the subject property, or an agent of the applicant must submit a PUD application, a Preliminary Development Plan, and the PUD application fee found in the Fee Schedule in Section 42.143.1 of the Rolla Planning and Zoning Code. A public hearing shall be held for such proposals and the Community Development Department shall notify the public of the hearing and proposal according to the prescribed procedures and standards described in Section 42-143 of the Rolla Planning and Zoning Code. 

(Ord. 3414; Ord. 4401, §10-11)



Sec. 42-201.4. Procedure.
Applications for a PUD District shall be evaluated using the following review process:

(a) Sketch plan.

(b) Preliminary Development Plan.

(c) Final Development Plan.

(Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-201.5. Sketch Plan.
A sketch or concept plan may be provided prior to filing a Preliminary Development Plan for review by the Community Development Director and other City department heads. (Ord. 3414; Ord. 3493, §6)



Sec. 42-201.6. Preliminary Development Plan Purpose and Intent.
The Preliminary Development Plan is intended to provide the applicant with the opportunity to submit information showing the basic concept, character and nature of the entire proposed PUD District without becoming involved in the preparation of a detailed plat or engineering drawings. It permits the developer to proceed with some assurance that a Final Development Plan will be approved. Developers may elect to forgo the Preliminary Development Plan step. Final Development Plans, however, must contain the same information required for Preliminary Development Plans.

Approval of a Preliminary Development Plan binds the applicant and the City with respect to the following development constraints:

(a) Categories of permitted uses;

(b) Overall maximum density of residential uses and intensity of non-residential uses;

(c) General location of vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems;

(d) General location and extent of public and private open space;

(e) General location of residential and non-residential land uses; and

(f) Phasing of development, if appropriate.

(Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-201.7. Preliminary Development Plan Application.
Five (5) copies of the completed Preliminary Development Plan application shall be submitted in a form and containing such information as shall be prescribed by the Community Development Director in written rules, but shall in all instances contain at least the following information which shall, taken together, constitute a Preliminary Development Plan:

The applicant's name, address, phone number, and interest in the subject property;

The owner's name and address, if different from the applicant, and the owner's signed consent to the filing of the application;

The names and addresses of all professional consultants advising the applicant with respect to the proposed PUD.

The legal description of the subject property and a survey, certified by a registered land surveyor, showing property lines and dimensions; all easements and rights-of-way, any part of which affects the subject property; and a statement that all necessary easements can be obtained; and

One (1) or more maps at a scale of not less than one (1) inch to two-hundred (200) feet delineating the existing and proposed physical site characteristics of the site and adjacent property, including:
Topography at contours not more than five (5) feet;
Slopes of ten (ten) percent or more;
Property boundary lines and dimensions; existing buildings; existing utilities; easements, roadways, rail lines and other public rights-of-way crossing or adjacent to the property;
Water courses, drainage ways, sinkholes, ponds, lakes, marshes or flood plains, including the 1 00-year flood plain, where applicable;
A generalized depiction of the vegetation and tree cover, particularly the location of mature trees, and other significant natural features;

The (1) or more maps at a scale of not less than one (1) inch to two-hundred (200) feet and/or a written statement of the proposed PUD describing the following:
The present zoning classification, existing land use and proposed land use describing the types and location of land use in each area of the development;
The proposed traffic circulation system illustrating external and internal traffic ways related to the development, showing the location of proposed rights-of-way and other transportation improvements with any proposed access restrictions. The City Council may impose standards and restrictions as are needed to protect the integrity and function of the City's thoroughfare system and to insure the safe and efficient circulation of vehicles and pedestrians within the district;
A generalized layout and description of proposed utility service, including storm water management systems;
Proposed landscaping for the development, including required buffer areas and other open spaces;
Information pertaining to the size, location, illumination, and relation to surrounding uses of signs within the proposed development.

A tabulation of the following information:
The total number of dwelling units proposed by type of structure, if appropriate;
The total land area, expressed in acres and as a percent of the total development area for each land use by type of structure, for streets and other public or common areas, and for off-street parking and loading areas; and
The number of off-street parking and loading spaces for each type of land use.

A phased PUD that extends beyond a single construction season shall include a development schedule stating the approximate beginning and completion date, the proportion of total open space to be provided, and the proportion of land uses to be constructed during each phase. All public improvements required for each phase shall be completed in sequence assuring adequate service for the PUD.

Evidence that the applicant has sufficient control over the subject property to complete the proposed PUD. Evidence would include a statement of all legal, beneficial, tenancy, and contractual interests held in or effecting the subject property. (Ord. 3414)


Sec. 42-201.8. Effect of Preliminary Development Plan Approval.
A Preliminary Development Plan, having been reviewed and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, shall not be modified, revoked, or otherwise altered pending the approval of a Final Development Plan by any action of the City without consent of the applicant. The applicant shall proceed to file a Final Development Plan, in accordance with the provisions in the following Section, with the Planning and Zoning Commission. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-201.9. Final Development Plan Purpose and Application.
The Final Development Plan is intended to particularize, refine and implement the Preliminary Development Plan. The application for Final Development Plan may include the entire area included in the approved Preliminary Development Plan or one or more phases thereof in accordance with the phasing schedule as part of the Preliminary Development Plan. The application shall contain a plan which is in substantial conformity with the Preliminary Development Plan. Additional information shall be provided as prescribed by the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council, but shall in all cases include the information and documentation found in the Preliminary Development Plan, and:

A legal description of the property for which the Final Development Plan approval is sought;

If necessary, a subdivision plat that includes a survey of the entire property certified by a registered land surveyor shall be submitted. Plats shall be in compliance with the Rolla subdivision regulations;

A Landscape Plan that specifies the design, description and arrangement of required landscaping for all areas, including materials and techniques used in accordance with Section 42-201.12. The articles of incorporation and by-laws of the private organization charged with maintaining the open space and buffer yards, if appropriate, shall be provided, in accordance with Section 42-302;

Copies of any restrictive covenants that are to be recorded with respect to the property included in the Final Development Plan;

Development plans, indicating placement of water mains, sanitary and storm sewers, gas, electric and telephone lines, and related facilities

A statement summarizing all changes which have been made in any document, plan, or data previously submitted, together with revised copies of any such document, plan, or data, if appropriate;

Proof of recording any easements and restrictive covenants prior to the sale of any land or structure or portion thereof within the PUD and of the establishment of any entity that is responsible for the management and maintenance of any public or private open space or buffer yard;

All certificates, seals and signatures required for the dedication of land and the recording of documents;

Such other information as the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall find necessary to a full consideration of the entire PUD or any phase thereof.

If the Planning and Zoning Commission finds that there is substantial conformity between the Preliminary and Final Plans, including the provisions of this Article and all other federal, state, or city codes, it shall recommend approval of the Final Development Plan with any conditions imposed by such recommendation. (Ord. 3414; Ord. 3493, §6)



Sec. 42-201.10. Substantial Conformity Defined.
A Final Development Plan shall be deemed to be in substantial conformity with an approved Preliminary Development Plan if it:

Does not increase maximum density approved in the Preliminary Development Plan more than five (5) percent;

Does not increase the maximum height of any structure by more than five (5) percent,

Does not decrease by more than five (5) percent the area approved for open space or change the general location of such areas;

Does not alter the approved traffic circulation elements that would decrease the ability of such elements to function efficiently or adversely affect their relation to surrounding land uses and circulation systems;

Does not significantly alter the arrangement of land uses within the PUD;

Does not violate any provision of the codes and ordinances applicable to the proposed PUD; and

Does not depart from the Preliminary Development Plan in any manner which the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall, based on the stated findings and conclusions, determine to materially alter the development concept for the proposed PUD. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-201.11. Effect of Final Development Plan Approval and Amendments.
Upon Final Development Plan approval by the City Council with or without modifications accepted by the applicant and upon application, all appropriate officials of the City may issue building and other permits to the applicant. The Community Development Director may authorize minor adjustments to the approved Final Development Plan when such adjustments appear necessary in light of technical or engineering considerations first discovered during actual site development. Otherwise, such an amendment will be classified as a major amendment to the Final Development Plan that must go through the entire PUD application and approval process as described in this Division. However, instead of the applicant being required to pay the full PUD application fee, the applicant must only pay the major amendment fee found in the Fee Schedule in Section 42.143.1 of the Rolla Planning and Zoning Code. A public hearing shall be held for such proposals and the Community Development Department shall notify the public of the hearing and proposal according to the prescribed procedures and standards described in Section 42-143 of the Rolla Planning and Zoning Code.

(Ord. 3414; Ord. 4401, §§12-14)



Sec. 42-201.12. Landscape Plans.
Landscape Plans are a required component of Development Plans under the PUD regulations of this Article. Landscape Plans shall contain the minimum following information:

A minimum scale drawing of one (1) inch to fifty (50) feet;
The location of all trees to be preserved;
The location of all plant and landscaping materials to be used;
A list of all plant materials (canopy, under-story, ornamental or evergreen tree; shrub; etc.) to be used;
The size of all plant material to be used;
The spacing of plant material, where appropriate; and
The entity responsible for preparing the Landscape Plan.
Landscape Plans shall provide, to the maximum extent practicable, for the preservation of existing mature trees in the City. A Plan that provides for the clear cutting of a development tract or lot shall only be approved if the developer or contractor establishes by clear and convincing evidence that the development will not be economically viable unless clear cutting is permitted. (Ord. 3414)



Secs. 42-202 to 42-203. Reserved.


ARTICLE III ZONING
DIVISION 15. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS


Sec. 42-204. Accessory Structures and Uses - Purpose and Definition.
An accessory structure is a building or structure that is located on the same lot as the main or primary building or structure and is subordinate to and detached from the main building, but is not used for human habitation. Accessory uses are consistent with and supplemental to the permitted uses in the zoning district. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-204.1. Permitted Accessory Structures.
Any structure or use that meets the definition of an accessory structure or use may be allowed in any district.

Accessory structures include, but are not limited to, the following list of examples:
Garages;
Utility sheds or carports;
Private in-ground swimming pools and above-ground swimming pools more than two (2) feet high deep and associated bath houses;
Green houses;
Satellite dishes; (Ord. 4470, §2)
Gazebos, pergolas or pavilions; (Ord. 3982, §1)
Barns;
Well and wash houses.
Temporary Accessory Storage – Portable On Demand Storage Units (PODS) or other temporary accessory storage units are allowed for the purposes of storage of household items, construction tools or materials for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days unless used in conjunction with a renovation or new construction project and then must be removed within sixty (60) days of the approved final inspection or the building permit expiration.  Temporary accessory storage must be placed on a drive, parking area, or any other hard surfaced area on the property except when the construction or renovation project will not allow for the use of these areas.  Temporary accessory storage shall not be placed on a street or other public area without the approval of the Director of Public Works.  Temporary accessory storage shall be defined as cargo or storage containers, cargo crates, box trailers, box or utility vans or trucks, van bodies or boxes removed from trailers or other similar vehicles.  Temporary accessory storage shall not be required to meet the setback requirements of other permitted accessory buildings or structures due to the temporary nature of their use on site. (Ord. 3982, §1)
Accessory structures shall be allowed under the following conditions:
On any lot in an "R" District having less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet accessory structures, other than residences, may be permitted with no plumbing fixtures required for human habitation, except for a washing machine and/or a janitor type sink;
On any lot in an "R" District having more than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, accessory structures with plumbing fixtures may be used for servant's quarters housing, as long as the structure is occupied by a servant employed on premises by the household occupying the main building; and
On any lot in a "C" or "M" District accessory structures used for residential purposes are not permitted unless used for security and are built as part of and/or connected to the main building.  (Ord. 3414; Ord. 3493, §7; Ord. 3982, §1; (Ord. 4470, §2)

Sec. 42-204.2. Location of Accessory Buildings or Structures in a Residential District.
An accessory building or structure in a residential district shall be located:

(a) Not less than forty (40) feet back of the front building line for the main building;
(b) Not less than five (5) feet from the main building, when not constructed, intended, or used for human occupancy at any time;
(c) Not less than five (5) feet from the rear lot line;
(d) (Repealed by Ord. 3611, §6);
(e) Not less than five (5) feet from the side lot line.
(f) Not less than ten (10) feet from any lot line for two-story accessory building or structure;
(g) No accessory building or structure on a comer lot shall project beyond the front yard building line; and
(h) Accessory buildings or structures shall comply with the height restrictions of the zoning district.
(Ord. 3414; Ord. 3493, §7; Ord. 3611, §6)



Sec. 42-204.3. Accessory Buildings or Structures in Commercial or Manufacturing Districts.
The location of accessory buildings or structures in a commercial or manufacturing zoning district shall be located consistent with the height, setback, and bulk standards. (Ord. 3414)



Secs. 42-205 to 42-206. Reserved.


Sec. 42-207. Customary Home Occupations - Purpose and Definition.
This section is designed to define what constitutes a home occupation and to enumerate the particular home occupations that are permitted. Customary home occupations are defined as any activity carried out for compensation in a residential dwelling unit. No home occupation shall be permitted if it:

Changes the outside appearance of the dwelling or is visible from the street;
Generates traffic, parking, sewage, water use or noise in excess of what is normally found in a residential neighborhood;
Creates a hazard to person or property, results in electrical interference or becomes a nuisance; or
Results in outside activities, storage or display. (Ord. 3414)


Sec. 42-207.1. Customary Home Occupations Permitted.
Customary home occupations include the following activities:

Home offices for architects, engineers, lawyers, realtors, insurance agents, brokers, ministers, rabbis, priests, salesmen, sales representatives, manufactures representatives, home builders, home repair contractors and similar occupations;
Artists, sculptors, authors, photographers and composers;
Computer programming and data processing;
Direct sale product distribution (Amway, Avon, Tupperware, etc.) provided parties for the purpose of selling merchandise or taking orders shall not be held more than once a month, shall be limited to ten ( 10) customers and shall be held between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.;
Dressmakers, seamstresses, and tailors;
Home crafts, such a model making, rug weaving, woodworking, ceramics (with a kiln up to six (6) cubic feet) and similar activities, provided that no machinery or equipment shall be used or employed other than that which would customarily be found in the home or machinery and equipment that would ordinarily be employed in connection with a hobby or avocation;
Mail order, not including retail sales from site;
Music and art teachers or other tutoring services.
Renting sleeping rooms and serving meals to not more than two (2) persons not members of the family occupying the dwelling unit provided one ( 1 ) off-street parking space is provided for each person;
Telephone answering service;
Washing and ironing service;
"Work at home" activities where employees of a business, located at another location, perform work for the business in their own residence, provided all physical contact between the business and the employee occurs at the place of business and not the residence, other than the initial installation of any equipment or other work facilities. The work activities of the employee shall conform to all other requirements of this Section. (Ord. 3414; Ord. 3748 §7)


Sec. 42-207.2. Use Limitations.
No person other than someone related by blood, marriage, adoption or custodial relationship to the person conducting the home occupation and who also resides in the dwelling unit shall be employed in the home occupation;

The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the principal residential building and shall be limited to one (1) room;

No manufacturing or processing of any sort whatsoever shall be done, except as permitted by Section 42-207.2. (6);

No stock in trade, except articles produced by members of the family residing on the premises, shall be stored on the premises;

No alteration of the principal residential building shall be made which changes the character thereof as a dwelling;

The home occupation shall not produce offensive noise, vibration, smoke, electrical interference, dust, odors or heat. Any noise, vibration, smoke, electrical interference, dust odors, or heat detectable beyond the property lines or beyond the walls of the dwelling unit, if the unit is part of a multifamily structure, shall constitute a violation;

No mechanical or electrical equipment other than normal domestic or household equipment shall be used;

There shall be no outdoor storage of equipment or materials used in the home occupation;

The receipt or delivery of merchandise, goods or supplies for use in a home occupation shall be limited to the United States mail, similar parcel delivery service, or private vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating of 24,000 pounds or less; and

Not more than one commercial vehicle utilized in the business shall be parked on site.  (Ord. 3414; Ord. 4453)

 



Sec. 42-207.3. Particular Occupations Prohibited.
Animal hospitals, stables or kennels;
Auto repairing and painting;
Barber shops and beauty parlors with more than one ( I ) operator;
Boarding and lodging houses, unless permitted by district regulations;
Dispatching of transfer and moving vans, taxi cab services; and
Palm reading, fortune telling, tattoo or body piercing parlors.
(Ord. 3414)



Secs. 42-208 to 42-209. Reserved.


Sec. 42-210. Supplemental Open Space and Yard Regulations.
In addition to the area requirements set out before, the following open space and yard regulations shall also apply: (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-210.1. Front Yard Regulations.
All property shall have a front yard not less than prescribed by this Article, except for the following instances:

Meets the criteria described in Subsection 42-210.4(a)

If permitted by a variance, special exception, or an approved Planned Unit Development

Where an irregular shaped lot has more area than required for its particular district, lot width may be computed including the most usable portion satisfying the minimum area requirements.

Where a residential building is located in a commercial district, the setback required in the residential district shall apply. (Ord. 4428, §§7-8)


Sec. 42-210.2. Side Yards - Corner Lots.
The required side yard for a corner lot shall be one-half of the required front yard setback for that particular lot or a minimum of ten feet, whichever is larger. This provision shall apply only to the side yard adjoining a street. (Ord. 3414; Ord. 3566, §3; Ord. 4428, §10)

Sec. 42-210.3. Yards Open.
Except as specified in this Section, all yards required by this Article shall be open and unobstructed to the sky. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-210.4. Exceptions to Yard Regulations.
Where buildings exist on adjacent lots (lots that are near, but not necessarily abutting) that front the same street as an empty lot, the required setback for new buildings on the empty lot may be reduced to align with the frontages of the other adjacent existing buildings rather than the provisions of this Article. However, in the usage of this provision, no front or street-side side setback shall be reduced to less than five feet for interior lots and less than ten feet for corner lots. If the required setback is reduced in this manner, the structure will be considered to be conforming to the setback provisions of this article and will not be given the status of a nonconforming structure.

Where compliance with the yard regulations cannot reasonably be accomplished because of irregular shaped lots or hillside lots; the Board of Adjustment may modify such regulations.

Where an irregular shaped lot has more area than required for its particular district, lot width may be computed at the most usable portion of the lot. (Ord. 3414; Ord. 4428, §§11-12)

 



Sec. 42-210.5. Permitted Projections and Structures in Required Yards.
The following projections may be located in a required yard:

Cornices, eaves, gutters, belt courses, sills, and other similar architectural features, shall not extend into a required side yard by more than two feet and shall not extend into a required front or rear yard by more than three feet;

Awnings, arcades, canopies, marquees, and galleries are permitted to encroach the sidewalk to within two feet of the curb, but must clear the sidewalk vertically by at least eight feet.

Open (i.e. no roofs or cover) fire escapes and open stairways not associated with a porch shall be permitted to extend into a required rear or side yard by no more than 50% of the required yard’s depth (open stairways associated with a porch or balcony will be considered part of the porch) and open handicapped ramps are permitted in 100% of all yards.

In R-1 and R-R, bay windows and unenclosed balconies, porches, stoops, terraces, and their eaves shall be permitted to extend into the required front yard or into the required street-side side yard of a corner lot by no more than 50% of the yard’s depth.

In any residential district that is not R-R or R-1, bay windows and unenclosed balconies, porches, stoops, terraces, and their eaves shall be permitted to extend into the required front yard or into the required street-side side yard of a corner lot by no more than 80% of the yard’s depth, but no such projection shall be closer than five feet to the front lot line of an interior lot and closer than ten feet to the street-side side lot line or front lot line of a corner lot. In addition, all components of such a structure or projection shall be contained within the lot.

If porches, steps, platforms, carports, landing places, and other similar projections extend into minimum required yards, they shall not be enclosed or temporarily enclosed nor shall the open sides be blocked by such contraptions as shades.

Any fence, hedge, statuary, arbors, or trellises in the front yard shall comply with the provisions of Section 42-211.1.

If a chimney is set back from any side lot line by at least three feet, chimneys may project thirty inches or less into any yard.

Flag poles.

Signs, as permitted in this Article.

If an open carport is at least ten feet from the rear or front lot line and three feet from all side lot lines, a carport that does not extend above the first floor of the building is permitted to extend up to ten feet into any yard. This provision does not apply to closed carports.  (Ord. 4428, §§13-14)



Sec. 42-210.6. Permitted In Any Yard, Except Front Yards:
A child's playhouse;
Recreational equipment and clotheslines; and
Fences not exceeding seven (7) feet in height and which comply with the provisions of this Article. (Ord. 3414)


Sec. 42-211. Vision Obstruction Restrictions- Purpose.
The following Section is intended to establish regulations governing the placement of natural or man-made obstructions to vision. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-211.1. Obstructions in Required Yards.
On any lot where a front yard is required or corner lot, no building, wall, fence or other structure shall be constructed and no hedge, tree, shrub, or other growth or object of any kind shall be maintained in such location within the yard so as to obstruct the view of pedestrians and motorists, as determined by the City Engineer.
Open fences not exceeding fifty (50) percent screening and four (4) feet in height above yard grade shall be permitted,
Hedges, shrubbery, flowers or other similar vegetation planted to form a continuous line of growth shall not exceed a height of four (4) feet. (Ord. 3414)


Sec. 42-212. Zero Lot Line Construction - Purpose.
The purpose of zero lot line construction is to permit a procedure for development that will result in improved living and working environments; which will promote more economic subdivision layout; which will encourage a variety of types of residential dwellings; which will support ingenuity and originality in total subdivision design; and which can preserve open space to serve the recreational, scenic and public service purposes related thereto, all within the densities established by the zoning district in which the zero lot line construction is permitted. (Ord. 3748, §8)



Sec. 42-212.1 Zero Side Yard.
The required side yard setback in the R-1 and R-2 Districts may be zero (0) on one side of the lot provided:

The lot adjacent to that side is also owned by the applicant or proof of consent is provided from the adjacent lot owner at the time if initial construction and the minimum side yard setback for such adjacent lot is either zero (0) or not less than ten (10) feet;
The adjacent side yard setback is perpetually maintained free and clear of any obstructions other than a three (3) foot eave encroachment, normal landscaping, patios, garden walls or fences unless it is a zero (0) side yard;
The wall located at the zero (0) side yard setback is constructed with easily maintained, solid material without windows;
No portion of the dwelling or architectural features project over any property lines; and
The zero (0) side yard is not adjacent to a public or private street or alley right-of-way.
(Ord. 3748 §8)



Sec. 42-212.2 Zero Rear Yard.
The required rear yard setback in the R-1 and R-2 Districts may be zero (0) provided:

The lot adjacent to the rear yard is also owned by the applicant or proof of consent is provided from the adjacent lot owner at the time of initial construction and the minimum rear yard setback satisfies the rear yard setback requirements of the zoning district, however, in no case shall the minimum rear yard be less than ten (10) feet unless it is zero (0);
The adjacent rear yard setback is perpetually maintained free and clear of any obstructions other than a three (3) foot eave encroachment, permitted accessory uses, such as a swimming pool or garage, as well as normal landscaping, patios, garden walls or fences unless it is a zero (0) rear yard;
The wall located at the zero (0) rear yard setback is constructed with easily maintained, solid materials without windows;
No portion of the dwelling or architectural features project over any property lines; and
The zero (0) rear yard is not adjacent to a public or private street or alley right-of-way.
(Ord. 3748 §8)



Sec. 42-212.3 Location of Zero Yards.
No lot may have both a zero (0) side yard and a zero (0) rear yard. (Ord. 3748, §8)

 



Sec. 42-212.4 Recording Maintenance and Use Easements.
Appropriate maintenance and use easements shall be included on the final plat for all affected properties. Where a final plat is not required, the maintenance and use easement shall be included in the deed or deeds for all affected properties. (Ord. 3748, §8)



Sec. 42-212.5 Placement of Zero Yard Wall.
The zero (0) side or rear yard wall shall be placed precisely on the lot (property line) with a perpetual maintenance easement on the adjacent lot. (Ord. 3748, §8)



Sec. 42-212.6 Application and Review.
Before construction of a zero lot line dwelling commences, an application, accompanied by a precise site plan, shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved or conditionally approved by the Commission prior to the issuance of building permits for the dwelling. Said plan shall delineate all structures proposed for initial construction. The Commission, after review, may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the proposed plan. In its review, the Commission shall consider placement of all structures, building material, finishing of the wall constructed along the side or rear lot line, and any impacts on adjacent property owners. (Ord. 3748, §8)



Sec. 42-213. Exterior Lighting Standards - Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to regulate the spillover of light and glare on operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians, and land uses in the proximity of the light source. Safety considerations form the basis of these regulations pertaining to motor vehicle use. In other cases, both the nuisance and hazard aspects will be regulated. This section is not intended to apply to public street lighting, signs, or seasonal displays. (Ord. 3748, §9)



Sec. 42-213.1 Standards.
The following standards are required of all exterior lighting, subject only to the exemptions permitted in Section 42-213.2.

The light source or luminary for all exterior lighting shall have a cutoff so that the bare light bulb, lamp or light source is completely shielded from the direct view of an observer at ground level at the property line adjacent to a public right-of-way or property zoned residential or, if a buffer yard is required, at the interior line of the buffer yard.
No flickering or flashing lights shall be permitted.
Light sources or luminaries shall not be located within buffer yard areas except on pedestrian walkways. (Ord. 3748, §9)


Sec. 42-213.2 Exemptions.
Outdoor Recreational Uses. Baseball diamonds, playing fields, and tennis courts shall be exempt from the exterior lighting standards because of their unique requirements for nighttime visibility and hours of operation. These outdoor recreational uses must meet all other requirements of this section and this Article.
Private Outdoor Lights. Private outdoor lights installed by a public utility on private property for security purposes are exempt from the exterior lighting standards provided the installation is approved by all property owners of residential property from which the light source can be viewed.
In Manufacturing Zoning Districts. Due to unique lighting requirements for some industrial or warehousing activities, exterior lighting shall be exempt from exterior lighting standards, except for parking lot lighting.
Emergency Warning Lights. Safety signal and warning device lighting shall be exempt from the exterior lighting standards of this Section. (Ord. 3748, §9)


Sec. 42-214. Noncommercial, Not-For-Profit Neighborhood Facilities - Purpose.
The purpose of these requirements is to provide opportunities for necessary and desirable noncommercial, not-for-profit neighborhood facilities while minimizing possible adverse impacts of such facilities on the surrounding neighborhood. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-214.1. Standards.
The proposed structure(s) shall not be located within any front or rear yards required by this Article or within ten (10) feet of the property line adjacent to the side yards of the lot on which the structures are located. Swimming pool pump and filter operations shall adhere to these standards, but in no event will they be located closer than twenty (20) feet to a side or rear property line.
Any outdoor swimming pool will be enclosed by a fence or wall with a minimum height of six (6) feet with gates that shall be self-closing and latching.


Sec. 42-215 to 42-216. Reserved.


Sec. 42-217. Common Open Space and Improvement Regulations.


Sec. 42-217.1. General Provisions.
The regulations set forth in this Section shall apply in all developments where the following features are held in common ownership by persons owning property within a development.

All lands in common open space, not a part of individual lots, designed for the mutual benefit of a group of persons owning property within a development, where such lands are not dedicated to or conveyed for public use; whether or not such lands are required by the provisions of this Article; and
All private streets, driveways, parking facilities, and buildings or portions thereof, as may be provided for common use, benefit and/or enjoyment of the development occupants; whether or not such improvements are required by the provisions of this Article. (Ord. 3414)


Sec. 42-217.2. Condominium Property Act.
Except where it can be demonstrated that the provisions of this Section can be satisfied by other means, all lands and improvements, as set forth in this Section. shall be established and maintained in accordance with the Condominium Property Act, Chapter 448, Missouri State Statutes. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-217.3. Subdivision Approval Required.
All subdivision of property containing common open space and common improvements shall be considered a subdivision and subject to review in accordance with the provisions of Article II, Subdivisions. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-218. Property Owner's Association.
All common open space and improvements shall be protected by legal arrangements that are satisfactory to the City and sufficient to assure their maintenance and preservation for the purposes intended. Covenants or other legal arrangements shall specify ownership of the common open space and common improvements, method of maintenance, responsibility for maintenance, maintenance taxes and insurance; compulsory membership and compulsory assessment provisions; guarantees that any association formed to own and maintain common open space and common improvements will not be dissolved without the consent of the City, and other specifications deemed necessary by the City. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-218.1. Covenants, Rules and By-laws.
Any restrictive covenants, rules and by-laws of the ownership unit, as prepared in accordance with Chapter 448, Missouri State Statutes, shall be approved by the City before any final plat is recorded. Such documents, once approved, shall become part of the recorded subdivision plat. The covenants and restrictions shall provide:

For the establishment of the condominium or homeowners association or trust prior to the sale of any property;
For the method of maintenance;
That open space restrictions and maintenance shall be permanent;
That the homeowners are liable for the payment of maintenance fees and capital assessments;
That unpaid homeowners fees and assessments will be a lien on the property of the delinquent homeowners;
That the association or trustee shall be responsible for liability insurance, taxes and perpetual maintenance;
That membership shall be mandatory for each homeowner and any successive buyer;
That each homeowner, at the time of purchase, shall be furnished with a copy of the approved restrictions or conditions;
That any association or trust formed to own and maintain common open space and common improvements will not be dissolved without consent of the City; and
That the City of Rolla shall assume no responsibility for the enforcement of private restrictive covenants.
(Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-218.2. Maintenance of Common Open Space and Improvements.
The City may require that, in order to assure adequate maintenance of common open space and improvements, any restrictive covenants, rules and by-laws created for the unit of ownership specify that the City may serve written notice to the association as to their failure to maintain the common open space and improvements in reasonable order. The notice shall describe how the unit of ownership has failed to maintain the common open space and improvements in reasonable condition and shall require that such deficiencies be remedied within thirty (30) days, setting a date and place of a public hearing. Said hearing shall be held within twenty (20) days of notice.

If said deficiencies are not corrected, the City may enter upon the common open space and improvements to maintain the same for one (l) year in order to preserve the taxable values of the properties within the development and to prevent the common open space and improvements from becoming a public nuisance. Entry upon and maintenance of the common open space and improvements shall not grant the public any rights to use the facilities, unless the owners dedicate the same to the public.

At or before the expiration of one (1) year, the City shall give notice and hold another public hearing to determine if the ownership unit is capable of adequately maintaining the common open space and improvements. The City may, at its discretion, continue to maintain the common open space and improvements for one (1 ) or more additional years if it finds that the ownership unit is not able to adequately maintain the common open space and improvements. The rules and by-laws creating the ownership unit shall provide that the cost of such City maintenance shall be assessed ratably against the individual properties within the development that have a right to use the common open space and improvements. This assessment shall constitute a lien against all properties within the unit ownership. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-218.3. Maintenance Responsibility.
The initial maintenance of the common open space and improvements within the development shall be the responsibility of the developer until the restrictive covenants, rules, and by-laws of the unit of ownership are established and maintenance responsibility is transferred to a duly constituted owner's association. The developer shall retain this maintenance responsibility, regardless of the status of the ownership unit, until fifty (50) percent of the development has been sold to the unit owners or other clients.

The developer maintenance responsibility shall be specifically indicated in a letter of agreement between the developer and the City, submitted at the time of Final Plat Review. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-219 to 42-220. Reserved.


Sec. 42-221. Urban Conservation and Redevelopment Areas.
The City Council may permit a modification of the requirements of this Article in an area where an Urban Conservation or Redevelopment Plan, enacted pursuant to Article VI, Sections l9 and 21 of the Constitution of the State of Missouri, has been adopted to encourage urban conservation and support private sector reinvestment. This action may be necessary to encourage projects that conserve and preserve urban resources and that promote the stabilization and economic development of an area, provided the following conditions are met:

The project complies with an approved Urban Conservation or Redevelopment Plan;
The project complies with all ordinances, except those provisions to be modified;
The project does not interfere with easements, roadways, utilities, and public or private rights-of-way;
The project is not injurious to the use and enjoyment of surrounding property;
The project does not create drainage or erosion problems;
The project makes adequate provision for open space and for its maintenance;
An acceptable site plan has been submitted to the planning and Zoning Commission and City Council specifying what provisions of this Article are to be modified and why; and
The City Council may impose conditions to achieve the intent of City ordinances, the intent of the Urban Conservation or Redevelopment Plan or to achieve other public purposes. The applicant must comply or provide adequate assurances that all the conditions will be satisfied as set forth by the City Council.
(Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-222. Family Child Care Homes.
A permit application for a family child care home shall be completed and filed with the Community Development Department on forms prescribed for that purpose and accompanied by a processing fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). Family child care homes shall satisfy, in addition to satisfying all Missouri Department of Health and Phelps/Maries County Health Department standards, the following requirements as a condition for receiving a permit from the City of Rolla:

The residence for which a permit is sought shall be the permanent residence of the child day care provider (operator);
No alteration of the principal residential building shall be made that changes the character or appearance of the building so as to be inconsistent with the appearance of dwellings in the immediate area around the family child care home.
No person, other than someone related by blood, marriage, adoption or custodial relationship to the operator and who also resides in the dwelling unit, shall be employed in the family child care home;
Outdoor play areas shall be located in the rear yard of a family child care home; and
One (1) exterior, flush-mounted attached sign is permitted not to exceed one (1) square foot in area.
(Ord. 3517, §1)



Sec. 42-223. Reserved.


Sec. 42-224. Residential Group Homes - Purpose.
Residential group homes for eight (8) or fewer unrelated mentally or physically handicapped persons that may include up to two (2) house parents or guardians when:

The structure, building, landscaping, fencing, etc. for the residential group home suits the character of the immediate neighborhood.
There are no other residential group homes within fifteen hundred (1,500) feet.
No sign identifying the residential group home exceeds four (4) square feet in area.
Signs may not be illuminated and must be attached to the residential group home.
There are no more than two (2) residents per bedroom. (Ord. 3414)


Sec. 42-225 to 42-226. Reserved.


Sec. 42-227. Screening and Fencing - Purpose.
To encourage the most appropriate land use and protect the privacy and property values of adjacent permitted uses, regulations are prescribed herein for the location and type of various screening devices to be used when required by this Division.  (Ord. 3414; Ord. 3886, §1; Ord. 4322, §1)



Sec. 42-227.1. Location and Height.
The following shall be required in addition to any required landscaping or buffer-yard.

Off-street parking areas.

Where an open off-street parking area for a multifamily residential use contains five (5) or more off street parking spaces and is adjacent to an R-1 or R-2 District, screening of not less than four (4) feet in height and meeting the requirements of Section 42211, Vision Obstruction Restrictions, shall be erected separating the off street parking area from the adjacent residential district. No screening is required for parking spaces fronting a public rightofway, except as required under Section 42230.5. (2).

Where an open off street parking area for a nonresidential use is in or adjacent to any residential district, screening of not less than four (4) feet in height and meeting the requirements of Section 42211, Vision Obstruction Restrictions, shall be erected separating the parking area from the adjacent residential district. No screening is required for parking spaces fronting a public rightofway, except as required under Section 42230.5 (2) or if a buffer-yard is required under Section 42-230.6.

Consolidated refuse storage areas, for all uses other than single family and two family dwellings, visible from the adjacent property lines shall be visually screened by a solid fence or wall, not less than the height of the refuse storage containers, on all sides except the side used for refuse pickup service.

Maximum fence height in areas zoned for residential use or in the C-O (Office District) and C-1 (Neighborhood Business District) shall be limited to seven (7) feet, except as provided in Section 42-211.1.

Maximum fence height in areas zoned C-2 (General Retail District) and CC (Center City District) shall be limited to eight (8) feet, except as provided in Section 42-211.1.

In areas zoned C-3 (Highway Commercial District), M-1 (Light Manufacturing District), or M-2 (Heavy Manufacturing District), fence height shall be limited to fourteen (14) feet in height, except as provided in Section 42-211.1, when such fencing is immediately adjacent to property zoned for residential use or where the fence height and location would adversely affect sight distance at intersections.  Commercial and/or Industrial buildings must be at least fifty thousand square feet (50,000 sq. ft.) in area to qualify for the fourteen (14) foot fence.

Any fence over ten (10) feet in height and over fifty (50%) screening must submit engineered plans.

Minimum lot size shall be at least two acres.
(Ord. 3414; Ord. 3886, §1; Ord. 4322, §1)

Sec. 42-227.2. Screening and Fencing Standards.
Property owners may elect to use permanent material such as wood, chain link, stone, brick, decorative wrought iron, concrete block or other materials that are similar in durability to satisfy screening and fencing requirements.
A landscaped earthen berm having side slopes with at least two (2) feet of horizontal distance for each foot of height may be used to satisfy screening requirements.
An evergreen hedge may be used if the shrubs or trees measure at least two-thirds (2/3) of the minimum required height when planted and form a continuous, solid, visual screen.
Property owners may not use the following materials for fencing:
Cast-off, secondhand, or other items not originally intended to be used for constructing or maintaining a fence;
Plywood less than five-eight (5/8) inches thick and/or plywood not of a grade approved for exterior use, particle board, paper, visqueen plastic, plastic tarp, or sheet metal;
Electrified fencing, barbed wire, razor wire, and other similar fencing materials capable of inflicting significant physical injury shall be prohibited, unless used in an RR (Rural Residential District), commercial or manufacturing zoning district if approved for use by the Codes Administrator.
All wooden fencing shall be installed finished-side facing out to any adjoining lot or street.
No provision of this Article shall be construed as granting a right for a property owner to erect a fence or wall on a public easement for any purpose. (Ord. 3414; Ord. 3886, §1)


Sec. 42-227.3. Maintenance.
Property owners shall be responsible for maintaining the required screening materials in a neat and orderly manner at all times. Plant materials which die shall be replaced with healthy plant materials of similar variety and meeting the size requirements of this Section. (Ord. 3414; Ord. 3886, §1)



Sec. 42-227.4. Additional Screening and Fencing.
The City may require screening and fencing of outside storage and display areas in nonresidential districts in addition to or in lieu of the requirements of this Article. The screening or fencing shall be of adequate height to effectively mask the specified area, but in no instance shall the screening or fencing be above seven (7) feet in height. (Ord. 3414; Ord. 3886, §1)

Sec. 42-227.5. Buffer Areas.
Whenever a buffer-yard is required per this Article, the screening required by this section shall be construed to be an additional requirement. (Ord. 3886, §1)



Sec. 42-228 to 42-229. Reserved.


Sec. 42-230. Landscaping and Buffer-Yards - Purpose.
These regulations provide standards and criteria for landscaping in all new construction projects which are intended to enhance the value of property, provide buffers between dissimilar uses, improve the physical appearance of the City and maintain an ecological balance. Landscaping and buffer-yards are intended to lessen the adverse impacts of more intense land uses when they are adjacent to less intense uses. Rural residential, single-family and two-family development, and uses in the C-O Office District are exempt from these regulations because such uses rarely create adverse impacts. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-230.1. Screening and Fencing.
All screening or fencing under this Section shall be in addition to any buffer-yard or area required in Section 42-23 l . (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-230.2. Enforcement.
In the event of a nonconformity with the standards and criteria of this Section, property owners, including any known tenants or agents, shall be notified citing the violation and describing what actions are required to comply with this Section. The owner, tenant, or agent shall have thirty (30) days from the notice date to restore the required landscaping. Failure to comply with the notice shall be considered a violation of this Article. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-230.3. Maintenance.
The property owner shall at all times remain responsible for maintaining all required landscaping in a neat and orderly manner. Plant materials shall be maintained in a healthy and growing condition that is appropriate for the season of the year. Dead plant materials shall be replaced with a similar variety plant material meeting the size requirement of this Section. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-230.4. General Standards for Trees.
Trees referred to in this Section shall be of a species common to or adapted to this area of Missouri as documented by the Missouri Department of Conservation. Caliper measurements shall be taken six (6) inches above grade. Trees shall have the following characteristics:

Canopy trees shall be deciduous trees that have a minimum height of thirty (30) feet at maturity. All canopy trees shall have a minimum caliper diameter of one and one-half ( l l/2) inches at the time of planting.
Under-story trees shall be deciduous trees that have a maximum height of less than thirty (30) feet at maturity. All under-story trees shall have a minimum caliper diameter of one (l ) inch at time of planting.
Ornamental trees shall be flowering deciduous trees. All ornamental trees shall have a minimum caliper width of one (l ) inch at time of planting.
Evergreen or conifer trees shall have a minimum height of twenty (20) feet at maturity. All evergreen trees shall be at least six (6) feet high at time of planting.
Smaller trees may be substituted where the applicant establishes that the location of driveways or unique physical characteristics of the property would not allow the plantings as required.
The Community Development Director may waive rules regarding setbacks and buffer- yards to preserve trees of exceptional quality due to size, large canopy cover, trunk diameter, rarity, age or species when written consent has been received from the owners of abutting property. Where such written consent is not filed, waiver may be granted by the Board of Adjustment as a variance according to the standards, notice and other procedures pertaining to variances.

(Ord. 3414)


Sec. 42-230.5. Minimum Requirements for Off-Street Parking Areas.
Interior and perimeter of parking lots shall be landscaped in accordance with the following criteria. Lots of one (1) acre or less shall be exempted from this regulation as are parking areas which are located under, on, or within buildings.

Development sites containing parking areas totaling thirty (30) or more parking spaces or the gross area is twelve-thousand (12,000) or more square feet, shall provide a minimum of five (5) percent of the parking area for landscaping. Additional requirements include:
All landscape areas shall be protected from vehicular encroachment or overhang through appropriate wheel stops or curbs;
There shall be a minimum of two (2) under-story trees or one (1) canopy tree planted for each thirty (30) parking spaces or twelve-thousand (12,000) square feet of parking area, or fraction thereof; and
Interior parking areas shall contain planting islands located so as to best relieve the expense of paving. Interior planting areas shall be a minimum of one-hundred (100) square feet for each under-story tree and two-hundred (200) square feet for each canopy tree dimensioned in such a way as to provide a suitable area for planting.
Perimeter landscaping shall be provided where a parking lot is within twenty (20) feet of a public right-of-way line and there is not an intervening building. Whenever a parking lot abuts a public right-of-way, a perimeter landscape area of at least five (5) feet in depth shall be maintained on private property and may include any required setback area. All necessary access ways shall be permitted through all such landscaping areas.
(Ord. 3414; Ord. 3493, §8)



Sec. 42-230.6 Buffer-Yard Standards.
Buffer-yards shall be required as shown on the Table of Buffer-yard Requirements. A buffer-yard shall be provided for a proposed commercial or industrial development when it will be located in a zoning district listed in the left-most column of the table and the development is adjacent to a zoning district listed across the top of the table. Commercial or industrial developments adjacent to a PUD district shall provide a buffer-yard based on the corresponding zoning district of the existing or proposed uses permitted in the PUD district as determined by the Community Development Director. Buffer-yards are not required if there is an intervening public street between the districts with a right-of-way width of fifty (50) feet or more or if a railroad right-of-way separates the two districts.

All or a portion of a buffer-yard may be used to satisfy a required setback, but in no instance shall parking spaces or outside storage/display be permitted in a buffer-yard.


Table of Buffer-Yard Requirements
Adjacent Zoning District
Development Zoning District	R-R	R-1	R-2	R-3	GI	C-O	C-1	C-2	C-3	M-1	PM-2	PUD
C-1	B	B	A	A	A	A	*	*	*	*	*	A
C-2	D	D	C	C	C	C	*	*	*	*	*	C	
C-3	E	E	C	C	C	C	*	*	*	*	*	C	
M-1	F	F	E	E	D	D	C	C	C	*	*	C
M-2	G	G	F	F	E	E	D	D	D	C	*	C	
* No buffer-yard required



Sec. 42-230.7. Buffer-Yard Definitions.
(a) Buffer-yards are defined in terms of the number of plant units required for each one-hundred (100) linear feet. The number of plant materials required shall be rounded up when a fraction is calculated. Property owners may increase the width and planting density of the buffer-yard.


Required plantings per 100 linear feet
Canopy tree(s)	Under-story trees	Evergreen trees	Shrubs
Buffer yard A	1	1	2	10
Buffer yard B	1	2	2	12
Buffer yard C	3	2	2	16
Buffer yard D	3	3	4	20
Buffer yard E	4	3	4	24
Buffer yard F	4	4	5	28
Buffer yard G	5	4	5	34
(b) Buffer-yards A and B shall have a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet.
Buffer-yards C and D shall have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet.
Buffer-yards E and F shall have a minimum width of thirty (30) feet.
Buffer-yard G shall have a minimum width of thirty-five (35) feet.
(c) The minimum buffer-yard width may be reduced by fifty (50) percent if the property owner elects to install a six (6) foot solid wood fence, a six (6) foot solid masonry/brick wall or a six (6) foot solid evergreen hedge. (Ord. 3414)


Sec. 42-230.8. Sight Distance and Utility Easements.
Strict compliance with these landscaping requirements shall not be required if it would cause visibility obstructions, particularly at intersections. The requirements set forth herein may be modified by the Community Development Director to the extent necessary to mitigate unnecessary economic hardship.
Buffer-yard and parking lot perimeter landscaping shall be provided in such a requirements set forth herein may be modified to the extent necessary to manner as to minimize their impact on utility construction and maintenance requirements. Plantings on utility easements shall be limited to ornamental or under-story trees, shrubs and hedges. In this instance, each required canopy tree shall be replaced with two (2) ornamental or under-story trees to reduce conflicts with overhead utilities. Plantings in or adjacent to a utility easement shall be coordinated with the effected utility company.
(Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-231 Boundary Description of the Rolla Arts & Entertainment Overlay District.
Beginning at the center of the Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad tracks and the south right-of-way line of Seventh Street; thence in an easterly direction, to the southeast intersection of Seventh Street and Olive Street; thence in a northerly direction, to a point eighty feet north of the northeast intersection of Seventh Street and Olive Street; thence in an easterly direction, a distance of two hundred and twenty-eight feet to the west right-of-way line of Cedar Street; thence in a northerly direction, along the west right-of-way line of Cedar Street to the southwest intersection of Tenth Street and Cedar Street; thence in an easterly direction, along the south right-of-way line of Tenth Street to a point three hundred and five feet east of the intersection of Tenth Street and Cedar Street; thence in a southerly direction, one hundred and ninety-five feet; thence west two hundred and forty-four feet to the east right-of-way line of Cedar Street; thence in a southerly direction, to the southeast intersection of Cedar Street and Seventh Street; thence in an easterly direction, along the south right-of-way line of Seventh Street, to the southwest intersection of Seventh Street and Maple Street; thence in a southerly direction, along the west right-of-way line of Maple Street to the northwest intersection of Fifth Street and Maple Street; thence in a westerly direction along the north right-of-way line of Fifth Street, to the center of the Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad tracks; thence in a northeasterly direction, along the center of the Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad tracks, to the southeast intersection of Seventh Street, also being the point of beginning. (Ord. 3946)



Sec. 42-231.1. Purpose of the Rolla Arts & Entertainment Overlay District
The purposes of the overlay district are to encourage the preservation, enhancement, expansion and integration of the arts and associated cultural activities, including arts-related support uses, within the area defined as the RA&ED. Additional purposes are to encourage a scale of development, a mixture of building uses, and other attributes, such as safe and attractive conditions for pedestrian and vehicular movement, all of which are consistent with the goals of the RA&ED Urban Conservation and Redevelopment District Plan. The overlay district is intended to expand business and job opportunities by helping Rolla become a destination point for visitors. Finally, this designation as an overlay district will strengthen the design character and identity of the district as a place devoted to promoting the arts and entertainment. (Ord. 3946)



Sec. 42-231.2. General Provisions.
Development in the RA&ED shall be governed by the overlay district regulations and the underlying zoning regulations. Where there are conflicts between this Division and the underlying zoning, the more restrictive regulations shall govern. The requirements of this Division and the underlying zoning regulations shall apply to all new construction and to any renovation of, addition to, or repair of existing buildings in the RA&ED. (Ord. 3946)



Sec. 42-231.3. Definitions.
Words found in the text of this Division shall be interpreted in accordance with the provisions set forth in this section. Where words are not defined, the standard dictionary definition shall prevail. The following terms have the meanings indicated:

Antique Shop: A place of business offering primarily antiques for sale or trade. An antique, for the purposes of this regulation, shall be an artistic work, piece of furniture, decorative object, or similar items, belonging to the past and at least thirty (30) years old.
Artist: A person regularly engaged in and who derives a substantial portion (50 percent or more) of his/her annual income from art or creative work either written, composed, created, or executed for a one of a kind, limited production working in all forms and mediums exclusive of any piece or performance created or executed for industry oriented distribution (advertising) or related production. The title of “artist" shall include painters, sculptors, authors, actors, screenwriters, play rights, film makers, dancers, potters, weavers, jewelers, exhibitors, printers, costumers, musicians, and photographers.
Arts Center: A structure or group of structures for housing the visual and/or performing arts.
Arts and Entertainment District: A district of public and private uses that is distinguished by physical, historical and artistic resources that play a vital role in the cultural life and economic development of the community by contributing to the public through interpretive, educational, and recreational uses – excluding adult entertainment.
Artist Gallery: An establishment engaged in the sale, loan or display of art, books, paintings, sculptures, or other works. An art gallery does not include libraries or museums.
Artist Live/Work Space: A structure or any portion thereof containing an individual housing unit(s) of at least seven hundred and fifty (750) square feet in habitable area that is used by the occupant(s) for both residential use and artist studio space. A household residing in such a unit must include at least one (1) artist as defined herein. Retail sales of art produced on-site that does not take place more than twenty four (24) hours per week shall be permitted.
Artist Studio: A structure or portion thereof designed to be used as a place of work by an artist(s) or craft person, including persons engaged in the application, teaching, or performance of artistic work.
Artistic Work: The creation, production, rehearsal, or teaching of any visual art or craft, including but not limited to painting, drawing, graphic design, photography, video, film, sculpture, weaving, jewelry, and pottery; or written works of fiction or nonfiction; or of any performing art, whether live or recorded performances, including music, dance, and theatre.
Assembly Hall: A building or portion of a building in which facilities are provided for civic, educational, political, religious, or social purposes. (Ord. 3946)


Sec. 42-231.4. Uses Permitted.
Real property within the RA&ED shall continue to be subject to the use regulations of the underlying zoning district in which it is located, except that certain uses, as outlined in Section 42-199.3, shall be allowed in the RA&ED. Additional uses permitted in the RA&ED include:

Antique stores.
Artist gallery.
Artist live/work space.
Artist studio.
Art glass studio.
Art supply store.
Assembly hall.
Bakery, limited to baking of food predominately sold in the City of Rolla/Phelps County.
Barber or beauty shop, cosmetics store.
Bed & breakfasts.
Book and music stores.
Café/restaurants (includes bars with food, live music and/or dancing; micro breweries; Wine bistro). Drive-through facilities shall not be permitted.
Coffee shops/tea room.
Dance studio.
Dressmaking or tailor shop.
Garden – florist and plant stores.
Gift/card shops, novelty and souvenir shop.
Hand crafted home décor.
Health food stores, exercise studio.
Ice cream/candy shops.
Import stores.
Jewelry stores.
Museum (historical).
Pet store and grooming in a completely enclosed building.
Photography studio and galleries, camera store.
Tobacco, pipe, cigar and accessories store.
Vintage clothing stores. (Ord. 3946)


Sec. 42-231.5. Site Plan Review.
The review and approval of a site plan, as specified under Division 16, Conditional Use Permits, Section 42-234, shall be required for any new building construction or the renovation of or addition to any building where the total cost of renovation or addition shall exceed seventy five (75) percent of the building's current market value. (Ord. 3946)



Sec. 42-231.6. Parking.
Required parking spaces may be shared with other uses to meet all or a portion of the parking requirement for the uses on a lot, provided these spaces are located in the RA&ED or within two blocks of the district. The respective cooperating property owners shall execute an agreement that identifies the designated parking spaces and specifies the time of day when they shall be available. This agreement shall be filed with the Community Development Department. (Ord. 3946)



Sec. 42-231.7. Sign Standards.
Only on-premise signs are permitted. Signs may be internally illuminated, but shall not use blinking, flashing, animated, or other illuminating devices which alters light intensity. No beacons or strobe lights shall be permitted.

One (1) detached sign may be used by each premise containing a multi-family use with three (3) or more housing units, an artist's live/work space, or a permitted non-residential use. No detached sign shall exceed thirty five (35) square feet in effective area or be located five (5) feet above the ground area upon which the sign is located.

One (1) attached flush mounted wall sign may be used on each building. The sign shall not exceed twenty five (25) square feet in effective sign area. (Ord. 3946)



Sec. 42-231.8. Litter Control.
Waste cans, dumpster units, or other forms of litter control and refuse disposal devised shall be placed on the site in a location where they are least visible from a public right-of-way. Each litter control device shall be enclosed so that no part of the device shall be visible from public right-of-way or from adjoining properties. (Ord. 3946)



Sec. 42-231.9. Other Zoning Regulations.
All property in the area shall continue to be zoned as shown on the Official Zoning Map until such time as the City Council shall vote to modify the Official Zoning Map pertaining to individual lots. (Ord. 3946)


Sec. 42-232.       Family Entertainment and Recreation Complex – Purpose
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Rolla, Missouri to license and regulate Family Entertainment and Recreation Complexes for the purpose of preserving and caring for the safety, health, comfort and general welfare of residents and visitors who may be attracted to and use such a facility, having in mind that many young persons require more care and attention than those of a more mature age.  These rules are fashioned to the end that order may be maintained, property protected and the purpose, specified above, preserved. (Ord. 4090, §1)

Sec. 42-232.1.    Definitions.
For the purposes of interpretation and enforcement, and unless the context requires otherwise, words and terms used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:

Family Entertainment and Recreation Complex (FERC):  A for profit business primarily engaged in the provision of multiple and diversified recreation and entertainment venues designed to support a range of entertainment and recreational needs of varied age groupings. Specific services or activities in a FERC may include a variety of complementary, mixed uses, such as movie theaters or other theatre, billiard or pool rooms, arcade games, laser tag, ball pit, snack bar/restaurant (with or without liquor sales, establishments offering mechanical or electronic amusement devices, bowling alley, ice or roller rink, miniature golf, concerts, dancing, and all other similar places of entertainment or recreation.

Mechanical or Electronic Amusement Devices:  Any machine, which, upon the payment of a charge or upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, disc, etc. may be operated by the public as a game, entertainment, or amusement, whether or not registering a score.  This definition includes electronic video games, marble machines, pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines, electronic bowling machines, electronic driving machines, electronic baseball, football, hockey or basketball machines, any and all air–propelled machines or games, shooting games, billiard/pool tables, snooker table, foosball, and all games, operations or transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may be indicated, whether or not electronically operated.  This definition does not include any devise the possession or use of which is prohibited by law.  The above enumeration devices shall not be deemed to be exclusive.  

        Billiard or Pool Hall: Any premise, business, or establishment that maintains six (6) or more regulation billiard or pool tables available for public use.

        Operator: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association or club who sets up for operation by another or leases a FERC.

        Proprietor: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association or club who as the owner and /or lessee has under his or its control a FERC

(Ord. 4090, §1.1)

Sec. 42-232.2     License Required; Application and Fee.
No person, corporation, partner, association, trust or firm shall engage in the business of a FERC in Rolla without obtaining a FERC business license (and an alcohol sales license if alcohol is sold and/or consumed on site); if alcohol is sold and/or consumed on site it shall be permitted only if sales do not exceed fifty (50) percent or more of the business’s gross income derived from all business activity on premise;
All applications for a FERC license shall be in writing in a manner required by the Finance Director, signed and sworn to by the applicant and shall set forth:
The name, mailing address, email address, and telephone number (including cell phones), of all applicants; 
The physical address of the FERC location;
A description of the number, types, location and age level to be served by each mechanical or electronic amusement devises to be used in the FERC;
Submission of a security and safety plan to the Fire Marshal and Chief of Police for review.
A parking space layout showing the minimum number of spaces and location;  
Proposed hours of operation;
The maximum number of persons permitted to occupy the FERC at any time under any situation, as determined by the Codes Administrator and Fire Marshal; 
A completed liquor license application, if applicable;
Additional information as may be necessary in order for the Finance Director to make a determination required by this sub-section.
Upon receipt of a completed license application for a FERC and after approval for zoning compliance by the Codes Administrator, the Finance Director shall cause an inspection of the premise to be made by the Fire Marshal/Codes Administrator to determine whether the applicant has complied with the ordinances they are charged with enforcing.  The Fire Marshal/Codes Administrator and members of his staff shall have the right to enter upon any premise for which a FERC is sought for the purpose of making such an inspection during normal business hours.  Further inspections of the premises may be made after a license has been issued if deemed necessary by the Finance Director in coordination with the Codes Administrator and Fire Marshal.
No FERC license shall be issued to any person who has pled guilty to or been convicted of any Class A felony.
Applications for renewal shall be received by the Finance Director at least sixty (60) days before expiration and shall be in the form as required for the original license.  If the license is denied, the Finance Director shall notify the holder of the license of the reasons for denial upon which this determination was made in writing not later than thirty (30) days before expiration of the license.       
Each license granted hereunder shall be valid for a term of twelve (12) months from the date of issuance, unless revoked or suspended.  Fees paid for less than a full year shall be prorated on a quarterly basis.  Fees are otherwise non-refundable.     
The initial application for a FERC license shall be accompanied by an application fee of two hundred dollars ($200).  The annual license renewal fee shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100) if the mechanical or electronic amusement devices available in the FERC have not been changed over the previous twelve (12) month term.      
(Ord. 4090, §1.2)

Sec. 42-232.3.    Operation Requirements for a FERC.
The following rules and regulations shall apply to the operation of a FERC in Rolla:

Nothing in this sub-section shall be construed to permit any person to conduct, sponsor, or operate any FERC, which is not allowed under the Rolla Planning and Zoning Code.  A FERC may be located in a C-2 (general retail district) as a conditional use.  A FERC shall not be located within one hundred (100) feet of a school or church.
Nothing in this sub-section shall be construed to permit any person to conduct, sponsor, or operate any FERC, which creates a nuisance.  
No minor under the age of fourteen (14) shall be allowed to operate any mechanical or electronic amusement device in a FERC unless such minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian or during the hours when such person’s school is in session.  Such a restriction notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place near the entrance to the FERC.
No cash rewards shall be offered or given in any contest, tournament, league or individual play or on any mechanical or electronic amusement device; and no such device shall be permitted to operate if said device delivers or may readily be converted to deliver to the player any coins, slugs, or tokens, unless such coins, slugs, or tokens can only be used to purchase prizes from an onsite store.  They cannot be redeemed for cash.  
The licensee of any FERC shall comply with all provisions of federal, state, or local laws and ordinances pertaining to the operation and maintenance of a FERC.
The operator and/or proprietor of a FERC shall comply with all notices, rules, and regulations of the City of Rolla governing the occupation and use of a FERC.
The issued license for a FERC shall be posted in a conspicuous place within the FERC.
The operator or proprietor of a FERC shall not permit at any time a greater number of persons within the FERC than capacity as approved by the Fire Marshal/Codes Administrator and set forth on the FERC license form. 
The operator and/or proprietor of a FERC shall maintain good order at all times in the FERC including onsite-parking areas.  The lack of good order shall include fighting and rowdy behavior, gambling, illegal, or excessive consumption of alcoholic beverages, and any other illegal drug use onsite.   
(Ord. 4090, §1.3)

Sec. 42-232.4.    Revocation or Suspension of a FERC License.
Every FERC license issued under authority of this ordinance is subject to the right, which is hereby expressly reserved, to be revoked or suspended should the operator or proprietor, directly or indirectly, permit the operation of any FERC, including any mechanical or electronic amusement device contrary to the provisions of this ordinance or the laws of the State of Missouri.  Revocation or suspension of a FERC license may also be caused where the applicant for the license has knowingly or negligently made false or misleading statements when applying for this license.  Failure to comply with all other statutes, codes, or ordinances, particularly building and fire codes, shall be a justification for revocation or suspension of a FERC license.  (Ord. 4090, §1.4)

Sec.42-232.5.  Request for Hearing.
Any person aggrieved by the denial of a license to operate a FERC or denial of the renewal of such license, may request a hearing before City Council, at which hearing such person shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard on all facts or issues involved.  The request for a hearing must be made in writing no less than ten (10) days following the denial and sent by certified mail to the City Administrator.  The City Administrator shall, upon receiving a request for a hearing shall schedule a hearing not later than fifteen (15) days from the date of actual receipt of the request and shall notify all parties of the time and place thereof.  The City Council shall have ten (10) days following the date of the hearing to render a decision in writing.  A request for a hearing shall stay any license revocation or suspension until such time as a hearing has been held and a decision rendered therein; provided, however, that if the Chief of Police or the Fire Marshal has found that a public safety imperatively requires emergency action, the license shall continue to be summarily suspended pending a hearing and decision in accordance with this section. (Ord. 4090, §1.5)

Sec.42-232.6.  Penalties for Offenses.
Any person who shall act as a FERC operator without a valid license or who shall violate any of the provisions of this code or who shall continue to act subsequent to the revocation of his license shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not more than three hundred ($300) dollars per day, for each day of noncompliance. (Ord. 4090, §1.6)

Sec. 42-232.7. Exemptions.
This ordinance shall not apply to, and no license required for, the operation of a FERC of the kind herein specified:

Wherein the proceeds there from are to be devoted exclusively to charitable, benevolent or religious purposes.
Where the operation thereof is upon the property and premises of a private membership club and for the benefit of its members or their guests; provided, that said exemption will terminate if said private membership club operates any device for the use or enjoyment of the general public.  
Any business that could be classified as a FERC that has been legally conducting business at the same location for a minimum of five (5) years are exempted from FERC licensing requirements.  The exemption will be terminated if the business relocates to another location. (Ord. 4090, §1.7)
(Return to Contents)
Sec. 42-233 to 42-233. Reserved


ARTICLE III ZONING
DIVISION 16. CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS

Sec. 42-234. Purpose of Conditional Use Permits
The conditional use permit procedure is designed to provide the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council with an opportunity for discretionary review of requests to establish uses or construct structures which may not be specifically allowed in a given zoning district, but may be deemed desirable or in the public interest to locate in that zoning district. The purpose of the review is to determine whether the proposed location of the use or structure is consistent with the overall intent of the zoning district regulations and to permit the imposition of conditions designed to minimize or mitigate potential adverse effects. Conditional Use Permits do not constitute a zoning change and only allow for a designated use, on a specific lot or tract, within the established zoning district. Conditional Use Permits shall not be required within the Planned Unit Development "PUD" District. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-234.1. Procedures.
In order for an applicant, who may be the property owner(s) or any person having a contractual interest in the subject property, to initiate the review process for the approval of a Conditional Use Permit, the applicant or an agent of the applicant must submit a Conditional Use Permit application, a site plan, and the Conditional Use Permit application fee found in the Fee Schedule in Section 42.143.1 of the Rolla Planning and Zoning Code. A public hearing shall be held for such proposals and the Community Development Department shall notify the public of the hearing and proposal according to the prescribed procedures and standards described in Section 42-143 of the Rolla Planning and Zoning Code. The application and site plan shall contain the information described below.

The Conditional Use Permit application shall contain the following information:

The names, addresses, signatures, and contact information for both the applicant and, if applicable, the agent of the applicant.

The legal description of the property;

The zoning classification and present use of the property;

A description of the proposed conditional use;

A Site Plan in accordance with this Section;

A statement describing how the proposed conditional use will comply with the applicable standards of this Section; and

A statement describing how the proposed conditional use is to be designed, arranged, and operated will be submitted in order to ensure that future development, which is consistent with District regulations, will not be prevented or made unlikely and that the value, use, and reasonable enjoyment of such property will not be impaired or adversely affected.

Site Plan content.

Approximate location of proposed and existing designated uses or buildings and other structures, including adjoining property, as well as parking and open areas shall be indicated for the proposed conditional use and adjacent property;

Existing and proposed contours at vertical intervals of not more than five (5) feet referred to sea level datum. Flood plain areas shall be delineated;

Approximate location of all isolated trees having a trunk diameter of six (6) inches or more, all tree masses and proposed landscaping/screening plan;

An elevation view of the site showing preliminary building form ( new construction only);

Proposed ingress and egress to the site, including right-of-way and pavement width for proposed and existing streets;

A plan for the provision of sanitation and drainage facilities;

The location, lighting and type of signs and the relationship of signs to traffic control;

The location and number of required off-street parking areas; and

The location of existing utilities.

(Ord. 3414; Ord. 4401, §§15-16)



Sec. 42-234.2. Burden of Proof/Standards.
In presenting any application for a Conditional Use Permit, the burden of proof shall rest with the applicant to clearly establish that the proposed conditional use shall meet the following standards:

The proposed conditional use complies with all applicable provisions of the applicable District regulations.

The applicant has demonstrated through the provision of a traffic impact study or other acceptable method that the proposed conditional use at the specified location will not adversely affect the safety of the motoring public and pedestrians using the facility and surrounding area from traffic congestion or other hazards.

The location and size of the conditional use, the nature and intensity of operation involved in or conducted in connection with it, and the location of the site with respect to streets giving access to it are such that the conditional use will not dominate the immediate neighborhood so as to prevent development and use of neighboring property in accordance with the applicable zoning District regulations or the policies of the Rolla Comprehensive Plan. In determining whether the conditional use will so dominate the immediate neighborhood, consideration shall be given to:

The location, nature and height of buildings, structures, walls, and fences on the site,

The nature and extent of proposed landscaping and screening on the site,

The noise characteristics of the use compared to the typical use in the District and any reduction solutions;

The potential glare of vehicles and stationary lights on site and any measures employed to mitigate their impact;

Sign location, type, size, and lighting, and

The impact on or potential interference with any easements, roadways, driveways, rail lines, utilities and storm water management systems. Off-street parking and loading areas will be provided in accordance with the standards set forth in this Article.

Adequate utility, drainage, and other such necessary facilities have been or will be provided.

The proposed uses where such developments and uses are deemed consistent with good planning practice; can be operated in a manner that is not detrimental to the permitted developments and uses in the district; can be developed and operated in a manner that is visually compatible with the permitted uses in the surrounding area; and are deemed essential, convenient, or desirable to preserve and promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the City of Rolla. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-234.3. Public Hearing.
The Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with the provisions of this Article shall hold a public hearing on the application for a Conditional Use Permit.
Subsequent to the public hearing, the Community Development Director shall certify that the application is complete and shall prepare a report to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Upon receipt of said report and after the holding of a Public Hearing, the Commission shall recommend to the City Council approval or denial of the Permit. (Ord. 3414)


Sec. 42-234.4. Approval or Denial of a Permit by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
In recommending approval of conditional uses, the planning and Zoning Commission shall impose such conditions as it determines necessary. Said conditions shall include but not be limited to the following:
Permitted uses, including maximum floor area;
Performance standards;
Height limitations,
Minimum yard requirements;
Off-street parking and loading requirements;
Sign regulations;
Minimum requirements for Site Plans; and
Time limitations for commencement of construction.
Upon denial by the Planning and Zoning Commission of an application for a Conditional Use Permit, the Community Development Director shall notify the applicant of such recommendation. If no appeal is filed, the application shall be deemed denied. No subsequent application for a Conditional Use Permit with reference to the same proposed use shall be filed by any applicant until the expiration of twelve (12) months after the denial. (Ord. 3414)


Sec. 42-234.5. Appeal of Denial Recommendation.
Upon the recommendation of denial by the Planning and Zoning Commission of an application, the applicant may file an appeal with the City Council requesting a determination by that body. A Notice of Appeal shall be filed within ten (10) days after the Commission's hearing is concluded. An appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed in duplicate with the City Clerk. The applicant shall have an additional thirty (30) days to file the actual appeal. The appeal shall specifically state how the application, as initially filed or subsequently modified, meets the criteria set forth in these regulations. (Ord. 3414)

 



Sec. 42-234.6. Protest of the Commission's Decision.
A protest against a proposed Conditional Use Permit may be filed in accordance with the provisions of this Article that address protest petitions for zoning cases. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-234.7. City Council Review.
In any case, subsequent to proper notification as described above, the City Council may affirm, reverse or modify, in whole or in part, any determination of the Planning and Zoning Commission. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-234.8. Permit Effective-When.
The Conditional Use Permit shall become effective upon approval by the City Council. In the event that some additional approval is required by some other governmental authority or agency, the permit request shall not be acted upon until that approval is received. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-234.9. Final Site Plans.
Subsequent to the effective date of the Conditional Use Permit, a Final Site Plan shall be submitted for review by the Community Development Director to determine compliance with the specified conditions of the permit. The plan shall contain the minimum requirements established in the conditions governing the permit. No building permits or authorization for improvement or development for any use requested under provisions of this permit shall be issued prior to the effective date of the Final Site Plan. The Final Site Plan shall be retained on file in the office of the Community Development Director. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-234.10. Procedure to Amend a Conditional Use Permit or Site Plan.
In order to amend an existing Conditional Use Permit or to amend the Site Plan approved for a Conditional Use Permit, the following procedures shall be executed:

To amend a Conditional Use Permit

The property owner or his/her/their agent shall submit a Conditional Use Permit Amendment application to request amendments to such a permit's conditions. The Community Development Director shall evaluate the request for consistency in purpose and content with the nature of the proposal as originally advertised for public hearing. A report shall be formulated that outlines the findings of such an analysis.

The Community Development Director shall then forward the request and his/her report to the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Commission shall review the proposed amendments and file a report with the City Council in which the Commission shall recommend to grant, deny, or modify the requested condition amendments. If the Commission determines that the requested amendments are not consistent in purpose and content with the nature of the proposal as originally advertised for public hearing, the Commission may require that a new public hearing on the matter be held. If a new public hearing is ordered for the amendment, the amendment becomes a major amendment and the applicant must pay the major amendment fee listed in Section 42.143.1 of the Rolla Planning and Zoning Code. A public hearing shall be held for such proposals and the Community Development Department shall notify the public of the hearing and proposal according to the prescribed procedures and standards described in Section 42-143 of the Rolla Planning and Zoning Code.

To amend the Site Plan:

The property owner or his/her/their agent shall submit a Conditional Use Permit Amendment application and an amended Site Plan in order for such an amended Site Plan to be considered for approval. The Community Development Director shall evaluate the request for consistency in purpose and content with the nature of the proposal as originally approved by the City Council.

If the Community Development Director determines that the proposed amendment to the Site Plan is not in conflict with the Final Site Plan and meets all conditions of the Conditional Use Permit, the Community Development Director may approve said amended Plan. The approved Site Plan shall be retained on file in the office of the Community Development Director.

If the Community Development Director determines that the amended Site Plan is not consistent in purpose and content with the Final Site Plan, the Community Development Director shall report this conclusion to the applicant and the Planning and Zoning Commission. In which case, the entire review process for the submittal of Conditional Use Permits shall be conducted for the amendment's approval. If the entire Conditional Use Permit approval process is required for the amendment, the amendment to the site plan becomes a major amendment and the applicant must pay the major amendment fee listed in Section 42.143.1 of the Rolla Planning and Zoning Code. A public hearing shall be held for such proposals and the Community Development Department shall notify the public of the hearing and proposal according to the prescribed procedures and standards described in Section 42-143 of the Rolla Planning and Zoning Code.
(Ord. 3414; Ord. 4401, §§17-18)

Sec. 42-234.11. Time Limit of Conditional Use Permits.
Conditional Use Permits shall be valid for an unlimited period unless a lesser period shall be provided in a particular permit. Upon the expiration of the time limit specified in a particular permit, the property owner may request that the Conditional Use Permit be reviewed by the City Council, which may extend it for an unlimited period or for a specified additional period of years. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-234.12. Failure to Commence Construction.
Unless otherwise stated in the Conditional Use Permit, substantial work or construction shall commence within one (l) year of the effective date of the permit, unless such time period is extended through appeal to the City Council. If no extension of time is granted the permit shall terminate. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-235. Bed and Breakfasts-Purpose.
The purpose of these requirements is to minimize any possible adverse effects of a bed and breakfast on the surrounding neighborhood while providing opportunities to make better use of existing housing, particularly larger, older houses located on major streets. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-235.1. Approval Standards.
(a) All applicants for a Conditional Use Permit for bed and breakfasts shall comply with the following requirements:
The use shall front on a collector street or higher classification street;
The number of proposed guest rooms in the bed and breakfast shall be stated in the Conditional Use Permit application;
Only short-term lodging shall be permitted, no monthly rentals.
There shall be no individual cooking facilities.
The facilities may be rented for receptions, parties, weddings or similar activities. Potential negative impacts, including, but not limited to, traffic, parking and noise, shall be addressed in the use permit application.
One (1) additional paved parking space per guest room shall be provided in the rear yard.
The operator shall live at the bed and breakfast.
Only resident's guests shall be served meals.
One (1) sign no larger than six (6) square feet shall be permitted. Signs may be illuminated.
A business license shall be obtained annually.
No bed and breakfast shall be located within three-hundred (300) feet of another bed and breakfast as measured along continuous public street rights-of-way from all streets abutting the bed and breakfast property, nor shall a bed and breakfast be located on property that abuts property on which another bed and breakfast is located. (Ord. 3414)


Sec. 42-236 to 42-238. Reserved.
DIVISION 17. OFF-STREET PARKING


Sec. 42-239. Parking Spaces Provided.
In all zoning districts off-street parking facilities shall be provided for the temporary storage or parking of motor vehicles for the use of occupants employees and patrons of buildings or structures constructed after the effective date of this Ordinance. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-239.1. Parking Space Defined and Computed.
A "parking space" shall mean a space of approximately two hundred (200) square feet, exclusive of drives or aisles giving access thereto, accessible to streets or alleys or aisles leading to streets or alleys and to be usable for the storage or parking of motor vehicles. Truck loading and unloading space as may be required by ordinance shall not be construed as supplying required off-street parking space. When a determination of the number of parking spaces required by this Division results in a fractional space, the fraction shall be counted as one (1) parking space. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-239.2. Shared Parking Areas.
The parking spaces required of two (2) or more uses located on the same lot may be combined and used together, however the aggregate number of off-street parking spaces required for all such uses shall be provided. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-239.3. What Various Terms Include.
Floor Area: In the case of offices, merchandising or service types of uses shall mean the gross floor area used or intended to be used for a service to the public as customers, patrons, clients or patients, or as tenants, including areas occupied by fixtures and equipment used for display or sale of merchandise, for show windows, or for offices incidental to the management or maintenance of stores or buildings. Floors or parts of floors used principally for toilet or rest rooms or for utilities, or for fitting rooms, dressing and alterations rooms, halls, storage rooms, file rooms, stairways, elevators shall be excluded.
Hospital Beds: In hospitals, bassinets shall not be counted as beds.
Seating Space: In stadiums, sports arenas, churches and other places of assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or other similar seating facilities, each twenty (20) lineal inches of such seating facilities shall be counted as one seat for the purpose of determining requirements hereunder.
Number of Employees: The number of employees shall be computed on the basis of the greatest number of persons to be employed at any one period during the day or night. (Ord. 3414)


Sec. 42-239.4. Cooperative Parking Facilities.
A Cooperative Parking Plan may be approved by the City to allow more flexibility in the provision of required parking facilities. In this instance, not more than fifty (50) percent of the off-street parking spaces required for a use or structure may be located on another site or lot. A Cooperative Parking Plan shall only be approved when the schedules of operation of all uses subject to the Plan are sufficiently staggered such that they are not normally open, used, or operated during the primary operating hours of the other uses. The use of shared parking shall not be a matter of right, it being intended that the City shall have discretion to approve a Cooperative Parking Plan based on the review of plans and other information submitted by the applicant subject to the requirements for off-street parking in this Division. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-239.5. Cooperative Parking Plan Application.
The owners of the entire land area to be included in the Plan shall file an application for a Cooperative Parking Plan with the Community Development Director. The application shall include plans showing the location of the use, buildings, or structures for which shared off- street parking spaces are to be provided, the location and layout of the parking area, and a parking demand schedule. A parking demand schedule shall include:

The hours of operation of each building, structure, or use which is to be party to the Cooperative Parking Plan, and
The projected parking demand for each building, structure, or use during each hour of the day for a typical week. Hourly parking demand may be averaged for week days, but shall be separately stated for Saturday and Sunday. (Ord. 3414)


Sec. 42-239.6. Cooperative Parking Plan Approval/Amendment.
Cooperative Parking Plans may be amended or withdrawn, pursuant to the process for the initial approval, provided that all parties to the Cooperative Parking Plan consent and that the parking regulations of this Division are substantially satisfied. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-239.7. Location of Parking Facilities.
Except for parking facilities that have been approved through cooperative parking plans, parking spaces and driveways shall be fully contained on the same premises as the building or land use it is required to serve. Shared driveways and other types of driveways may be used if each lot using another lot for access has been issued the appropriate access easement(s) that allow them to cross another’s property. (Ord. 4428, §§15-16)


Sec. 42-239.8. Nonconforming Parking and Applicability.
The exceptions to and the applicability of parking regulations and standards is as follows:

Unless otherwise exempt, new buildings and land uses shall conform to all current parking regulations and standards.

A zoning inspection for a business license that results in a change of use (as listed in the permitted/conditional use lists of each district, not as described in building codes), increase of intensity of use, or the establishment of a new use shall only be approved if, in addition to the use regulations being met, the current parking regulations and standards are met. However, lots with buildings that have existed for at least five years (determined by final inspection date or County Assessor information) shall not be required to increase the number of parking spaces that such requests may induce if the lot or parcel is fully built-out with parking (i.e. cannot construct more parking without reducing its building footprint or required landscaping). No zoning inspections for business licenses shall be approved by the Community Development Department, nor shall any sign permits be issued, nor shall the approval of a final building inspection be given until the parking is installed.

Requests for additions and expansions to existing structures and for the construction or placement of new primary and accessory buildings shall not be permitted if the lot on which such buildings exist are not able to accommodate the increased parking requirements that are induced by such requests. If the lot or parcel is not fully built-out with parking, it must come into conformance with parking regulations and standards before building permits for such additions are finalized.

A temporary seasonal use, such as snow cone stands and fireworks stands shall not be required to provide additional parking spaces to the parking spaces that are already located on the parcel on which it would be located, if that lot is fully built-out with parking. (Ord. 4428, §§17-18)



Sec. 42-240. Required Parking Spaces.
Residential and Lodging Uses:
Single-family attached and detached, two family, manufactured homes where permitted: 0.66 parking spaces for each bedroom with a minimum of two parking spaces for two bedroom units and above.   Actual parking spaces will be rounded up over .5 spaces and rounded down under .5 spaces.
Multi-family dwellings: 0.66 spaces for each bedroom  with a minimum of two parking spaces for two bedroom units and above.  Actual parking spaces will be rounded up over .5 spaces and rounded down under .5 spaces.
Boarding. rooming and lodging houses: One (1) for each lodging room.
Dormitories fraternities, single student housing, and sororities: Two (2) for each three (3) occupants based on the capacity of the building plus any additional parking required for public assembly requirements of this Section.
Hotels and motels: One (1) for each sleeping room, plus any spaces required for accessory uses such as restaurants, cocktail lounges, meeting rooms, etc.
(Ord. 4214, §1)
Business and Commercial Uses:
Restaurants: One (1) for each three (3) seats provided for patrons use for restaurants, including night clubs, lunch counters, diners and all other similar dining or drinking establishments with no pick-up or drive thru service. Restaurants with pick-up service or drive-in facilities, including seasonal shaved ice or ice cream stands, shall provide at least one off-street parking space for every one hundred (100) feet of gross floor area, and in no case less than six (6) off- street parking spaces.
Business or professional offices: One (1) for each two hundred (200) square feet of total building floor area used or intended to be used for service to the public or as workspace for employees
Retail or mercantile establishments: One (1) off-street parking space for each one hundred fifty (150) square feet of gross floor area used or intended to be used for service to the public as customers, patrons and clients
Retail establishments over 80,000 square feet: One (1) for each three hundred (300) square feet of total building floor area, excluding on-site warehouse space not used for the display of goods for sale.
Industrial and Warehouse Uses:
Manufacturing uses: Two (2) for each three (3) employees.
Cartage and express facilities: Two (2) for each three (3) employees, plus one (1) for each vehicle kept on the premises.
Terminal facilities: Two (2) for each three (3) employees, plus one (1) for each truck or semi- trailer kept on the premises.
Warehouse facilities: One (1) for each employee, plus one (1) for each vehicle kept on the premises.
Schools, Institutions and Places of Public Assembly:
Places of public assembly: One (l) for each four (4) seats or fifty (50) square feet of building space used or intended to be used for assembly by the public, whichever is greatest.
Indoor Tennis. health clubs racquetball clubs: One (1) for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area.
Private schools: One (1) for each eight students, plus one (1) for each employee.
Hospitals: One (1) for each bed for inpatient care facilities and one (1) for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of total building floor area.
Day care centers and nursery schools: One (l) for each employee and one (l) for each five (5) children.
Nursing homes and similar facilities: One ( 1 ) for each three beds plus one ( 1 ) for each two (2) employees.
(Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-241. Parking Area Surface.
Except for accepted gravel, driving surfaces in the Rural Residential District, every parking and/or driving surface area shall be paved with an all-weather surface. Such requirement shall only apply to areas used for parking or on-site traffic circulation. The exits and entrances shall be approved by the City Engineer. Driving surfaces shall be constructed to meet the requirements of existing or developed soil conditions of the site. These areas shall be constructed with a crushed stone base course and an asphaltic concrete wearing surface. Both courses must be compacted to a density of not less than ninety-five percent of the standard compacting test. In lieu thereof, the parking and/or driving surface area may be constructed of a Portland concrete wearing course. As a minimum, the pavements shall meet the requirements of cul-de-sac as outlined in the current City design standard manual. The developer shall be responsible for determining any site soil conditions and the selection of the pavement used. If weather conditions limit the completion of the parking lot at the time of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the owner may, with the approval of the City Engineer, post a performance bond with the City to guarantee the completion of this work. (Ord. 3414; Ord. 3611, §7; Ord. 3748, §11; Ord. 4428, §§19-20)



Sec. 42-241.1. Parking Area Lights.
Any lights used to illuminate parking areas shall be so arranged and hooded as to confine all direct light rays entirely within the boundary lines of the parking area. (Ord. 3414)



Secs. 42-242 to 42-243. Reserved.
DIVISION 18. SIGNS.


Sec. 42-244. Purpose of Sign Regulations.
The purposes of these sign regulations are: (1) to encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication in Rolla; (2) to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the City's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; (3) to promote pedestrian and traffic safety; (4) to minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on the enjoyment and economic value of nearby public or private property; (5) to preserve the right of free speech and expression; (6) and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these restrictions.  (Ord. 3414; Ord. 4453, §2)



Sec. 42-244.1. Definitions.
Balloon Sign: A lighter-than-air, gas-filled balloon, tethered in a fixed location, which may or may not contain an advertisement message on its surface or attached to the balloon in any manner.
Banner: Any cloth, bunting, plastic, paper, or similar non-rigid material attached to any structure, staff, pole, rope, wire, or framing that is anchored on two or more edges or at all four corners, or by one edge when not on a pole or staff. Banners do not include flags.
Changeable Copy Sign: A sign with the capability of content change by means of manual or remote input, includes the following types:
Manually Activated - Changeable sign whose message copy or content can be changed manually on a display surface.
Electrically Activated - Changeable sign whose message copy or content can be changed by means of remote electrically energized on-off switching combinations of alphabetic or pictographic components arranged on a display surface.
Decorations: Displays (including lighting) that are a non-permanent installation for one-time or yearly events.
Electronic Message Center or Sign (EMC): An electrically activated changeable sign whose variable message and/or graphic presentation capability can be electronically programmed by computer from a remote location. EMCs typically use light emitting diodes (LEDs) as a lighting source. Any reference to EMC also refers to electrically activated changeable copy signs.
Feather Flags (Also known as advertising flags, flag banners, swooper flags, flutter flags, blade flags, sail flags, bow flags, tear drop flags): These advertising tools come in the form of a long, narrow, lightweight canvas or other non-rigid material that is attached to a flexible pole (generally) that can be placed into the ground or attached to a weighted stand that allows them to be portable. The shape of the canvas usually resembles a feather or tear drop or a sail with its long side attached to the pole and perpendicular to the ground. Feather flags are temporary in nature and do not include flags or banners.
Flag: Any sign printed or painted on cloth, plastic, canvas, or other like material with distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols and is attached to a pole or staff and anchored along only one edge or supported or anchored at only two corners.
Flashing Signs: Signs whose illumination is characterized by a repetitive cycle in which the period of illumination is either the same as or less than the period of nonillumination. Generally, a message is continuously repeated, with the sign used as an attention-getting device.
Freestanding Signs: A sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in the ground; and that is independent and detached from any building or other structure. The following are subtypes of freestanding signs:
Ground Sign (Also known as monument sign): A sign permanently affixed to the ground at its base, supported entirely by a base structure, and not mounted on a pole or attached to any part of a building.
Pole Sign: A freestanding sign that is permanently supported in a fixed location by a structure of one or more poles, posts, uprights, or braces from the ground and not supported by a building or a base structure. This definition includes pylon signs.
Temporary Freestanding Sign: A freestanding sign that is not anchored in the ground or supported by a structure that is anchored in the ground or a freestanding sign that is easily removed from the ground by hand, such as h-frame lawn signs. This type of sign does not include balloon signs, inflatable signs, feather banners, sandwich board signs, vehicular signs, animated/electronic signs, mechanical movement signs, or revolving signs.
Frontage, Building: The length of an exterior building wall or structure of a single premises along the public's rights-of-way.
Frontage, Property: The length of the property line(s) of any single premises along a public street. When the word "frontage" is used alone, it refers to property frontage.
Illumination: A source of any artificial or reflected light, either directly from a source of light incorporated in, or indirectly from an artificial source.
External Illumination: Artificial light, located away from the sign, which lights the sign, the source of which may or may not be visible to persons viewing the sign from any street, sidewalk, or adjacent property.
Internal Illumination: A light source that is concealed or contained within the sign and becomes visible in darkness through a translucent surface. Message center signs, digital displays, and signs incorporating neon lighting shall not be considered internal illumination for the purposes of this ordinance.
Illuminated Sign: A sign with electrical equipment installed for illumination, either internally illuminated through its sign face by a light source contained inside the sign or externally illuminated by a light source aimed at its surface.
Inflatable Sign: A sign that is an air-inflated object, which may be of various shapes, made of flexible fabric, resting on the ground or structure and equipped with a portable blower motor that provides a constant flow of air into the device.
Internal Signs: Any on-premises sign located entirely within a building.
Mechanical Movement Sign: A sign having parts that physically move rather than merely appear to move as might be found in a digital display. The physical movement may be activated electronically or by another means, but shall not include wind-activated movement, such as used for banners or flags. Mechanical movement signs do not include digital signs that have changeable, programmable displays.
Off-Premises Sign (Also known as a third-party sign, billboard, or outdoor advertising): An outdoor sign that contains a message or messages that directs attention to a specific business, product, service, event or activity, or other commercial or noncommercial activity, or contains a non-commercial message about something that is not sold, produced, manufactured, furnished, or conducted on the premises upon which the sign is located.
On-Premises Sign: A sign that contains a message or messages and design that relates to an individual business, profession, product, service, event, point of view, or other commercial or non-commercial activity sold, offered, or conducted on the same property where the sign is located.
Permanent Sign: A sign attached or affixed to a building, window, or structure, or to the ground in a manner that enables the sign to resist environmental loads, such as wind, and that precludes ready removal or movement of the sign and its intended use appears to be indefinite.
Portable Sign: Portable signs are signs that are designed to be transported or moved and not permanently attached to the ground, a building, or other structure. The following types of signs are portable signs.
Sandwich Board Sign (Also known as A-frame sign): A type of freestanding, portable, temporary sign consisting of two faces connected and hinged at the top and its message is targeted to pedestrians. Includes a board sign on a stand instead of hinged.
Vehicular Sign: A sign affixed to a vehicle in such a manner that the sign is used primarily as a stationary advertisement for the business on which the vehicle sits or is otherwise not incidental to the vehicle's primary purpose.
Premises: The lot or lots, plots, portions, or parcels of land considered as a unit for a single use or development, whether owned or leased.
Projecting Sign (Also known as a blade sign): A building-mounted, double-sided sign with the two faces generally perpendicular to the building wall. Signs and banners that hang from a canopy, awning, or roof shall be considered projecting signs.
Revolving Sign: A sign which revolves in a circular motion; rather than remaining stationary on its supporting structure.
Roof Sign: A sign mounted on the main roof portion of a building or on the uppermost edge of a parapet wall of a building and which is wholly or partially supported by such building. When permitted, a roof sign will be considered a wall sign for the purpose of calculating maximum sign area.
Sign: Any device, structure, fixture, painting, emblem, or visual that uses words, graphics, colors, illumination, symbols, numbers, or letters for communicating a message. A sign includes the sign faces as well as any sign supporting structure
Sign Area or Face: The area of a sign enclosed by the perimeter upon which sign copy is placed. The computation details are described below:
Where the sign consists of individual letters, designs, or symbols that are attached individually and directly upon a wall without a change in color or appearance of the surface background, the area shall be that of the smallest rectangle which encompasses all of the letters, designs, and symbols.
In the case of panel or cabinet type signs, the sign area shall include the entire area of the sign panel or cabinet upon which the sign copy is displayed or illustrated, but not open space between separate panels or cabinets.
In the case of sign copy enclosed within a painted or illuminated border, or displayed on a background contrasting in color with the color of the building or structure, the sign face shall comprise the area within the contrasting background, or within the painted or illuminated border.
Only one side of a double-sided sign shall be considered when determining the sign area if the faces are equal in size and the interior angle formed by the faces is zero degrees.
Where the faces of a double-sided sign are not equal in size, but the interior angle formed by the faces is zero degrees, the larger sign face shall be used as the basis for calculating sign area.
When the interior angle of a double-sided sign formed by the faces is greater than zero degrees, all sides of such sign shall be considered in calculating the sign area.
The sign area for signs that are (or include) a three-dimensional object is calculated as the sum of two adjacent vertical faces of the smallest cube encompassing the sign or object.
Sign Copy: The letters, figures, characters, representations, pictures or wording on a sign, including any identification, description, symbol, trademark, object, design, logo, illustration, or device comprising the content or message of a sign; or any emblem or painting designed to advertise, communicate, identify, or convey information.
Sign Height: The vertical dimension of a sign. The computation details and relevant regulations are as follows:
Sign height shall be measured as the distance from the highest portion of the sign to the mean finished grade of the street closest to the sign. In the case of a sign located greater than 100 feet from a public street, height shall be measured to the mean grade at the base of the sign.
Clearance shall be measured as the smallest vertical distance between finished grade and the lowest point of the sign, including any framework or other structural elements that project from the wall.
Snipe Sign (Also known as bandit sign): A sign tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued, or otherwise attached to trees, poles, stakes, fences, public benches, streetlights, or other objects, or placed on any public property or in the public's rights-of-way or on any private property without the permission of the property owner.
Streamers: A display made of lightweight, flexible materials, consisting of long, narrow, wavy strips hung individually or in a series, with or without a logo or advertising message printed or painted on them and typically designed to move in the wind.
Temporary Sign: A sign that cannot be defined as a permanent sign. The only types of temporary signs permitted in the City of Rolla are listed under Subsection 42-244.7(b)
Wall Sign (Also known a fascia sign, parallel wall sign, or band sign): A building-mounted sign, which is either attached to or displayed on an exterior wall in a manner parallel with the wall surface. A sign or banner installed on a roof, eave, canopy, or awning in a manner parallel with the structures surface is also considered a wall sign. See projecting signs for signs that hang from such structures.
Zoning District, Nonresidential: C-O, C-1, C-2, C-3, CC, M-1, M-2, GI, and PUDs that contain commercial, office, civic, or industrial uses.
Zoning District, Residential: R-R, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-3b, and PUDs that do not contain commercial, office, civic, or industrial uses.
(Ord. 4068, §1; Ord. 4453, §4)

Sec. 42-244.2. Exempt Signs.
The following signs are exempt from the provisions of this Division, unless otherwise noted, but must conform to all other federal, state, and local codes/rules, including building codes.

Any sign that is posted by a governmental unit on government property and any sign required by local, state, or federal law.
Any sign posted on the property of a public school district or public university if that sign is posted by the school district or university that owns such property. 
Signs that are less than seven feet in height if the sign face is not visible from the public's rights-of-way.
In nonresidential districts, any sign less than seven feet in height and that is more than 100 feet away from any lot line fronting a street.
In nonresidential districts, if the signs are four square feet or less in area and four feet or less in height, one pole sign at each exit and each entrance of any property.
Flags. This provision does not include banners or feather flags. However, flags and supporting structures that lawfully project into the public rights-of-way shall not hang below seven feet in height.
Internal signs, including lettering painted on or attached to a window or door and window signs located inside a building, but excluding flashing signs that do not conform to the regulations of this Division related to electronic message center signs. 
Balloons (does not include balloon signs) that are less than 36 inches in diameter. Balloons that are deflated or faded will be deemed unmaintained and required to be removed.
A sign that is integrated into or on a coin-operated machine, credit-card machine, vending machine, gasoline pump, or telephone booth.
Signs printed on or attached to a public bench if it does not interfere with driver vision or pedestrian movement and does not extend beyond the public bench's structural width and height.
Signs carved into a building or raised in integral relief on a building.
(Ord. 3414; Ord. 3542, §2; Ord. 3566, §5; Ord. 3611, §9; Ord. 4453, §6)



Sec. 42-244.3. Prohibited Signs.
The following signs are prohibited.

Flashing signs.
Signs that employ pyrotechnic or blue casting components and signs that emit smoke, visible vapors, particulate matter, or odor.
Signs that employ any searchlights or strobe lights and reflective signs or signs containing mirrors.
Signs that may be confused with or construed as a traffic control sign, signal, or device, or the light of an emergency vehicle or road equipment by reason of their size, location, movement, coloring, or manner of illumination.
Signs that shield from view any traffic control device, sign, signal or other government sign.
Snipe signs.
Vehicular signs. This regulation does not include operable vehicles primarily and actively used for business purposes and/or personal transportation.
Signs that are unlawful.
 (Ord. 3414; Ord. 4453, §9)



Sec. 42-244.4. General Sign Provisions.
On-Premises Signage. Permanent signage, except as authorized by Section 42-244.8 and signs authorized by federal and state law, shall only be on-premises signage. Temporary signage shall be on-premises signage, except as authorized in Sections 42-244.5 and 42-244.6.
Messaging. Any signage authorized to be displayed by this ordinance may contain a noncommercial message.
Permitting Exceptions. The following operations shall not require the issuance of a sign permit:
Changing the copy on an existing conforming sign that has not been discontinued and that is specifically designed for the use of manually or digitally activated  changeable copy sign, including billboard panels and posters; but not including changes in the structure, size, placement, or location of the sign, and
Maintenance, including repainting, cleaning, or other normal repair of an existing sign not involving structural alterations or changes in size, location, or placement.
Permitting Process. Except for exempt signs, all permanent signs, regardless of the fact that a building permit may be required for its erection/installation, require the submission and approval of an application for a sign permit and a sign site plan. Sign permits are not building permits for signs. Some signs may require building permits, even if they are exempt from this Division. Applications for sign permits or supporting material, such as elevations, shall indicate the type, number, size, shape, and dimensions of all of the existing and proposed signage on the premises. If needed, elevation views or other relevant information may be required. No sign permits shall be issued if the premises requesting the permit contains an illegal sign.
Site Plan Requirements. Sign site plans shall be provided as follows:
The site plan shall be drawn to scale or shall show the dimensions of all relevant objects/elements and show all the distances between all of the relevant objects/elements.
The site plan shall indicate the property lines of the premises and, in cases whereby signs are being placed in the rights-of-way, the site plan shall indicate the type of ROW surface, the location of the curbline, the sidewalk, and any objects within the ROW in front of the property subject to the proposal.
The site plan shall show the proposed location of each sign in relation to property lines, nearby buildings, walkways, streets, driveways and parking areas.
Sign Location and ROW. All signs and other objects regulated by or exempt from this Division, including merchandise, patio furniture, sign structures, flags, decorations, and temporary signs, must be erected/placed and attached totally on or within private property, except that if a tenant space is located in a nonresidential zoning district along the public's rights-of-way and there is less than five feet between the full building frontage of the tenant space and the public's rights-of-way, certain types of signs and other objects may be placed in or project over the public's rights-of-way, but not in or over any roadway. Apart from all other provisions that apply, Subsection 42-244.7(f) and the following provisions listed below describe the applicability and the restrictions of such an allowance:
Only wall signs, flags, streamers, and projecting signs shall be permitted to project over sidewalks. The minimum clearance of such objects shall be seven feet and the object shall not occupy space beyond a vertical plane of two feet from the curb line.
Only patio furniture, merchandise, and sandwich board signs are permitted on sidewalks. The maximum height for such signs/objects shall be five feet.
One flag or temporary freestanding sign may be located in each city-owned flowerpot if the sign is less than two square feet in area, the object does not exceed five feet in height when in the flowerpot, the flowerpot is watered and maintained by the tenant, and those flowerpots are on a public sidewalk and abut the tenant space responsible for locating such a sign in said flowerpot.
See Subsection 42-244.7(f) for all other restrictions pertaining to this allowance.
Permission. The party constructing/installing/placing the sign or object on private property is responsible for obtaining the permission of the property owner before such action is taken.
Setbacks. Unless exempt by Subsection 42-244.4(f), all signs, including temporary signs and exempt signs, shall conform to the side and rear setback requirements of the zoning district they are located in. However, the front of the lot shall be defined as any lot line that fronts a street. Such signs shall have a minimum rear yard setback of ten feet and a minimum side yard setback of five feet.
Residential Protection. Even if a sign is exempt under Section 42-244.2, no sign that makes noise shall be permitted in or within 100 feet of a residential zoning district that is not the public's rights-of-way.
Illumination. All permanent signs may be unilluminated, internally illuminated, or externally illuminated. Externally lit signs shall be illuminated only with steady, stationary, and shielded light sources directed solely onto the sign. The illumination of signs shall not be brighter than is necessary for clear and adequate visibility. Illumination shall not exceed approximately 750 cd/m² or Nits at night. The illumination of signs shall not be of such intensity or brilliance as to impair the vision of a motor vehicle driver with average eyesight or to otherwise interfere with the driver's operation of a motor vehicle.
Roof Signs and Sign Placement. In no instance shall a wall sign or projecting sign project above the eave line or beyond a wall edge, except for roof signs in the C-3 and C-C zoning districts.
Maintenance. All signs, together with their supports, braces, connections, or anchors shall be kept in good repair. Unsafe signs, damaged, or deteriorated signs, or signs in danger of breaking apart or falling shall be removed or repaired by their owner upon written notice by the City of Rolla.
Clearances.
Vision clearance areas: Vision clearance areas or triangles are triangular shaped areas located at the intersection of any combination of rights-of-way, alleys, or driveways. The size of the triangle shall be determined by the City Engineer. The vision or path of pedestrians, bicyclists, or motor-vehicle operators shall not be obstructed with any object regulated by or exempt from this Division. No object shall be located within any vision clearance triangle, the size of which is determined by the city engineer,
Clearances from fire escapes, means of egress or standpipes: Signs, sign structures and awnings are prohibited from being erected in any manner that interferes in any way with the free use of any fire escape, means of egress or standpipe. Attaching signs, sign structures or awnings to a fire escape is prohibited, unless such a sign is required for safety.
Obstruction of windows and ventilation: Signs, sign structures and awnings are prohibited from being installed in any way that obstructs any building openings to such an extent that light, ventilation, or exhaust are reduced to a level below that required by either the Building Code, Plumbing Regulations, Heating and Ventilating Regulations, or Housing and Maintenance Regulations.
Measurements. All lineal distances required by this Division shall be measured from the nearest outside edge of the subject sign, whether a support, structural member, or the sign surface itself, to the nearest outside edge of the corresponding sign, building, right-of-way, property line, easement, or other object/element involved. Other measurement specifications are within the definition section of this Division, Section 42-244.1.
Changeable Copy. Changeable copy, whether digitally or manually activated, is permitted only if it is integrated into a pole, ground, marquee, projecting, or wall sign. In addition, only manually activated changeable copy is permitted on sandwich board signs. See Section 42-244.10 for restrictions on the use of EMCs.
Movement. Mechanical movement and revolving signs are only permitted in certain nonresidential districts.
Rules for interpretation and applicability.
When the word "sign" or "signs" is used in this Division it may also be referring to patio furniture, merchandise, and decorations.
Where this Division is silent, or where the rules of this Division do not provide a basis for concluding that a sign is allowed, said sign is therefore prohibited.
(Ord. 3414; Ord. 3493, §9; Ord. 4068, §3; Ord. 4453, §11)



Sec. 42-244.5. Sign Regulations for Residential Zoning Districts.
Sign standards for properties within residential zoning districts that are vacant or contain single-family houses and duplexes, even if business is being conducted in the building:
Type. Any wall sign or freestanding sign, as defined and limited in Subsection 42-244.1(i). No sign is permitted to have changeable copy. Off-premises temporary signage shall not be posted for more than 14 consecutive days in any given quarter of a year and such signage shall be removed within 14 days of receiving notice from the City of Rolla. 
Number and Sign Area. If the total sign area of all signs does not exceed 32 square feet, there is no limit on the number of signs permitted.
Height. Freestanding signs shall be less than six feet in height and wall signs shall not project higher than the lowest eave line.
Sign standards for residentially-zoned properties that serve as the entrance/exit ways to subdivisions, contain multi-family complexes or condominium complexes, or contain permitted or nonconforming nonresidential uses that are not considered home occupations and are not located in single-family houses or duplexes:
Type. Any wall sign or freestanding sign, as defined and limited in Subsection 42-244.1(i). Off-premise temporary signage shall not be posted for more than 14 consecutive days in any given quarter of a year and such signage shall be removed within 14 days of receiving notice from the City of Rolla. 
Number and Sign Area. One wall sign is permitted on each building and one ground or pole sign is permitted per entrance/exit to a public street or, in the case of a subdivision, per entrance/exit to the subdivision. The maximum sign area of any one permanent sign is 64 square feet. An unlimited amount of temporary freestanding signs, as defined and limited in Subsection 42-244.1(i), is permitted if the total sign area of all temporary freestanding signs does not exceed 32 square feet.
Height. Ground and pole signs shall be limited to a maximum height of 15 feet. Temporary freestanding signs shall be limited to six feet in height.
 (Ord. 3414; Ord. 4453, §14)

Sec. 42-244.6. Sign Regulations for Non-Residential Zoning Districts.
General Provisions:
In addition to the signs listed in Subsections 42-244.6(b) and 42-244.6(c), properties within nonresidential zoning districts are permitted temporary/portable signs, as regulated in Section 42-244.7.
Each building, not individual tenants, are permitted a maximum amount of area for wall signs. The owner(s) of the premises may divide and distribute the allowable sign area in any way she/he/they chooses. It is the responsibility of the person/entity posting the sign to obtain permission from the owner to install/locate a sign of a certain size on the owner's property. 
Sign standards for properties located in C-O and C-1 Districts:
Type. Pole signs, ground signs, projecting signs, and wall signs shall be permitted.
Number. Each premises is permitted an unlimited amount of wall signs and is permitted one projecting sign for each tenant space. In addition, all premises are permitted two permanent freestanding signs (i.e. ground signs and pole signs) if there is a distance of 500 feet or more between the two signs. Corner lots and parcels shall be permitted one permanent freestanding sign per street frontage, up to two signs, if each sign is located along a different street, regardless of distance between the two signs. Otherwise, there must be 500 feet of separation between the signs in order for two signs to be permitted on such premises. 
Sign Area. Maximum wall sign area shall be determined by multiplying the lineal feet of building frontage facing a street by two square feet. Projecting signs shall not exceed 20 square feet in area, regardless of the amount of other signage on the premises. Each Pole or ground sign shall be limited to 100 square feet each.
Height and Clearance. Ground and pole signs shall be limited to a maximum height of 20 feet. Projecting signs shall have a minimum clearance of seven feet.
Sign standards properties located in C-2, C-3, CC, M-1, M-2, or GI Zoning Districts and, unless otherwise restricted by a final development plan, any PUDs with commercial, industrial, or civic uses:
Type. Same as Subsection 42-244.6(b)(1), except that mechanical movement and revolving signs are also permitted. In addition, roof signs are only permitted in C-3 and C-C zoning districts and such signs will be considered wall signs in the calculation of maximum sign area. If a mechanical movement or revolving sign is attached to a building it will be considered a projecting sign and if such signs are not connected to a building, they will be considered a permanent freestanding sign (i.e. ground signs and pole signs).
Number. Same as Subsection 42-244.6(b)(2).
Sign Area. Maximum wall sign area shall be determined by multiplying the lineal feet of building frontage facing a street by four square feet. Projecting signs shall not exceed 20 square feet in area, regardless of the amount of other signage on the premises. Each Pole or ground sign shall be limited to 400 square feet each.
Height and Clearance. Ground and pole signs shall be limited to a maximum height of 40 feet. Roof signs shall not exceed the building height limit of the zoning district in which the sign is located. Projecting signs shall have a clearance of seven feet.
 (Ord. 3414; Ord. 4453, §17)

Sec. 42-244.7. Temporary and Portable Signs.
The following provisions apply to nonresidential zoning districts only. Temporary signs that comply with the requirements of Section 42-244.7 shall not be included in the determination of the type, number, or area of the signs permitted on a property per Subsections 42-244.6(b) and 42-244.6(c). The following restrictions apply to temporary and portable sign placement/installation/construction

Each independently occupied tenant space on a property in a nonresidential district is permitted to locate two temporary signs on such a property, except that when a tenant locates a balloon sign or inflatable sign on the property, the tenant shall not locate any other temporary or portable sign on the property. Off-premise temporary signage shall not be posted for more than 14 consecutive days in any given quarter of a year and such signage shall be removed within 14 days of receiving notice from the City of Rolla. A vacant parcel shall be permitted an unlimited number of temporary freestanding signs only, but the total sign area of such signs shall not exceed 96 square feet.
Tenants may only choose from the following types of temporary and portable signs:
Temporary freestanding signs
Banners, if not considered a wall sign per Subsection 42-244.1(ff)
Balloon signs
Inflatable signs
Feather flags
Sandwich board signs
Streamers
Area restrictions by sign type:
Temporary freestanding signs, banners, and feather flags shall not exceed 32 square feet.
Sandwich board signs shall not exceed 16 square feet
Inflatable signs and balloon signs are limited to 75 square feet (See Subsection 42-244.1(z)(7) for the method of calculating area for three-dimensional objects).
Height restrictions by sign type:
Temporary freestanding signs and sandwich board signs shall be limited to five feet in height.
Feather flags, balloon signs, banners, streamers, and inflatable signs shall be limited to 24 feet in height.
General restrictions:
The party posting the temporary sign is solely responsible for obtaining the permission of the property owner before posting their temporary sign.
Except for movement caused by air compressors for inflatable signs, mechanical motion, illumination, EMC technology, and electronically activated changeable copy is prohibited.
Manual changeable copy is only permitted when integrated into a sandwich board sign.
Inflatable signs, feather flags, and balloon signs shall have a minimum setback requirement from all lot lines that is equal to its height. All other temporary/portable signs, except when certain such signs are permitted within the sidewalk area, must conform to the same setback requirements to which permanent signs must conform.
Inflatable signs are not permitted within 100 feet of a residential zoning district and air compressors (and other noisy motors associated with any sign) must be turned off between the hours of 11 P.M. to 7 A.M.
No temporary or portable sign that is more than seven feet tall shall be permitted within 100 feet of a residential zoning district.
Vehicular signs are prohibited, except that the use of business logos, identification, or advertising on operable vehicles primarily and actively used for business purposes and/or personal transportation is permitted.
Signs located on patio furniture, merchandise, or the structures on or from which such merchandise sits or hangs, respectively, shall be considered temporary signs and count towards the total temporary/portable signage permitted per property.
Sidewalk restrictions. If permitted by Subsection 42-244.4(f), the following restrictions apply:
If signs are permitted on sidewalks, signs shall only be located on the sidewalk space that abuts the tenant space that is permitted to locate such signs on such sidewalks.
No object shall obstruct a continuous through pedestrian zone of at least five feet in width.
Sandwich board signs that are on a public sidewalk shall be located within 12 feet of the primary public entrance of the tenant's establishment.
Sandwich board signs shall be weighted, temporarily secured, or strategically placed to avoid being carried away by high winds.
Sandwich board signs and merchandise shall not be displayed on any sidewalk during hours of non-operation.
No signs shall obstruct pedestrian and wheelchair access from the sidewalk to parking spaces or access ramps designated for people with disabilities or building exits, including fire escapes.
Installation and Maintenance
All signs/objects must be installed such that, in the opinion of Rolla's building official, they do not create a safety hazard.
All signs must be made of durable materials and shall be well maintained. Signs that are frayed, torn, broken, or that are no longer legible will be deemed unmaintained and required to be removed.
Owner or tenant will be given one warning for violating any of the provisions pertaining to temporary/portable signs. After the initial warning, all subsequent violations may result in the issuance of a citation without any further notice in perpetuity.
(Ord. 3414; Ord. 3542, §3; Ord. 3611, §10; Ord. 4453, 20)



Sec. 42-244.8. Off-Premises Sign (Third-party sign, billboard, or outdoor advertising)
Permanent off-premise signage shall comply with all the requirements of this section and shall only be permitted upon property having frontage on either Interstate 44, Highway 63, or Business Loop 44 and zoned C-3, M-1, or M-2. Within areas zoned Planned Unit Development District, or property in any zoning district upon which a conditional use permit has been issued in the above mentioned corridors, such advertising structures shall only be permitted when specifically authorized upon the final development plan or permit approval.  (Ord. 3414)

Area, Height, Location - I-44:
The maximum height of a billboard along Interstate 44 shall not exceed 45 feet. No part of structure shall extend below 15 feet.
The maximum surface area along Interstate 44 shall be 672 square feet with a maximum sign height of 20 feet and a maximum sign width of 48 feet. The sign shall be limited to two signs in each direction with one message per sign. In no case will the total sign surface in any one direction exceed 672 square feet.
Sign spacing along I-44 shall be 500 lineal feet per side of the highway.
Area, Height, Location - Hwy. 63 and Business Loop-44:
The maximum height of a billboard along Highway 63 and Business Loop 44 shall be 30 feet. The maximum surface area of a billboard along Highway 63 and Business Loop 44 shall be 192 square feet surface on each side with a maximum sign height of 12 feet and a maximum sign width of 24 feet. No part of structure shall extend below 15 feet.
Sign spacing along Highway 63 and Business Loop-44 shall be one thousand (1000) lineal feet per side.
Billboards along Business Loop 44 and Highway 63 shall not exceed two sign surfaces, one surface in each direction, with 192 square feet surface on each side and not more than two advertising faces on each side.
No sign shall be located within 1000 feet of a residential zoning district.
The minimum front yard setback for such signs shall be 15 feet from any public right-of-way, and/or private roadway easement. The maximum setback for such sign shall be 50 feet from the public right of way.
Restrictions for all highways:
External lighting of billboards, such as floodlights, thin line and gooseneck reflectors are permitted, provided the light source is directed upon the face of the sign and is effectively shielded so as to prevent beams or rays of light from being directed toward any residential structure or into any portion of the main travel way. The lights should not be of such intensity so as to interfere with the residential use of property or to cause glare, impair the vision of the driver of a motor vehicle, or otherwise interfere with a driver's operation of a motor vehicle.
No such sign shall be located in such a manner as to obstruct or otherwise interfere with the effectiveness of an official traffic sign, signal, or device or obstruct or physically interfere with a motor vehicle operator's view of approaching, merging, or intersecting traffic.
No part of any billboard shall be located on any public street or private utility easement, drainage easement, or railroad right-of-way.
All lineal distances required by this section shall be measured from the nearest outside edge of the subject sign, whether a support, structural member, or the sign surface itself, to the nearest outside edge of the corresponding sign, building, right-of-way, or easement involved.
Plans Required: An application to erect such a sign shall include the following:
A set of plans, to scale, approved and sealed by a licensed engineer, providing all necessary construction and electrical details of the sign and sign structure, including height.
A Sign Plan, to scale containing:
The proposed location of the sign on the property.
The distance from the proposed sign location to any buildings upon the property, and adjoining street right-of-way lines, and driveway entrances.
In conditional use areas, the distance from the proposed sign location to the next nearest billboard sign within 100 feet on either side of the street in either direction.
The distance from the proposed sign location to the nearest street intersection in either direction.
Other information deemed necessary by city officials.
A representation of the proposed sign, to scale, including the width and length of the sign faces, and height from surrounding grade.
Construction Specifications: Any sign erected under this Article shall be a single pedestal type, constructed of non-flammable material, excluding wood. Construction of the sign and material specifications shall meet the structural requirements of the City's Building Code.
(Ord. 3414; Ord. 4453, §21)

Sec. 42-244.9. Non-Conforming Signs.
Nonconforming signs are signs that do not conform to this Division, yet were legally established prior to the adoption of this Division. The burden of proof will be on the property owner to show that the sign was legally established. Nonconforming signs, including those existing pursuant to variances granted by the Board of Adjustment before June 1, 1999, may continue to exist after passage of this Division if they maintain their nonconforming status. Nonconforming signs will be removed and/or changed in accordance with the provisions of this Section.

Permanent signs and sign structures that are moved, removed, replaced, or structurally altered, as defined in the Definitions Section of this Article, must be brought into conformance with the sign regulations. However, nonconforming signs required to be moved because of public right-of-way improvements may be reestablished. Removable faces or sign panel inserts in a cabinet style sign may also be changed by right, and such change does not constitute a structural alteration nor trigger loss of nonconforming status.
Nonconforming temporary signs must be removed within 30 days of the passage of this language.
Once a sign is altered to conform or is replaced with a conforming sign, the nonconforming rights for that sign are lost and a nonconforming sign may not be reestablished.
Loss of nonconforming sign status.
If a sign is discontinued, it loses its nonconforming status. Except for signs that were legally established as Billboards according to state and/or federal law, a sign shall be considered discontinued if, for one year, the services or products advertised are no longer available at the destination or if the sign no longer has an advertising message other than the name of the sign owner on any part of the sign (Beginning dates of discontinuance can be validated by identifying the termination date of business licenses).
Destruction. When a sign or sign structure is removed or intentionally destroyed, replacement signs and sign structures must comply with the current standards. However, if a sign or sign structure that has nonconforming elements is partially or totally damaged by fire or other causes beyond the control of the owner, the sign and sign structure may be rebuilt to the same size and height using the same materials.
Once a sign loses its nonconforming status, it must be removed before any other permits for signs shall be issued for the premises on which the sign that has lost its nonconforming status exists.
If structural alteration is needed to maintain the sign's structural integrity, the sign shall be removed and no building or sign permits shall be issued until its removal.
In cases of doubt or on a specific question raised whether a nonconforming sign exists, it shall be a question of fact decided by the Codes Administrator and such a determination shall be subject to appeal to the Board of Adjustment. 
(Ord. 3414; Ord. 4068, §4; Ord. 4428, §§21-22; Ord. 4453, §23)

(Return to Contents)

Sec. 42-244.10. Electronic Message Center Signs.
In nonresidential zones, Electronic Message Centers (EMCs), which includes electronically activated changeable copy signs and signs that imitate movement through electronic means, are permitted in accordance with the permitted sign area regulations of the district in which the sign is located. The following restrictions apply:

With the exception of flashing signs and full motion video or film display via an electronic file imported into the EMC software or streamed in real time into the EMC, EMC display features and functions are permitted in nonresidential zoning districts only.
No EMCs are permitted within 100 feet of any residential zone.
An EMC sign may be a portion or comprise the entirety of the sign face of a wall sign, pole sign, ground sign, or projecting sign. No other types of sign shall be integrated with EMC or other digital display technology.
All EMC signs shall have automatic dimming controls, either by photocell (hardwired) or via software settings, in order to bring the EMC lighting level at night into compliance with sign illumination standards of this division in Subsection 42-244.4(j).
(Ord. 3982, §2; Ord. 4453, §10)

Secs. 42-245 to 42-246. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 19. NON-CONFORMING BUILDING AND USE REGULATIONS


Sec. 42-247. Nonconforming Buildings and Structures.
Except as limited below and except for nonconforming signs, any structure or lawful use of any structure or land or part thereof that exists at the time of the adoption of this Article or an amendment thereto may be continued notwithstanding the fact that it may not conform to the provisions of this Article. The term ‘structure’ includes accessory structures. Proof of lawful establishment must be provided by those who wish to continue such nonconformance. Signs abide by separate nonconforming structure regulations, which can be found in Subsection 42-244.9.

The following limitations apply to maintaining lawful nonconforming status:

an expansion or increase in intensity of a nonconforming use of land or structure or part thereof;
a change of use or a discontinuance of a nonconforming use of land or a structure or part thereof;

discontinuance of a use is defined as continuous vacancy or nonuse of land or structures or part thereof for a period of one year;

reconstruction, enlargements, additions, expansions, or structural alteration of a nonconforming structure, except for structural alterations that are required by building, fire, or health codes for human health and safety;

structural alteration is defined as any alteration to any component of a structure that supports any vertical load in addition to its own weight;
the modification of existing buildings is permitted by right if such changes result in greater conformance with the specifications of this Article;

structures that exist on lots that do not meet minimum lot size and width requirements render such structures nonconforming and, in turn, shall not be permitted to receive expansions or additions and the lots shall not be permitted to receive additional accessory or primary structures;
nonconforming structures shall not be moved unless they are moved in way that reconciles all nonconforming aspects of the structure that can be reconciled by moving the structure;
a nonconforming structure that is damaged by fire, tornado, or other catastrophe shall be permitted to be restored or rebuilt and used again as previously, provided that building permits for such restoration or reconstruction are issued within two years of the date of the catastrophe and are diligently prosecuted to completion and that the rebuilding or restoration following the catastrophe does not increase any nonconforming aspect of the original structure or use.

Exemption: Where reconstruction, alteration, extension, addition, or structural change to a single-family or two-family residential structure used for residential purposes does not increase any nonconforming aspect of the use or structure, a variance from the Board of Adjustment is not required for said alteration, reconstruction, addition, or structural change. Enlargements, expansions, and additions (including adding accessory structures) are not permitted if the lot does not meet minimum lot size and width requirements.

From the time of public notification for the adoption of the provisions of this division and afterward, the above limitations and other provisions of this Division will apply to all requests for building permits; to all change/establishment/increase of use requests, which includes such requests through the zoning approval of business license applications; and any other request that require land use review or building permits.

The Board of Adjustment, after a public notice and a public hearing, may grant a special exception to allow a legal nonconforming use to be changed to any other use permitted in the zoning district in which the nonconforming use is allowed, provided the proposed use is not more intense than the existing use in terms of traffic generation and other impacts on surrounding property.

The Board of Adjustment, after public notice and a public hearing, may grant a variance to allow a preexisting nonconforming use or structure to be expanded if, in the opinion of the Board, such expansion will not be more objectionable to or detrimental to the character of the neighborhood than the original preexisting nonconforming use or structure.
(Ord. 4428, §§23-26)


Secs. 42-248 to 42-249. Reserved.
DIVISION 20. CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS


Sec. 42-250. Map and Text Amendments.
Rolla's property owners, legislative bodies, and government officials may propose amendments to the Official Zoning Map (e.g. rezoning requests), the Future Land Use Map, or the text of Rolla's Planning and Zoning Code. For such a request to be initiated, applicants must submit the appropriate application and the Map & Text Amendment fee listed in the Fee Schedule in Section 42.143.1 of the Rolla Planning and Zoning Code. All applications and fees shall be filed with the Community Development Department no later than the second Tuesday of each month for consideration during the following month.

(Ord. 3414; Ord. 4401, §§21-22)



Sec. 42-250.1. Recommendations.
The Planning and Zoning Commission may within its discretion, make one of the following recommendations in connection with each proposed re-zoning application.

Recommend against the change in zoning.
Recommend a change in zoning.
Recommend a change in zoning for such area together with its recommendations as to requirements for the paving of streets, alleys and sidewalks, means of ingress and egress to the public streets, provisions for drainage, parking spaces and street layouts and protective screening and open spaces and any other requirements which, within the discretion of the Planning and Zoning Commission, will protect adjacent property and secure substantially the purpose and intent of this Article. (Ord. 3414)


Sec. 42-250.2. Findings by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the following information when reviewing re-zoning requests:

Whether the proposed zoning district classification is consistent with the intent of the Rolla Comprehensive Plan;
Whether there are any changed or changing conditions in the neighborhood affected that make the proposed rezoning necessary or desirable from an overall community development perspective;
Whether the range of uses in the proposed zoning district classification are compatible with the uses permitted on other property in the immediate vicinity;
Whether adequate utility service and facilities exist or can be reasonably provided to serve the uses permitted on the property if rezoned;
The impact the proposed uses would have upon vehicular and pedestrian traffic safety;
Whether the proposed rezoning would correct an error in the application of this Article as applied to the subject property;
Whether a reasonably viable economic use of the subject property will be precluded if the proposed rezoning is denied creating an economic hardship; and
Relevant information submitted at the public hearing. (Ord. 3414)


Sec. 42-250.3. Report of Action Taken.
Each such recommendation made by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be reported to the City Council and the applicant. The Secretary of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall set up and maintain a separate file for each application received, and all records and files herein provided shall be permanent and official files of the City of Rolla. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-250.4. Notice of Hearing Before City Council.
A public hearing, where parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard, shall be held by the City Council before adopting any proposed amendment. At least fifteen days before the public hearing is held, a notice of such a hearing shall be published in an official paper or a paper of general circulation in Rolla. The notice shall specify the time and place of such hearing and the location where the application and related documents may be viewed. In addition, staff shall notify the public of the hearing and proposal according to the prescribed procedures and standards described in Section 42-143 of the Rolla Planning and Zoning Code.

(Ord. 3414; Ord. 4401, §§23-24)



Sec. 42-250.5. Action of City Council.
When the Planning and Zoning Commission has recommended a change in zoning together with recommendations, as to requirements as heretofore provided, the City Council shall be at liberty to either accept, reject or make other or additional requirements, and any such requirements, in the discretion of the City Council to be made, shall become a part of the ordinance changing the zoning classification of such property. Such requirements shall be considered as an amendment to the zoning ordinance as applicable to such property. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-250.6. Two-Thirds Majority Necessary when Protested.
In case of a protest petition against such change, duly signed and notarized, by the owners of thirty (30) percent or more of the land area (exclusive of streets and alleys) included in such proposed change or within an area determined by line drawn parallel to and one hundred eighty-five (185) feet distance from the boundaries of the district proposed to be changed, such amendments shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of two thirds (2/3) of all the members of the City Council. The provisions of this Section apply to the adoption of, additions to, changes or modifications of the official map of the master plan, whether such changes are initiated by the City Council, the Planning and Zoning Commission, Community Development Director or by property owner application. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42.250.7. Limitation on Application for Rezoning.
No application for rezoning of any tract, lot or parcel of land within the City of Rolla, other than an application initiated by the City Council or the Planning and Zoning Commission, shall be filed or allowed prior to the expiration of twelve (12) months from the time that the City Council shall have finally acted on any application for rezoning of all or part of the same lot, tract or parcel of ground. The City Council may waive this requirement upon written request by the applicant, provided the applicant can show substantially changed conditions from any previously submitted but unsuccessful rezoning requests for all or a portion of the same lot, tract or parcel of ground. The applicant may then reapply for a review through the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council.

A rezoning application may be withdrawn upon request by the applicant at any point in the approval process, prior to final action by the City Council, without requiring a twelve (12) month delay before reapplication. The Planning and Zoning Commission would first consider the new application. (Ord. 3414; Ord. 3890, §2)



Secs. 42-251 to 42-252. Reserved.
DIVISION 21. ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND REVIEW


Sec. 42-253.1. Duties of the Codes Administrator.
The Codes Administrator or his duly designated and authorized representative, in addition to the duties delegated to him under this Article and other ordinances of the City, shall administer and enforce this Article including:

Receiving applications for permits for the construction, erection, structural alteration, enlargement and removal of buildings, structures, parking lots, signs, variances and special exceptions, notify applicants of all City ordinances pertaining to said applications, issue as soon as practicable certificates required by this Article when plans are found to comply with the provisions of this Article and all other City laws and ordinances applicable thereto; make and maintain records for all functions pertaining to codes administration duties; and in connection with such duties interpret the provisions of this Article.
Receiving applications for certificates of occupancy for buildings and structures for which building permits have been issued, and which have been constructed, erected, structurally altered, enlarged or moved in accordance with such permits and are ready for use and occupancy; notify applicants of City ordinances pertaining to said applications.
Providing technical assistance to the City Council, Planning and Zoning Commission, and Board of Adjustment as they may require in the performance of their duties under this Article
Conducting inspections of buildings, structures, and uses of any premises to determine compliance with the terms of this Article.
Conducting inspections of buildings, structures, signs, and uses of any premises to determine compliance with the terms of any application, permit, or certificate issued by his office and to ensure that the provisions of this Article are enforced with respect to screening, landscaping, buffer-yards and other requirements or conditions established by City Council. (Ord. 3414)


Sec. 42-253.2. Duties of the Community Development Director.
In addition to the duties delegated to him under this Article and other ordinances of the City, the Community Development Director or his duly designated and authorized representative shall:

Receive applications for Zoning Ordinance map amendments and conditional use permits pursuant to the provisions of this Article.
Maintain for distribution to the public copies of the zoning map or maps, the text of the Zoning Ordinance, and the rules of the Planning and Zoning Commission and Board of Adjustment. A reasonable fee for each copy shall be charged to defray printing costs.
Provide technical and expert assistance to the City Council, Planning and Zoning Commission, and Board of Adjustment.
Make recommendations with respect to city planning, zoning, land use and development to the City Council, Planning and Zoning Commission, City Administrator and other departments and agencies of the City.
Maintain permanent and current records of official actions on all variances, conditional use permits, special exceptions, re-zoning applications, and other activities of the Planning and Zoning Commission and Board of Adjustment and all functions of the Community Development Department related to the administration of this Article. (Ord. 3414)


Sec. 42-253.3. Building Permit Required.
It shall be unlawful to start the construction of a new building, structure, parking lot, or sign or the enlargement or structural alteration of a building, structure, parking lot, or sign, without first filing a written application for and obtaining a building permit. All applications for such permits shall be in accordance with the requirements of this Article and building code of the City of Rolla. No building permit shall be issued unless a plat is filed in duplicate, drawn to scale and in such form as may be prescribed by the building inspector, showing the location on the lot of the building, structure, parking lot, or sign to be erected, altered, or enlarged, signed by the applicant, and other information as the building inspector may require in the enforcement of this Article. Failure to provide this information shall be good cause for the revocation of any such building permit. Unless upon written order of the Board of Adjustment, no building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building, structure, parking lot, or sign where said construction, addition, or alteration thereof would be in violation of any of the provisions of this Article. A record of all applications, together with supporting plats, shall be kept in the office of the building inspector. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-253.4. Certificate of Occupancy Required.
No vacant land shall be occupied or used except for agricultural uses and no building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be occupied or used until the building inspector shall have issued a certificate of occupancy. The certificate of occupancy shall state that the building or proposed use of a building or land complies with the building and health laws and ordinances, and with the provisions of these regulations. A record of all certificates shall be put on file in the office of the building inspector, and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected. No fee shall be charged for a certificate of occupancy. No permit for excavation for any building shall be issued before application has been made for certificate of occupancy.

(a) Certificate of occupancy for a building: Certificate of occupancy shall be applied for coincident with the application for a building permit and shall be issued within ten (10) days after the erection or structural alteration of such building shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions of these regulations.

(b) Certificate of occupancy for a non-conforming use: A Certificate of occupancy for legal non-conforming uses shall be issued, and the certificate shall state that the use is a legal non-conforming use. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-253.5. Zoning Enforcement.
Notice of Violation: Whenever the Codes Administrator, or one of his authorized representatives, determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of any provision of this Article exists on any parcel of land within the City, he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the owner or agent of said parcel as follows. Such notice shall:
Be in writing and include a statement of any alleged violations, what remedial action(s) are to be taken, and any fines or fees associated with the enforcement of this Article;
Allow a reasonable time for the correction of any violation or the performance of any required act,
Be served upon the owner or his agent personally, by registered mail to his last known address, or is posted conspicuously in or about the building, structure, or sign affected by the action.
Revocation of Permits: Whenever the Codes Administrator has ordered a person to correct any violation and when such violation has not been corrected within the time specified by such order, thereafter the administrator may institute an action to revoke any permits issued by the City under which the activity is conducted and occupancy permits.
Abatement of Violation: If a person violates this Article or if a notice of a violation is not complied with within the time specified by the Codes Administrator, the administrator may cause a municipal court summons to be issued, and he may also request the City Attorney to institute the appropriate legal proceedings to obtain an injunction to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to acquire removal or termination of the unlawful use of a building, structure or sign in violation of the provisions of this Article or any order or direction made pursuant thereto.
Fines and Penalties: Any person violating this Article, or failing to comply with any order issued pursuant to any Section thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not more than three hundred ($ 300) dollars, per day, for each day of noncompliance. The City shall attempt to give notice when the violation does not pose an imminent danger and the owner has not previously been notified either orally or in writing regarding a violation of the same Section of this Article.
Legal Action: The imposition of the fines herein prescribed shall not limit the City Attorney from instituting appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or use of building or structure in or about any premises, in violation of this Article.
Discontinuance of Illegal Use or Occupancy: Whenever any building, site or portion thereof is being used or occupied contrary to the provisions of this Article, the Codes Administrator shall order such use or occupancy discontinued by notice served on any persons using or causing such use or occupancy to be continued. Such persons shall discontinue use or occupancy or make the building, site or portion thereof comply with the requirements of this Article within a time period not to exceed ten (10) days after receipt of such notice. (Ord. 3414)


Sec. 42-253.6. Inspection and Right of Entry
In the discharge of his duties, the Codes Administrator or his authorized representative shall have the authority to enter at any reasonable hour any building, structure or premises in the City to enforce the provisions of this Article. Any person making such inspection shall furnish to the owner or occupant of the building or structure to be inspected sufficient identification and information to enable the owner or occupant to determine that he is a representative of the City and to determine the purpose of the inspection. Inspections may be prompted on the basis of complaint or as part of a systematic inspection program directed by the Codes Administrator, Community Development Director, or City Administrator. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-253.7. Permits Required for Construction of Building - Annexation.
Any person owning, controlling, constructing, supervising or directing the construction of any building or structure in the process of construction which is incomplete at the time the land upon which it is situated is annexed to the City of Rolla before proceeding shall apply to the Codes Administrator of the City of Rolla for a permit authorizing further work Said construction work shall be suspended until the permit provided for herein has been issued or until final zoning regulations have been adopted, which permit the construction, use and occupancy of the structure or building. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-254. Board of Adjustment - Composition.
The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five members, who shall be City residents. The members of the Board of Adjustment shall be appointed for staggered terms of five (5) years each and shall serve without compensation. No member shall serve more than two (2) consecutive terms and shall not be a current member of the Planning and Zoning Commission. All members shall be removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after public hearings. The Board shall elect its own chairman who shall hold office for one year. The Codes Administrator, or his designee, shall be an ex-officio member of the Board of Adjustment without voting power. The Codes Administrator, as an ex-officio member, shall act as secretary and shall maintain a separate file for each application for appeal, special exception and variance received and shall record therein the names and addresses of all persons, and further keep a record of all notices published as required herein. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-254.1. Procedures.
Meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine. All meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be open to the public except as provided by law. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions. Every decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be in writing and shall contain a full record of the findings of the Board in each case, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public record. The secretary of the Board of Adjustment shall notify in writing the City Council and Zoning and Planning and Zoning Commission of each decision, interpretation, appeal, special exception and variance considered under the provisions of this Article. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-254.2. Powers.
The Board of Adjustment shall:

Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this Article and may also decide any questions involving the interpretation of any of the provisions of this Article, including the location of any district boundaries, if there is uncertainty with respect thereto.
In appropriate cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, make special exceptions to the terms of this Article in harmony with its general purpose and intent and in accordance with the general and specific rules herein contained.
Authorize, upon appeal, in specific cases such variance from the terms of this Article as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions hereof will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this Article shall be observed and substantial justice done. (Ord. 3414)
Shall serve as the members of the Board of Appeals for the 2000 International Property Maintenance Code, as required in Section 111.2 of that Code, and shall hear appeals by any person directly affected by a decision of the Codes Administrator or a notice or order issued under this Code. The chairman of the Board of Adjustment shall serve as the chairman of the Board of Appeals. The alternate members of the Board of Adjustment shall serve as alternate members of the Board of Appeals. (Ord. 3639, §1)


Sec. 42-254.3. Appeals.
Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the City of Rolla affected by any decision of an administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within fifteen (15) days time after an administrative officer has rendered the decision. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the secretary of the Board of Adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the reasons. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall send to the secretary of the Board all the papers constituting the record relating to the appealed action. The applicant for an appeal, however, shall bear the burden of producing evidence establishing the grounds of the appeal. In exercising the powers herein granted, the Board may, in conformity with the provisions of this Article reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of four (4) members shall be necessary for an appeal to be approved by the Board of Adjustment. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-254.4. Appeals to Stay Proceedings.
A properly filed notice of appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a proper court order. 

(Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-254.5. Notice of Appeals.
Notice of appeals (i.e. an appeal application) shall be submitted not less than twenty-eight days prior to a regularly scheduled Board meeting. The applicant shall be notified in writing by registered mail of the date, time, and location of the hearing. Upon filing a notice of appeal with the secretary of the Board of Adjustment, the applicant must submit to the Community Development Department the appeal application and the appeal fee listed in Section 42.143.1 of the Rolla Planning and Zoning Code. A public hearing shall be held for such proposals and the Community Development Department shall notify the public of the hearing and proposal according to the prescribed procedures and standards described in Section 42-143 of the Rolla Planning and Zoning Code.

(Ord. 3414; Ord. 3566, §6; Ord. 3748, §12; Ord. 4401, §§25-26)



Sec. 42-254.6. Limitation on Re-Filing.
No appeal, request or application to the Board of Adjustment shall be allowed with respect to the same parcel of land, building, or structure prior to the expiration of six (6) months from the date of the ruling of the Board of Adjustment unless a substantial change of circumstances or conditions can be demonstrated by the applicant. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-255. Exceptions and Variances.
A "special exception" is a permission given by the Board properly authorized by this Article in specific cases for an applicant to use his property in a manner contrary to the provisions of this Article provided such use serves the general welfare and preserves the community interest. A "variance" is an authorization by the Board granting relief and doing substantial justice in the use of the applicant's property by a property owner where, owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of the Article will result in unnecessary hardship. The Board of Adjustment may designate conditions on granting special exceptions or variances that secure the public interest and intent of this Article. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-255.1. Notices of Hearings.
Applications for special exceptions, variances, and use variances shall be submitted on forms provided for this purpose not less than twenty-eight days prior to a regularly scheduled Board meeting. Along with the submission of such an application, the applicant shall submit the appropriate fee listed in Section 42.143.1 of the Rolla Planning and Zoning Code. Once the application has been determined to be complete, the Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing and written notice of all such public hearings shall be sent by the secretary of the Board to the applicant and all other persons deemed by the Board to be affected. In addition, upon completeness, the Community Development Department shall notify the public of the hearing and proposal according to the prescribed procedures and standards described in Section 42-143 of the Rolla Planning and Zoning Code.

(Ord. 3414; Ord. 4401, §§27-28)



Sec. 42-255.2. Hearings.
Any interested party may appear at the hearing in person or by agent or by attorney. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to establish the facts necessary which the Board of Adjustment must find before granting any special exception or variance as herein contained. The Board of Adjustment may impose such conditions and restrictions as may be necessary to comply with the standards set out in this Article to reduce, minimize, or mitigate the effect of such special exception or variance upon the property in the neighborhood, and to better carry out the intent of this Article. The concurring vote of four members of the Board shall be necessary to decide in favor to affect any variance of this Article or to grant any special exception. No request or application to the Board of Adjustment shall be allowed on the same piece of property prior to the expiration of six (6) months from a ruling of the Board of Adjustment on any request or application to such body unless other property abutting or adjoining such property shall have within such period been altered or changed by a ruling of the Board of Adjustment, in which case such change of circumstances shall permit the allowance of an application, but such hearing shall be considered on its merits as in all other cases. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-255.3. Duration.
Any special exceptions or variances authorized or granted by the Board of Adjustment either under the provisions of this Article or under the authority granted to the Board of Adjustment under the statute of the State of Missouri shall authorize the issuance of a building permit, or a certificate of occupancy, as the case may be, for a period of ninety (90) days from the date of the favorable action on the part of the Board of Adjustment, unless the Board of Adjustment in its minutes shall, at the same time, grant a longer period. If the building permit or certificate of occupancy shall have not been issued within said ninety (90) day period or such extended period as the Board may specifically grant, then the special exception or variance shall be deemed waived and all rights thereunder terminated. Such termination or waiver shall be without prejudice to a subsequent appeal to the Board in accordance with the rules and regulations herein contained. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-255.4. Special Exceptions.
The prospective occupant or owner of the property shall make application for special exceptions according to the terms of this Article and follow the application procedures outlined in Section 42-255.1 of this Division. Subject to the conditions and safeguards herein contained, after public notice and hearing, the Board of Adjustment may authorize special exceptions to this Article as follows:

The Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception to allow a legal non­conforming use to be changed to any other use permitted in the zoning district in which the non-conforming use is allowed, provided the proposed use is not more intense than the existing use in terms of traffic generation and other impacts on surrounding property.

Permit the extension of an existing legal non-conforming use in a building upon a lot currently occupied as a legal non-conforming use.

Permit the use of property in the "R-1 " and "R-2" Districts adjacent to the "R-3", "C" or "M" Districts, even if separated therefrom by an alley or by a street, for parking of passenger cars under such safeguards and conditions of the setback requirements of the more restricted property, and further provided that such parking area shall not extend a greater distance than five hundred (500) feet from the "R-3," "C" or "M" Districts and other conditions as needed to promote public safety.

Permit the use of property owned by a church for the parking of passenger cars in any district under such safeguards and conditions as are necessary to protect adjacent property. 

(Ord. 3414; Ord. 4401, §§29-30)

Sec. 42-255.5. Variances.
The Board of Adjustment may grant an applicant a variance in the following instances:

A variance from the applicable bulk regulations for buildings and structures, including maximum height, lot coverage, and required yard areas.

A variance from the applicable minimum requirements for lot size, width, depth, or setback distances.

A variance from the applicable off-street parking requirements.

A variance from the applicable open space, landscaping and buffer area requirements. (Ord. 3414; Ord. 4428, §27)



Sec. 42-255.6. Variance Standards.
The Board of Adjustment shall not vary the regulations of this Article as authorized above unless and until it shall make findings based upon the particular evidence presented to it in each specific case that:

That there are special circumstances or conditions applying to the land or buildings for which the variance is sought, which circumstances or conditions are peculiar to such land or building and do not apply generally to lands or buildings in the same zone or neighborhood, and that said circumstances or conditions are such that the strict application of the provisions of this Article shall create an unnecessary economic hardship by depriving the applicant of the reasonable use of such land or building, and;
That the alleged hardship has not been created by any person presently having an interest in the property, and,
That the purpose of the variance is not based exclusively on a desire to enhance the value of the property, or increase the return or income therefrom, and;
That the granting of such variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or substantially or permanently injurious to the property or improvements in such zoning or neighborhood areas in which the property is located, and;
That the granting of the variance is necessary for the reasonable use of the land or building and that the variance as granted by the Board is the minimum variance that will accomplish this purpose, and will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood; and;
That the literal enforcement and strict application of the provisions of this Article will result in an unnecessary hardship inconsistent with the general provisions and intent of this Article and that in granting such variance the spirit of the Article will be preserved and substantial justice done. (Ord. 3414)


Sec. 42-255.7. Use Variances.
The Board of Adjustment may grant use variances where the strict enforcement of this Article may cause an unnecessary hardship resulting from the unique physical characteristics of a site for a proposed use. The Board of Adjustment shall also make a determination that granting the use variance is consistent with the intent of the Comprehensive Plan and that granting the variance will result in the achievement of substantial justice. Applications for a use variance shall follow the provisions prescribed in Division 17, Section 42-234.1. pertaining to Site Plans. (Ord. 3414)



Sec. 42-255.8. Appeal from Ruling of Board of Adjustment.
Appeals from rulings of the Board of Adjustment may be taken in the manner provided by statute. (Ord. 3414)



Secs. 42-256 to 42-359. Reserved.
DIVISION 22. AMENDMENTS TO THE OFFICIAL ZONING DISTRICTS MAP
SUBDIVISION I. USE PERMITS


Sec. 42-360. Use permit grant to Darrell G. Bradford and Robert Fitzsimmons to conduct a photographic business on a tract of land zoned R-3 (Multi-Family) District.
That a use permit be and it is hereby granted to Darrell G. Bradford and Robert J. Fitzsimmons, d/b/a Bradford and Fitzsimmons Photography to conduct a photographic business and its related activities, including indoor and outdoor photography, wholesale and/or retail sales of photographs, wedding albums, cameras and films, photographic supplies and products, picture frames, and the fabrication thereof, on the tract of land owned by the said Darrell G. Bradford and Robert J. Fitzsimmons now zoned R-3 (Multi-Family) District, situated in the City of Rolla, county of Phelps, and state of Missouri, described as follows:

The north 210.2 feet of the west 245 feet of block four (4) of the Rolla Mill Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 1985, §1, 8-9-76.)



Sec. 42-361. Use permit grant to Dan Woodward to conduct an art gallery and museum on property at 1705 North Oak Street.
That an use permit shall be issued to Dan Woodward to permit property located at 1705 North Oak Street, more particularly described as:

The South Half of Lot 7 and all of Lots 8 and 9 in Block 11 of Schuman Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri;

to be used for the business of a fine art gallery and museum. (Ord. 2446, §1, 1-7-85).



Sec. 42-362. Use permit grant Renick Enterprises, Inc. to permit property in Eastmeadow Tract A to be used for general office buildings.
That a use permit shall be issued to Renick Enterprises, Inc. to permit property located in Eastmeadow Tract A, more particularly described as:

A fractional part of Tract A of "Eastmeadow", an addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri more particularly described as follows: Commencing at the Northwest corner of Lot No. 2 of the N.W. 1/4 of Section 7, Township 37 North, Range 7 West; Thence S. 0° 38' W., 35.00 feet to the South Right-of-Way, 189.39 feet to the Point of Beginning of the tract herein described; Thence S. 0° 38' W., 230.01 feet; Thence S. 89° 01'E., 200.00 feet; Thence N. 0° 38' E., 230.01 feet to the South Right-of-Way of East Tenth Street; Thence N. 89° 01' W. along said South Right-of-Way, 200.00 feet to the Point of Beginning. Containing: 46,002 sq. ft., 1.06 acre.

to be used for general office buildings. (Ord. 2547, §1, 7-21-87.)



Secs. 42-363 Approving a Conditional Use Permit at 1056 Kingshighway for Carol Pruett.
That a Conditional Use Permit be granted to Carol Pruett to operate a package liquor store in a C-2 (general retail district) zone.
The Conditional Use Permit shall follow "Attachment B Standards for all Condition Use Permits".
The Conditional Use Permit is granted only to the above name and for the above address. If the business license is not renewed or the business should relocate, the Conditional Use Permit shall be terminated. (Ord. 3672, §§1-3)

Sec. 42-364. Approving a Condition Use Permit for property located 1100 Hwy 72 East, to permit the establishment of a Family Recreation and Entertainment Complex (FERC) (Noe).
The Conditional Use Permit application requires the applicant to submit information pertaining to compliance with regulations and the finding of no adverse effect, described in  Section 42-234.2 (Complying with the Standards and no Adverse Affect to the Community). These findings are attached to the Conditional Use Permit application.
The building footprint is 21,641 sq. ft. The lot size is 2.41 acres. There is adequate space to accommodate required off-street parking. All necessary utility and drainage services are provided.
The building is large enough to allow an occupancy level of 300 persons as determined by the Codes Administrator, with no less than 100 parking spaces on-premise.  Parking spaces set-a-side for the public shall be paved as local weather permits this spring.  The project meets lot coverage limits and setbacks are not a problem for this CUP.
The building has undergone extensive remodeling in the recent past to help meet all relevant zoning, building and fire codes.  In addition, the project complies with ADA requirements concerning ramps, public toilets, etc. 
The south exterior wall shall be insulated as specified in the Renovation Sound Wall Plans submitted by the applicant’s engineer so that sound emanating from the building will not be heard.  Current City Ordinance pertaining to sound nuisances shall be used to make this determination.  
Access to the subject property is provided by a driveway that connects with Hwy 72.  No other access point shall be used by employees or customers.
The existing wooden fence shall be extended to the north property line then to the west of the driveway. No fence will be required along the southern property line as long as the existing vegetation is maintained so as to screen the residential properties to the south. Vehicular and stationary glare will be monitored and reduced when necessary by the applicant.    
The Conditional Use Permit shall expire if the business becomes inactive for a period of nine (9) months. 
The Conditional Use Permit is only valid for the current business occupant. Upon termination of any lease the Conditional Use Permit is terminated.  If the business were to relocate, the Conditional Use Permit would not follow the business to the new location. The business will have to adhere to all restrictions and conditions imposed upon the Conditional Use Permit (see Item 1 for Standards.)
All “live or hired talent” performing in the FERC shall cease performing at midnight Friday and Saturday, and at 10:30 p.m. Sunday through Thursday. 
(Ord. 4103)


Sec. 42-365. Approving a Conditional Use Permit for the establishment of a massage therapy business located at 904 Turkey Run Drive. (Bartle).
The Basic Zoning Ordinance No. 3414, Chapter 42 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, which said zoning ordinance adopts zoning regulations, use districts and a zoning map in accordance with a comprehensive plan, be and the same is hereby amended by changing the zoning and classification of the following property situated within the City of Rolla, Missouri, and described as follows: The property located at 904 Turkey Run Drive shall be approved for a Conditional Use Permit for the operation of a Massage Therapy Business as described herein.
The following conditions or provisions shall be applied to this Conditional Use Permit application to eliminate any potential adverse community or neighborhood impacts:
The applicant/owner shall schedule appointments with at least one fifteen (15) minute interval to allow one client to leave before another arrives.
No exterior commercial or business signage shall be permitted for this particular Conditional Use Permit, except that the existing address numbers shall be permitted.
No additional Conditional Use Permits shall be approved within 500 feet of 904 Turkey Run Road.
The applicant/owner agrees to limit the hours of operation from 10:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.  The use restrictions found in Article III, Division 15, Section 42-207.2 Use Limitations, shall be imposed as a requirement for approval of this Conditional Use Permit.      
The Conditional Use Permit shall expire and become invalid if the business becomes inactive and ceases to serve clients at 904 Turkey Run Road for a period of nine (9) consecutive months.  
The applicant/owner agrees to permit the Building Codes Administrator to enter the premises at 904 Turkey Run Road when he deems it necessary to enforce the provisions of this permit, or where the Building Codes Administrator has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in this structure or premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this permit.  The Building Codes Administrator shall only have authorization to enter this structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform duties imposed by this Conditional Use Permit, provided that his credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested.  If unoccupied, the Building Codes Administrator shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises to request entry.  If entry is refused, the Building Codes Administrator shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law, including the immediate termination of this permit.      
(Ord. 4163)


Sec. 42-366. Approving the establishment of a Family Entertainment and Recreation Complex (FERC) at 1100 Highway 72 East in the City of Rolla, Missouri (Barrack).
The Basic Zoning Ordinance No. 3414, Chapter 42 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, which said zoning ordinance adopts zoning regulations, use districts and a zoning map in accordance with a comprehensive plan, be and the same is hereby amended by changing the zoning and classification of the following property situated within the City of Rolla, Missouri, and described as follows: 1100 Highway 72 Event Center to permit the development of a FERC (Family Entertainment and Recreation Complex).
The following regulations or conditions shall apply to the Family Entertainment and Recreation Complex (FERC) located at 1100 Highway 72 East and otherwise known as the Highway 72 Event Center.  Nothing herein exempts the owner or operator/tenant of the Highway 72 Event Center from violating any City ordinance.
The subject property is currently zoned C-2 (General Retail District), which permits the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages on premise, provided the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be limited to properly licensed vendors as required in Rolla.  The FERC is limited to a maximum of 40 days per year where alcoholic beverages may be sold on site.
Hours of Operation:  Will vary depending on each tenant or event.  No bands, DJs, or loud sounds will be allowed after 11 p.m. on Sundays through Thursdays, and after 12 midnight on Fridays and Saturdays.  Loud sounds shall mean being audible off the FERC property.  No bands or DJs may play music outside of the building without approval from the City. 
The building footprint is 21,641 square feet.  The lot size is 2.41 acres.  The owner of the Event Center shall maintain a minimum of 100 parking spaces on site.
The Highway 72 Event Center will be required to get a business and sales tax license to cover all incidental facility uses.  Any event sponsor not covered by the Highway 72 Event Center license will obtain a separate business license.  Where there are multiple vendors at an event, only the event sponsor is required to have a business license. 
The application for a FERC for the Highway 72 Event Center dated August 5, 2015, and executed by Charlotte J. Barrack is incorporated herein.
(Ord. 4233)

(Return to Contents)


Sec. 42-367. Approving a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) to allow the operation of a nursing home facility in an R-1 (Single Family District) zoned area at 1000 Lions Club Drive. (Clearparth).
The Basic Zoning Ordinance No. 3414, Chapter 42 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, which zoning ordinance adopts zoning regulations, use districts, and a zoning map in accordance with the comprehensive plan as hereby amended by changing the zoning classification of the property situated within the City of Rolla Missouri, and  described as follows:

A fractional part of the Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 13, Township 37 North, Range 8 West of the 5th P.M. described as follows:  Commencing at the Southwest Corner of the Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of said Section 13; thence North 0°33’00” East, 9.27 feet along the West line of said Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter to the southwest corner of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Document No. 1997-875; thence North 89°03’50” East, 50.02 feet along the South line of said Document No. 1997-875 parcel to the true point of beginning of the hereinafter described tract:  Thence North 0°33’00” East, 289.76 feet to the southerly right of way of Lions Club Drive; thence northeasterly 35.58 feet along the arc of a curve, concave southeasterly with a radius of 710.00 feet the chord of which is North 74°30’20” East, 35.58 feet, and, North 75°56’30” East, 245.80 feet, and, northeasterly 96.76 feet along the arc of a curve, concave northwesterly with a radius of 1240.00 feet the chord of which is North 73°42’20” East, 96.74 feet, and, North 71°28’10” East, 256.64 feet, and, northeasterly 99.93 feet along the arc of a curve, concave northeasterly with a radius of 490.00 feet the chord of which is North 65°37’40” East, 99.75 feet all along said southerly right of way to the South line of Ponzer Third Addition; thence North 89°47’20” East, 49.31 feet along the South line of said Ponzer Third Addition to the southwest corner of Municipal Acres No. 2; thence North 89°37’00” East, 115.26 feet along the South line of said Municipal Acres No. 2; thence South 1°18’10” West, 93.54 feet partially along the West line of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Document No. 1998-1375 to its southwest corner; thence South 4°41’10” West, 60.33 feet to the northernmost corner of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Document No. 1997-2417; thence South 7°03’20” West, 342.30 feet along the West line of said Document No. 1997-2417 parcel to the aforesaid South line of parcel 1997-875; thence South 88°32’40” West, 340.55 feet, and, South 89°03’50” West, 477.64 feet all along said South line to the true point of beginning.  Above described tract contains 7.77 acres, more or less, per plat of survey R-11621A, dated December 15, 2004, by Elgin Surveying & Engineering, Inc. (Ord. 4260, §1)

SPECIAL PLAT RESTRICTION AND RESTRICTIVE COVENANT AS TO THE ISSUANCE OF BUILDING OR CONSTRUCTION PERMITS.  The undersigned owners of the tract of land herein platted do hereby impose upon said property and do hereby make the following restrictive covenant: No construction may be commenced upon the above-described property until all necessary building and construction permits have been issued by the City of Rolla, Missouri and that it is understood by the undersigned that no such permits shall be issued for any lots herein platted until the completion of all public improvements appertaining to such lots or until a cash bond equal to the reasonable costs of completing such public improvements has been received and approved by the City of Rolla, Missouri.  The above-mentioned public improvements shall be completed pursuant to the agreement between the undersigned and the City of Rolla, Missouri for the completion of such improvements as required by this article of the City Code of Rolla, Missouri. (Ord. 4260, §2)

CONTINGENCIES TO THE CUP AGREEMENT:

The applicant shall first obtain approval of the Clearpath Holdings project from the City
The City’s Environmental Services Department and the applicant shall determine the most efficient location on site for identifying a place where solid waste disposal facilities might be located.
The City’s Public Works Department will arrive at a mutually agreed upon decision regarding ingress/egress to any private driveway from Lion’s Club Drive.
Rolla Municipal Utilities and the applicant shall arrive at a mutually agreeable decision regarding electrical and water connections to the property.
Project is detailed and limited as referenced in the Site Plan attached herein as Exhibit A. (Ord. 4260, §3)

This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.  Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the revised plat has been filed with the Phelps County Recorder of Deeds. (Ord. 4260, §4)
(Return to Contents)


Sec. 42-368.  Approving a Conditional Use Permit to the property known as 1501 Martin Springs Drive for the use of a "Concrete batching or transit mix plant (temporary use only)" in the Highway Commercial (zoning) District (C-3). (Lehman)

That the Rolla Planning and Zoning Code, Ordinance No. 3414, which is Chapter 42 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, and a code that, in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan, divides the City of Rolla into zoning districts; controls the regulation and restriction of the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or use of buildings, structures, or land within such districts; and controls the number, shape, and area of  such zoning districts on the Official Zoning Map, is hereby amended by authorizing the issuance of a CUP for the use of a “Concrete batching or transit mix plant (temporary use only)” in the Highway Commercial (zoning) District (C-3) on the property currently known as 1501 Martin Springs Drive, which is described in the document with the recording number of 2014-4638 and partly described below:

Fractional Part Lots 101,102,109,110 & 111 Railroad Addition & Fractional Part W/2 SE1/4 of Section 10, Township 37, Range 8 (Ord. 4415, §1)

That, as a condition of the approval of this ordinance, this Conditional Use Permit will expire on December 31, 2018, a date after which the use of a “Concrete batching or transit mix plant (temporary use only)” will no longer be permitted on the property described in Section 1 of this ordinance, which is currently known as 1501 Martin Springs Drive. (Ord. 4415, §2)

This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. Building permits may not be issued by the Community Development Department until the Conditional Use Permit process has been completed by the City Council. (Ord. 4415, §3)

Secs. 42-369 to 42-372. Reserved.
DIVISION 22. AMENDMENTS TO THE OFFICIAL ZONING DISTRICTS MAP
SUBDIVISION II. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
Sec. 42-373. Approving a community or neighborhood development plan affecting lands situated on the northwest corner of the intersection of Pershing Place and Independence Drive known as Pershing Village.
That the application and plan for the development of a neighborhood unit development in the City of Rolla, Missouri on property more particularly described as follows:

A fractional part of tract 4 of Heritage Heights Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, more particularly described as follows: Beginning at the SW corner of Sec. 6, Twp. 37 N. Rng. 7 W.; thence N. 0o 11'E., along the centerline of McCutchen Road, 1665.0ft.; thence S. 89o 49' E., 30.0 ft.; thence along the centerline of Pershing Place and along the arc of a curve, Delta Right, 61o 59', radius 50 ft., 54.09 ft.; thence S. 27o 50' W., 18.85 ft.; thence N. 62o 10'E., 25.0 ft. to the east right of way line of Pershing Place and the point of beginning of the tract herein described; thence N. 62o 03' E., 84.98 ft.; thence N. 81o 50' E. 127.21 ft.; thence S. 36o 56' E., 324.05 ft.; thence N. 79o 23' E., 89.98 ft.; thence S. 11o 20' E., 387.62 ft.; thence N. 78o 40 ft. E., 129.62 ft. to the west right of way line of Independence Road; thence in a southerly direction along the west right of way line of Independence Road and the arc of a curve, Delta angle right, 8o 06' 50", radius 1884.86 ft., a distance of 266.92 ft.; thence S. 4o 00' W., 46.35 ft.; thence N. 23o 26' 52" W., 184.93 ft.; thence S. 57o 54' W., 162.36 ft. to the east right of way line of Pershing Place; thence in a northwesterly direction along the east right of way line of Pershing Place and the arc of a curve, Delta angle right 4o 01' 13", radius 1885.08 ft., a distance of 132.27 ft.; thence N. 28o 50' W., along the right of way line of Pershing Place, 23.30 ft.; thence in a northwesterly direction along the right of way line of Pershing Place, and the arc of a curve, Delta left, 8o 00', radius 1935.00 ft., 270.18 ft.; thence N. 36o 50' W., along the east right of way line of Pershing Place 35.96 ft.; thence northwesterly along the east right of way line of Pershing Place and the arc of a curve, Delta right, 9o 00' radius 1885.08 ft., 296.11 ft.; thence N. 27o 50' W., 146.06 along the east right of way line of Pershing Place to the point of beginning. Containing 5.12 acres, more or less, as per survey by John B. Heagler, Jr.

Be and the same is hereby approved, subject to the following modifications, conditions and provisions:

Supplemental use regulation set forth in Section 42-278 paragraph (i) is hereby waived.
Section 42-36 (i) of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby waived.
Section 42-26 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby waived.
That the appropriate restrictions be attached to final plat of the area to maintain the use restrictions approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. (Ord. 2321, § 1, 5-3-82.)


Sec. 42-374. Approving a community or neighborhood development plan for the Charles Maize property affecting lands situated in lot 3 of the Railroad Addition located in the NE 1/4 of the NW 1/4 of the NE 1/4 of Section 2.
All that part of lot 3 of Railroad Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, and located in the NE 1/4 of the NW 1/4 of the NE 1/4 of Sec. 2, Twp. 37N., Rng. 8 W. of 5th P.M., described as follows:

Commencing at the NE corner of Railroad lot 3 and on Vienna Road; thence S. 88o 44' W. 19.8 ft. along the N. line of said Railroad lot 3 to the W. line of said Vienna road, the true point of beginning of the tract hereinafter described; thence S. 0o 54' E. 260.09 ft. along said W. line; thence S. 89o 06' W. 270.56 ft.; thence S. 0o 54' E. 160.95 ft.; thence N. 89o 06' E. 270.56 to aforesaid W. line of Vienna Road; thence S. 0o 54' E. 168.5 ft. along said W. road line to the S. line of Railroad lot 3; thence S. 89o 40' W. 270.64 ft. along said S. line of lot 3 to the center line of a small creek; thence N. 24o 59' W. 207.06 ft. and N. 19o 34' W. 192.93 ft. and N. 1o 33' E. 102.08 ft. and N. 12o 29' W. 112.36 ft. all along center line of creek to the N. line of Railroad lot 3 at a point N. 88o 44' E. 212.0 ft. from the NW corner of said lot 3; thence N. 88o 44' E. 434.74 ft. along said N. line to the true point of beginning.

Be and the same is hereby approved, subject to the following modifications, conditions and provisions:

Supplemental use regulation set forth in Section 42-274 paragraph (i) is hereby waived.
Section 42-36 (i) of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby waived.
Section 42-26 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, is hereby waived.
That the appropriate restrictions be attached to final plat of the area to maintain the use restrictions approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. (Ord. 2339, §1, 8-2-82.)


Sec. 42-375. Amending the site plan of the Vienna Woods neighborhood or community unit development.
That the site plan of the Vienna Woods Neighborhood or Community Unit Development plat as same is submitted on this date is hereby approved as amended. (Ord. 2403, §1, 1-3-84)

 



Sec. 42-376. Approving a planned unit development plan submitted for consideration according to the provisions of Article III, Chapter 42 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, affecting lands situated north of 10th Street and abutting the east corporate limits in the City of Rolla, Missouri.
That the application and plan for the development of a planned unit development in the City of Rolla, Missouri on property more particularly described as follows:

"A fractional part of the South Half of Lot 1 of the Southwest Quarter of Section 6, Township 37 North, Range 7 West of the 5th P.M. described as follows: Commencing at the Northeast Corner of the South Half of Lot 1 of the Southwest Quarter of said Section 6; thence North 88°-46' West, 171.50 feet along the Half Lot Line to the true point of beginning of the hereinafter described tract: Thence continuing North 88°-46' West, 634.31 feet along said Half Lot Line to the northeast corner of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Book 160, Page 347; thence South 0°-24'-50" East, 417.52 feet along the East Line of said Book 160, Page 347 parcel to its southeast corner; thence North 88°-46' West, 23.80 feet along the South Line of said Book 160, Page 347 parcel; thence South 0°-19'-20" East, 869.81 feet to the North right-of-way of State Route BB; thence South 89°-15' East, 60.01 feet along said North right-of-way; thence North 0°-19'-20" West, 347.82 feet; thence South 89°-42'-30" East, 583.59 feet; thence North 0°-31'-10" East, 929.13 feet to the true point of beginning. Above described tract contains 14.21 acres, more or less, description derived from survey R-4624, dated November 22, 1991, by Elgin Surveying & Engineering, Inc."

be and the same is hereby approved. (Ord. 2853, §1)



Sec. 42-377. Approving a planned unit development plan submitted for consideration according to the provisions of Article III, Chapter 42 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, affecting lands situated west of Forum Drive and south of St. James Road (Oak Tree Apartments).
That the application and plan for the development of a planned unit development in the City of Rolla, Missouri on property more particularly described as follows:

All of Tract No. 6 of the Forum Lakes Addition, an Addition to the City of Rolla, Missouri, and being generally located on the west side of Forum Drive, North of the intersection of Forum Drive and California Drive to a point 654 feet north of said intersection.

be and the same is hereby approved. (Ord. 3019, §1)



Sec. 42-378. Approving North Brook, a planned unit development according to the provisions of Article III, Chapter 42.278 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri.
That the Basic Zoning Ordinance No. 1248, Chapter 42 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, which said zoning ordinance adopts zoning regulations, use districts and a zoning map in accordance with a comprehensive plan, be and the same is hereby amended by changing the zoning and classification of the following property situated within the City of Rolla, Missouri, and described as follows:

A fractional part of the Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 36, Township 38 North, Range 8 West of the 5th P.M. described as follows: Beginning at the Northeast Corner of the Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of said Section 36; thence South 0°08'10" West, 757.75 feet along the East line of said Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of the northeast corner of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Document No 9300693; thence south 88°42'50" West, 249.88 feet along the North line of said Document No. 9300693 parcel to its northwest corner; thence South 0°09'20" West, 522.90 feet along the West line of said Document No. 9300693 parcel to its Southwest corner, also being a point on the North right of way of Old St. James Road, thence South 88°47'10" West, 159.07 feet along said North right of way; thence North 1°55' West, 18.00 feet; thence North 31°14'20" West, 83.53 feet; thence North 13°33'20" West, 153.84; thence North 45°37'50" West, 60.28 feet; thence North 32°31'40" West, 88.42 feet; thence North 64°08'50" West, 116.23 feet; thence North 33°10' West, 6.96 feet to the Corporate Limits of Rolla, Missouri; thence North 0°08'30" East, 82.56 feet, and, North 10°33'40" East, 798.92 feet, all along said Corporate Limits; thence North 89°00' East, 544.53 feet to the true point of beginning. Above described tract contains 14.21 acres, more or less, per plat of survey R-7295, dated June 25, 1996, by Elgin Surveying & Engineering, Inc.

from its present C-3 (commercial district) to PUD (planned unit development) zoning. (Ord. 3161, §1)



Sec. 42-379. Approving the rezoning and final plat of Park Place Senior Housing, a Planned Unit Development. (Brown)
That the Basic Zoning Ordinance No. 1248, Chapter 42 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, which said zoning ordinance adopts zoning regulations, use districts and a zoning map in accordance with a comprehensive plan, be and the same is hereby amended by changing the zoning and classification of the following property situated within the City of Rolla, Missouri, and described as follows:

A fractional part of Lot 85 of Railroad Addition, Rolla, Missouri more particularly described as follows: Beginning at the Southwest Corner of Lot 85 of said Railroad Addition; thence North 0°25'50" East, 652.13 feet along the West line of said Lot 85 to the southerly right-of-way of Lanning Lane; thence North 87°47' East 379.52 feet along said southerly right-of-way to the west line of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Book 298, Page 175; thence South 0°33'40" West, 658.56 feet along said West line to the South line of the aforesaid Lot 85 of Railroad Addition; thence South 88°44'40" West, 377.77 feet along said South line to the point of beginning. Above described tract contains 5.69 acres, more or less, per plat of survey R-9583, dated September 7, 2000 by Elgin Surveying & Engineering, Inc.

from its present R-1 (single family district) to R-3 (multi-family district) zoning.

That an application for a Planned Unit Development (PUD) for this property, Park Place Senior Housing, has met the requirements of Section 42-278 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri and is hereby approved. (Ord. 3403, §§ 1 & 2)



Sec. 42-380. Approving the rezoning and final plat of Jordan's Pass, a Planned Unit Development. (Jordan)
(Ord. 3406, §§ 1 & 2) (Repealed by Ord. 3504, § 1)



Sec. 42-381. Approving the rezoning and final plat of North Meadow, a Planned Unit Development (Sally/Brown).
That the Basic Zoning Ordinance No. 1248, Chapter 42 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, which said zoning ordinance adopts zoning regulations, use districts and a zoning map in accordance with a comprehensive plan, be and the same is hereby amended by changing the zoning classification of the following property situated within the City of Rolla, Missouri, and described as follows:

Tract 9 of Forum Lakes Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla, Missouri

from its present R-3 (multi-family district) zoning to PUD (Planned Unit Development). (Ord. 3431, §1)

That an application for a Planned Unit Development (PUD) for this property, North Meadow Planned Unit Development, has met the requirements of Section 42-278 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri and is hereby approved. (Ord. 3431, §2)



Sec. 42-382. Approving North Ridge Planned Unit Development (Sally/Brown).
That the Basic Zoning Ordinance 3414, Chapter 42 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, which said zoning ordinance adopts zoning regulations, use districts and a zoning map in accordance with a comprehensive plan, be and the same is hereby amended by changing the zoning classification of the following property situated within the City of Rolla, Missouri, and described as follows: Lots 11A and 11B of a Resubdivision of Tract 11 of Forum Lakes Subdivision, a Subdivision in Rolla, Missouri from its present R-3 (multi-family district) zoning to PUD (Planned Unit Development).
That an application for a Planned Unit Development (PUD) for this property, North Ridge Planned Unit Development, has met the requirements of Section 42-201 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri and is hereby approved.
The Planned Unit Development shall follow the requirements and standards of attached "Exhibit 1" (Ord. 3512, §§ 1 & 2)


Sec. 42-383 - Approving Lexington Place as a Planned Unit Development. (Brown)
That the Basic Zoning Ordinance No. 3414, Chapter 42 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, which said zoning ordinance adopts zoning regulations, use districts and a zoning map in accordance with a comprehensive plan, be and the same is hereby amended by changing the zoning classification of the following property situated within the City of Rolla, Missouri, and described as follows:

A fractional part of the Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 35, Township 38 North, Range 8 West of the 5th P.M. described as follows: Commencing at the Southeast Corner of the Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of said Section 35; thence South 88°19'30" West, 25.01 feet along the South line of said Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter to the West right of way of Vienna Road, the true point of beginning of the hereinafter described tract: Thence continuing South 88°19'30" West, 129.99 feet along said South line of the Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter to the southeast corner of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Document No. 2002-7619; thence North 0°26' West, 211.44 feet along the East line of said Document No. 2002-7619 parcel to its northeast corner; thence North 75°08' West, 306.45 feet, and, South 88°18'20" West, 185.25 feet, all along the northerly line of said Document No. 2002-7619 parcel to the easterly right of way of Vichy Road; thence North 19°42'10" West, 265.10 feet along said easterly right of way to the southernmost corner of Lot 1 of Spring Crest; thence North 36°10'30" East, 109.75 feet, and, North 27°05'20" East, 89.64 feet, and, North 16°41'20" East, 92.10 feet, and, North 2°40' East, 39.26 feet, and, North 16°37'20" East, 47.92 feet, and, North 27°05'10" East, 74.66 feet, and, North 30°24'50" East, 117.89 feet, and, North 5°06'40" West, 68.93 feet, and, North 59°37'10" West, 64.49 feet, and, North 42°17'40" West, 133.14 feet, and, North 10°04'20" West, 65.27 feet, all along the easterly line of said Lot 1 to the North line of the aforesaid Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter; thence North 88°12'30" East, 468.74 feet along said North line; thence South 0°15'10" East, 207.45 feet to the North line of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Document No. 9404466; thence South 88°27'20" West, 57.34 feet along said North line to the northwest corner of said Document No. 9404466 parcel; thence South 1°01'20" East, 435.06 feet along the West line of said Document No. 9404466 parcel and its extension to the northwest corner of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Document No. 1997-3569; thence South 0°40'30" West, 227.49 feet along the West line of said Document No. 1997-3569 parcel and its extension to the northwest corner of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Book 289, Page 239; thence South 0°30'20" East, 168.33 feet along the West line of said Book 289, Page 239 parcel to its southwest corner; thence South 75°14' East, 210.37 feet along the southerly line of said Book 289, Page 239 parcel to the aforesaid West right of way of Vienna Road; thence South 0°25'50" East, 225.52 feet along said West right of way to the true point of beginning. Above described tract contains 10.19 acres, more or less, per plat of survey R-11095, revised December 8, 2003, by Elgin Surveying & Engineering, Inc. from R-1 (single-family district) zoning to PUD (Planned Unit Development).

That an application for a Planned Unit Development (PUD) for this property, Lexington Place Planned Unit Development, has met the requirements of Section 42-201 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri and is hereby approved.
The Planned Unit Development shall follow the requirements and standards of attached "EXHIBIT 1" and be in substantial conformance with the site plan.
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval.
Occupancy permits shall not be issued for any of the units until public street improvements have been completed with the approval of the Public Works Director. (Ord. 3590, §§1-5)


Sec. 42-384. Approving Cedar Trail Planned Unit Development. (Timber Ridge Builders)
That ordinance number 3647 (Zumwalt Planned Unit Development) is hereby repealed.
That an ordinance shall be adopted to establish Cedar Trail Planned Unit Development according to Section 42.201 of the Rolla City Code for the following property situated within the City of Rolla, Missouri, and described as follows: A part of Lots 59, 60, 68 and 69 all in the Railroad Addition to the City of Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri, described as follows:

Beginning at an iron pin at the SW corner of Railroad Lot 59; Thence along the South line of Railroad Lot 60, S 87°22'01" W (basis of bearing based on survey #I-1703 by Integrity Engineering, Inc.) 144.66 feet to an iron pin on the Southerly right-of-way line of Christy Drive, as located September 2006; Thence with said Southerly right-of-way line, S 56°49'19" W 100.45 feet an iron pin; Thence along a curve to the left with a chord bearing and length of S 38°10'32" W 111.91 feet to an iron pin; Thence S 19°31'44" W 82.91 feet to an iron pin; Thence along a curve to the right with a chord bearing and length of S 42°05'47" W 172.70 feet to an iron pin; Thence S 64°39'49" W 197.27 feet to an iron pin; Thence along a curve to the right with a chord bearing and length of N 88°08'40" W 205.64 feet to an iron pin; Thence N 60°57'10" W 190.24 feet to an iron pin at the intersection with the Southeasterly right-of-way line of Houston Road, as located September 2006; Thence with said Southeasterly right-of-way line, along a curve to the right with a chord bearing and length of N 26°40'48" E 28.47 feet; Thence N 31°22'37" E 21.57 feet to an iron pin at the intersection with the Northerly right-of-way line of Christy Drive; Thence with said Northerly right-of-way line, S 60°57'10" E 190.53 feet to an iron pin; Thence along a curve to the left with a chord bearing and length of S 88°08'40" E 159.94 feet to an iron pin; Thence N 64°39'49" E 197.27 feet to an iron pin; Thence along a curve to the left with a chord bearing and length of N 42°05'47" E 134.32 feet to an iron pin; Thence N 19°31'44" E 82.91 feet to an iron pin; Thence along a curve to the right with a chord bearing and length of N 38°10'32" E 143.88 feet to an iron pin; Thence N 56°49'19" E 15.71 feet to an iron pin at the intersection with the South line of Railroad Lot 60; Thence with said South line, S 87°22'01 W 92.52 feet to an iron pin; Thence leaving said South line N 34°41'55" W 279.25 feet to an iron pin on the Southeasterly right-of-way line of Houston Road, as located September 2006; Thence with said Southeasterly right-of-way line, N 53°29'16" E 44.91 feet to an iron pin; Thence N 53°10'06 E 260.29 feet to an iron pin; Thence N 42°33'17" E 140.93 feet to an iron pin; Thence N 44°28'12" E 78.25 feet to an iron pin; Thence leaving said Southeasterly right-of-way line, S 00°47'31" W 312.04 feet to an iron pin; Thence S 89°29'04" E 104.05 feet to an iron pin on the West line of Railroad Lot 59; Thence with said West line, N 00°47.31" E 420.51 feet to an iron pipe at the NW corner of Railroad Lot 59; Thence with the North line of Railroad Lot 59, N 89°08'46" E 378.33 feet to an iron pin; Thence N 88°47'55" E 118.59 feet to an iron pin; Thence leaving said North line, S 00°15'29" E 665.47 feet to an iron pin on the South line of Railroad Lot 59; Thence with said South line S 89°4'08" W 505.83 feet to the point of beginning. Description per survey number I-2706 by Integrity Engineering, Inc. October 9, 2006. Containing 12.42 acres. Subject to easements and restrictions existing and of record.

That the Planned Unit Development shall follow the requirements and standards of “Exhibit I" attached (Requirements and Standards applicable to Lot 2 of Cedar Trail Planned Unit Development) and be in substantial conformance with the site plan.
That “Exhibit I" shall be filed with this ordinance. (Ord. 3647, §§1-3; Ord. 3772, §§1-3; Ord. 3900, §§2-3)


Sec. 42-385. Approving real estate known as 1551 Highway 72 East from R-1 (Single Family) to PUD (Planned Unit Development) District zoning. (Bahr)
That the Basic Zoning Ordinance No. 3414, Chapter 42 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, which said zoning ordinance adopts zoning regulations, use districts and a zoning map in accordance with a comprehensive plan, be and the same is hereby amended by changing the zoning and classification of the following property situated within the City of Rolla, Missouri, and described as follows:

A fractional part of the North Half of Lot 2 of the Northwest Quarter, and a fractional part of the North Half of Lot 3 of the Northwest Quarter of Section 18, Township 37 North, Range 7 West of the 5th P.M. described as follows: Commencing at the Northwest Corner of Lot 2 of the Northwest Quarter of said Section 18; thence South 89°13'50" East, 30.00 feet along the Section Line to the true point of beginning of the hereinafter described tract: Thence continuing South 89°13'50" East, 516.00 feet along said Section Line to the northwest corner of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Document No. 2002-5138; thence South 0°10'40" West; 781.36 feet along the West line of said Document No. 2002-5138 parcel to the North line of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Document No. 2000-878; thence North 89°12'40" West, 559.86 feet along the northerly line of said Document No. 2000-878 parcel to its northwest corner; thence South 40°45'20" West, 421.68 feet along the westerly line of said Document No. 2000-878 parcel to the northeasterly right of way of Missouri Highway 72; thence North 49°23'10" West, 61.45 feet along said northeasterly right of way to the southernmost corner of a parcel described in Phelps County Deed Records at Document No. 2003-2216; thence North 40°58'30" East, 467.06 feet along the southeasterly line of said Document No. 2003-2216 parcel; thence South 76°34'40" East 61.21 feet; thence South 89°18' East, 170.22 feet; thence North 0°10'40" East, 375.00 feet; thence North 89°`12'50" West, 170.00 feet; thence North 0°10'10" East, 346.33 feet to the true point of beginning. Above described tract contains 8.49 acres, more or less, per plat of survey R-11834, revised June 13, 2005 by Elgin Surveying & Engineering, Inc. from R-1 (single family) to PUD (planned unit development) zoning.

Any future land subdivision within the PUD shall require the dedication of right-of-way, in an amount and location as determined by the Public Works Director. (Ord. 3685, §§1-2)



Sec. 42-386. Approving the rezoning of real estate known as 8.43 acres South of Victoria Hills Plat No. 2 from R-1 (Single Family) District to PUD (Planned Unit Development. (Forness)
That the Basic Zoning Ordinance No. 3414, Chapter 42 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, which said zoning ordinance adopts zoning regulations, use districts and a zoning map in accordance with a comprehensive plan, be and the same is hereby amended by changing the zoning and classification of the following property situated within the City of Rolla, Missouri, and described as follows: Part of the SW1/4 of the SW1/4 of Section 13, T37N, R8W of the 5th P.M. in the City of Rolla, Phelps County Missouri, described as follows: commencing at the SW corner of the SW1/4 of the SW1/4 of said Sec. 13, thence N32°37'28"E 52.38 feet to the east right-of-way line of Rolla Street. Thence along said East right-of-way line N00°24'23"E 181.16 feet to the point of beginning. Thence with same N00°07'54"E 179.48 feet, thence with same N00°16'10"E 10.00 feet to the South line of Victoria Hills Plat #2, thence leaving said East right-of-way line of Rolla Street N89°21'13"E 1304.61 feet along the South line of Victoria Hills Plat #2, thence leaving said South line S00°51'30"W 9.95 feet along the East line of said SW1/4 of the SW1/4, thence with same S00°22'46"W 189.25 feet to the Northerly right-of-way line of Lions Club Drive. Thence leaving said East line along said Northerly right-of-way line the following courses and distances S64°27'53"W 76.16 feet, thence along a curve to the right having a radius of 1660.00 feet and an arc length of 604.63 feet with a chord of S75°32'33"W 601.29 feet, thence along a curve to the right having a radius of 2251.83 feet and an arc length of 135.68 feet with a chord of S88°09'16"W 135.66 feet, thence N89°52'17"W 80.73 feet, thence leaving said northerly right-of-way line N00°13'57"W 185.00 feet to the South right-of-way line of Pebble Stone Lane, thence along said South right-of-way line S89°32'03"W 250.00 feet, thence with same S89°44'43"W 185.55 feet to the point of beginning. Containing 8.43 acres. Subject to easements and restrictions existing or of record; from R-1 (single family district) to PUD (planned unit development) zoning.

That Pebble Stone PUD be approved with the landscaping site plan, building elevation drawing, homeowner covenants/restrictions and Exhibit I requirements and standards.

(Ord. 3745, §§1-2)

Sec. 42-387. Approving the rezoning of real estate known as Lot 1 of VBC Inc Subdivision from C-2 (General Retail District) zoning to PUD (Planned Unit Development District) zoning. (Lincoln Hotel Group Inc.)
That the Basic Zoning Ordinance No. 3414, Chapter 42 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, which said zoning ordinance adopts zoning regulations, use districts and a zoning map in accordance with a comprehensive plan, be and the same is hereby amended by changing the zoning and classification of the following property situated within the City of Rolla, Missouri, and described as follows: Lot 1 of VBC Inc. Subdivision, a subdivision in the City of Rolla, from C-2 (general retail district) zoning to PUD (Planned Unit Development District) zoning.
The PUD site plan and Exhibit 1 shall be filed with the ordinance. (Ord. 3787, §§1-2)


Sec. 42-388. Approving rezoning real estate known as Lots 1-4 and the north half of the vacated alley of Block 9, Holloway Addition from R-3 (Multi Family) Zoning to PUD (Planned Unit Development District) Zoning. (Chapman)
That the Basic Zoning Ordinance No. 3414, Chapter 42 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, which said zoning ordinance adopts zoning regulations, use districts and a zoning map in accordance with a comprehensive plan, be and the same is hereby amended by changing the zoning and classification of the following property situated within the City of Rolla, Missouri, and described as follows: Lots 1-4 and the north half of the vacated alley of Block 9, Holloway Addition, in the City of Rolla, from R-3 (multi-family district) zoning to PUD (Planned Unit Development District) zoning.
The PUD site plan and Exhibit 1 shall be filed with the ordinance. (Ord. 3795, §§1-2)


Sec. 42-389. Approving the rezoning of real estate known as 400 East 6th Street (Block 70, County Addition) from C-1 (neighborhood business district) to PUD (planned unit development district) zoning. (Marge & Mavis LLC)
That the Basic Zoning Ordinance No. 3414, Chapter 42 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, which zoning ordinance adopts zoning regulations, use districts and a zoning map in accordance with a comprehensive plan, be and the same is hereby amended by changing the zoning and classification of the following property situated within the City of Rolla, Missouri, and described as follows: 400 East 6th Street (Block 70, County Addition), in the City of Rolla, from C-1 (neighborhood business district) zoning to PUD (planned unit development district) zoning.
Exhibit I, Exhibit I (A) Site Plan, Exhibit I (B) Landscape Plan, Exhibit I (C) Exterior Elevations, shall be filed with the ordinance.
By this Ordinance, the City Council hereby consents to the issuance of a license to sell liquor limited to the School House PUD. The School House PUD building does not lie within 100 lineal feet of a school, church, or building regularly used as a place of worship and, therefore, is not subject to any exception requirement under State statute. (Ord. 3873, §§1-3)
That Ordinance No. 3873 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri is hereby revised and amended by changing certain land use and site/building design elements as described in the attached Exhibit 1 (Text) affecting real estate described as follows: 400 East 6th Street (Block 70, County Addition), in the City of Rolla.
Exhibit I (Text), Exhibit (A) Development (site) Plan, Exhibit (B) Landscape Plan, Exhibit (C) Exterior Elevation, Exhibit (D) Exterior Elevation "Patio" shall be filed with the revised and amended ordinance. (Ord. 3921, §§1-2)


Sec. 42-390. Approving the rezoning of real estate known as part of Tract 3, Heritage Heights Addition from R-3 (Multi-Family) zoning to PUD (Planned Unit Development District) zoning. (Gingerbread House)
That the Basic Zoning Ordinance No. 3414, Chapter 42 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, which zoning ordinance adopts zoning regulations, use districts and a zoning map in accordance with a comprehensive plan, be and the same is hereby amended by changing the zoning and classification of the following property situated within the City of Rolla, Missouri, and described as follows:

A fractional part of Lot 3 of Heritage Heights Addition, Rolla, Missouri more particularly described as follows: Beginning at the Southwest corner of Tract B, of said subdivision, thence North 89°42’00” East, 378.01 feet to the Westerly right-of-way of Pershing Place, thence Southeasterly along said right-of-way on a curve with a chord bearing and distance of South 30°36’00” East, 98.24’ with a 1,885.00’ radius, thence South 29°06’20” East, 23.30’, thence along a curve with a chord bearing and distance of South 30°22’40” East, 85.95’ with a radius of 1935.08’ to a point on the Westerly right-of-way of Pershing place and the Northerly right-of-way of Truman Avenue, thence along said Truman Avenue South 57°55’40” West, 215.27’, thence along said right-of-way on a curve with a chord bearing and distance of North 87°56’00” West, 50.17’ with a radius of 44.70’, thence North 53°47’40” West, 87.80’, thence along a curve with a chord bearing and distance of North 71°57’10” West, 170.18’ with a radius of 273.03’, thence South 89°53’20” West, 17.10’ to the Easterly right-of-way of McCutchen Drive, thence along said McCutchen Drive North 00°09’10” West, 185.04’ back to the point of beginning; containing approximately 2.37 acres more or less from R-3 (multi-family district) zoning to PUD (Planned Unit Development District) zoning.

Exhibit I (Requirements/Standards), Exhibit II (Site Plan) and Exhibit III (Exterior Elevations) shall be filed with the ordinance. (Ord. 3889, §§1-2)


Sec. 42-391.   Approving the rezoning of real estate known as 207 West 9th Street from G-I to PUD. (Wands)
That Ordinance No. 3917 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri is hereby revised and amended by changing the total proposed occupancy permitted as described in the attached Exhibit 1 (Text) affecting real estate described as follows: 207 West 9th Street, in the City of Rolla. (Ord. 3917, §1; 3945, §1)
Exhibit 1 (Text) shall be filed with the ordinance.  (Ord. 3917, §2; 3945, §2)

Sec. 42-392. Rezoning of real estate known as 600-602 North Elm Street and 604 North Elm Street, from CC (Center City District) zoning and C-3 (Highway Commercial District) zoning to PUD (Planned Unit Development District) zoning. (Wands)
That the Basic Zoning Ordinance No. 3414, Chapter 42 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, which said zoning ordinance adopts zoning regulations, use districts and a zoning map in accordance with a comprehensive plan, be and the same is hereby amended by changing the zoning and classification of the following property situated within the City of Rolla, Missouri, and described as follows: All of Lot 7 and a fractional part of Lots 3, 5, and 6, County Addition from CC (Center City District) zoning and C-3 (Highway Commercial District) zoning to PUD (Planned Unit Development District) zoning. (Wands) (Ord. 4031, §1)

See attached Exhibit 1 (text) and the Sally Building Development Plan, which shall be filed with the revised and amended re-zoning ordinance. (Ord. 4031, §2)


Sec. 42-393. Rezoning of real estate known as Lot 4 of the Heritage Height Subdivision, A 1.3 acre tract located at the intersection of Pershing Place and Truman Avenue, from C-O (Commercial Office District) to PUD (Planned Unit Development District) zoning. (Woessner)
That the Basic Zoning Ordinance No. 3414, Chapter 42 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, which said zoning ordinance adopts zoning regulations, use districts and a zoning map in accordance with a comprehensive plan, be and the same is hereby amended by changing the zoning and classification of the following property situated within the City of Rolla, Missouri, and described as follows: All of Lot 4, Heritage Height Re-Subdivision of Tract 2 & 3 from C-O (Commercial Office District) to PUD (Planned Unit Development District) zoning. (Woessner) (Ord. 4032, §1)

See attached Exhibit 1 (text) and the Pershing Hill Development Plan, which shall be filed with the revised and amended re-zoning ordinance. (Ord. 4032, §2)

§ 42-394.   Amending the Planned Unit Development known as the Pebble Stone PUD by amending certain elements found in Exhibit 1 of said PUD (Forness).
That the Basic Zoning Ordinance No. 3414, Chapter 42 of the Code of the City of Rolla, Missouri, which said zoning ordinance adopts zoning regulations, use districts and a zoning map in accordance with a comprehensive plan, be and the same is hereby amended by changing certain elements of Exhibit 1 as follows:

Uses Permitted: The PUD may consist of nineteen duplex or attached single-family type dwellings totaling not more than 38 dwelling units. In lieu of any duplex or attached single-family type dwelling unit, as shown on the Pebble Stone approved Site Plan, there may be constructed one, single-family dwelling unit (to be located upon two tracts, with setback requirements to be enforced and applied as in the case of a duplex or attached single-family dwelling unit). A 0.5 acre private neighborhood park shall be developed as shown on the Pebble Stone PUD Site Plan. The City of Rolla will not be responsible for improving and maintaining the private "Recreation Area" shown on the Pebble Stone PUD Site Plan.

Intensity of Development: Development shall adhere to the following: Each duplex or attached single-family building shall have a minimum of three thousand eight hundred and fourteen (3,814) square feet of gross floor area. Each single family dwelling (as constructed across two tracts) shall have a minimum of one thousand six hundred (1,600) square feet of gross floor area on the ground level.

That Exhibit 1 of the Pebble Stone PUD is hereby amended to reflect the changes and restrictions found in the revised Exhibit 1 "Uses Permitted" and "Intensity of Development" requirements and standards.
Secs. 42-395. Reserved.
DIVISION 22.  AMENDMENTS TO THE OFFICIAL ZONING DISTRICTS MAP  

SUBDIVISION IIa.  WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES CODE

Sec. 42-396.  Purpose.
Statement of Purpose.  The general purpose of this Division 22 ("Division") is to regulate the placement, construction, and modification of telecommunications Wireless Communications Facilities to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, while at the same time not unreasonably interfering with the development of the competitive wireless telecommunications marketplace in the City of Rolla.  Specifically, this Division is intended to:
Provide for the appropriate location and development of telecommunications facilities and systems to serve the citizens and businesses of the City of Rolla;
Minimize adverse visual impacts of Wireless Communications Facilities through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques that provide predictability for nearby property owners and others that future uses will not materially alter such approved aesthetic protections without zoning hearing procedures and input from interested parties;
Ensure that any new Wireless Communications Facilities are compatible with the neighborhood or surrounding community to the extent possible; and
Ensure that regulation of Wireless Communications Facilities does not have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, does not unreasonably discriminate among functionally equivalent providers of such service and promotes the provision and availability of communication services within the City, and is no more burdensome than regulations applied to other types of infrastructure deployments.
Applicability; preemption. Notwithstanding any ordinance to the contrary, the procedures set forth in this Division shall be applicable to all Wireless Communications Facilities existing or installed, built, or modified after the effective date of this Division to the fullest extent permitted by law. No provision of this Division shall apply to any circumstance in which such application shall be unlawful under superseding federal or state law and furthermore, if any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this Division is now or in the future superseded or preempted by state or federal law or found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unauthorized, such provision shall be automatically interpreted and applied as required by law. (Ord. 4470, §1)
Sec. 42-397. Definitions.

As used in this Division, the following terms shall have the meanings and usages indicated:

Accessory Use: Any use authorized herein that exists in addition to the principal use of the property.
Antenna: Any device that transmits and/or receives wireless radio waves for voice, data, or video communications purposes including, but not limited to, television, AM/FM radio, texts, microwave, cellular telephone, and similar forms of communications. The term shall exclude satellite earth station antenna less than two meters in diameter (mounted within 12 feet of the ground or building-mounted) and any receive-only home television antenna.
AGL (Above Ground Level): Ground level shall be determined by the elevation at the center location of measurement.
Authority Pole: A Utility Pole that is owned and/or operated by the City but shall not include municipal electric utility distribution poles or facilities.
Cabinet: A structure for the protection and security of communications equipment associated with one or more Antenna where direct access to equipment is provided from the exterior and that has horizontal dimensions that do not exceed four feet by six feet, and vertical height that does not exceed six feet.
Director: The Community Development Director or his/her designee or official acting in such capacity.
Disguised Support Structure: Any freestanding, artificial structure designed for the support of Antenna, the presence of which is camouflaged or concealed as an appropriately placed and designed architectural or natural feature. Depending on the location and type of disguise used, such concealment may require placement underground of the utilities leading to the structure. Such structures may include but are not limited to clock towers, campaniles, observation towers, light standards, flagpoles, and artificial trees. For purposes of this definition, a structure "camouflaged or concealed as an appropriately-placed and designed architectural or natural feature" shall mean: 
It is consistent with and contributes to and does not detract from the character and property values and use of the area and neighborhood in which it is located;
It does not contain distorted proportions, size, or other features not typically found on the type of structure or feature to which it is designed to replicate;
It cannot be identified as a Support Structure by persons with reasonable sensibilities and knowledge;
Its equipment, accessory buildings, or other aspects or attachments relating to the Disguised Support Structure are wholly concealed using a manner consistent with and typically associated with the architectural or natural structure or feature being replicated; and
It is of a height, design, and type that would ordinarily occur at the location and neighborhood selected. 
Existing Structure: Any structure capable of supporting Wireless Communication Facilities (other than a Support Structure) in full conformance with the design and other requirements of this Division and is: (1) existing prior to the date of all applicable permit applications seeking City authorization for installation of such facilities thereon and (2) not built or installed in anticipation of such specific installation or erected as a means to evade approvals applicable to a non-existing structure.
FAA: The Federal Aviation Administration.
Fast-Track Small Wireless Facility or Fast-Track: A Small Wireless Facility that meets the following requirements for an Antenna and associated equipment:
No more than seven cubic feet in volume (comprised of no more than 27 square feet of exterior surface area, excluding the surface width equal to the width of the Existing Structure or Utility Pole to which it is mounted, on an imaginary enclosure around the perimeter thereof, excluding cable or cable conduit of four inches or less). Volume shall be the measure of the exterior displacement of the Antenna and associated equipment;
Located with the consent of the owner on an Existing Structure or Utility Pole, or concealed within or on a replacement Utility Pole if appearance is not materially altered and the replacement Existing Structure or Utility Pole is no more than five feet taller;
Not exceeding six feet above the top of an Existing Structure or Utility Pole for a total height not exceeding 50 feet nor taller than more than six feet above the average of similar poles within 300 feet.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission.
Height: The vertical distance measured from the center location of measurement at ground level to its highest point and including the main structure and all attachments thereto.
Person: An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization, including the City. 
Right of Way: The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, or alleyway, but not including:
The airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to cellular or other nonwire telecommunications or broadcast service;
Easements obtained by utilities or private easements in platted subdivisions or tracts;
Railroad rights-of-way and ground utilized or acquired for railroad facilities; or
Poles, pipes, cables, conduits, wires, optical cables, or other means of transmission, collection or exchange of communications, information, substances, data, or electronic or electrical current or impulses utilized by a municipally owned or operated utility pursuant to Missouri law.
Shelter: A building for the protection and security of communications equipment associated with one or more Antenna and where access to equipment is gained from the interior of the building. Human occupancy for office or other uses or the storage of other materials and equipment not in direct support of the connected Antenna is prohibited.
Small Wireless Facility: Antennas and associated equipment that meet the following:
Each Antenna could fit within an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume; and
All other associated equipment, to the extent permitted by applicable law to be calculated, of cumulatively no more than 28 cubic feet in volume; provided that no single piece of equipment on the Authority Pole shall exceed nine cubic feet in volume, and no single piece of ground mounted equipment shall exceed 15 cubic feet in volume.
Support Structure: A Tower or Disguised Support Structure.
Tower: A structure designed for the support of one or more Antenna and including guyed towers, self-supporting (lattice) towers, or monopoles, but not Disguised Support Structures, Utility Poles, or buildings. The term shall also not include any Support Structure that includes attachments of 50 feet or less in height owned and operated solely for use by an amateur radio operator licensed by the FCC.
Utility Pole: A pole or similar structure that is or may be used for wireline communications, electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, signage, or a similar function, or for the collocation of Small Wireless Facilities or Fast Track.
Wireless Communications Facility: Any Antenna, Small Wireless Facility, Fast Track, Cabinet, Shelter, and Support Structure and associated equipment. (Ord. 4470, §1)
Sec. 42-398. Application Procedures; Timing.

Applications. Applications for permitted, administrative, or conditional uses pursuant to this Division shall be subject to the supplementary procedures in this Division. Applications shall be submitted to the City as a complete application on forms provided by the City. A "complete application" shall be an application submitted on the forms provided by the City, fully executed by the applicant, identifying the specific approval sought, and containing all attachments, fees as may be established to reimburse the City for its inspection and review costs, and information as required thereon or by the City, consistent with this Division. Applications shall be accompanied by a building permit application and other applicable forms.
Proof of Owner Consent. Applications for permitted, administrative, or conditional uses pursuant to this Division shall be required to provide proof of owner consent, which shall minimally include:
Written consent to pursue the application by all fee simple owners of the underlying real estate (or where located in street rights-of-way, the rights-of-way owner thereof), including when the proposed location is also in a utility easement; and
Written consent to pursue the application of the owner of the structure on which such Facility is to be placed, if different than applicant.
Timing. Applications shall be decided upon within a reasonable time, subject further to state or federal specific additional time requirements as may apply to the particular application.
Consolidated Applications for Small Wireless Facilities. An applicant may submit a consolidated application and receive a single permit for up to 20 collocated Small Wireless Facilities, provided that they are for the same or materially the same design of Small Wireless Facility being collocated on the same or materially the same type of Utility Pole or Support Structure. Denial of one or more Small Wireless Facilities in a consolidated application shall not delay processing of any other Small Wireless Facilities in the same consolidated application.
Opportunity to Cure. In case of a denial, the applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the City and resubmit the application within 30 days of the denial without paying an additional application fee. The City shall approve or deny the revised application within 30 days of resubmission and limit its review to the deficiencies cited in the original denial. (Ord. 4470, §1)
Sec. 42-399. General Requirements.

Applicability. The requirements set forth in this Division shall be applicable to all Wireless Communications Facilities within the City installed, built, or modified after the effective date of this Division to the full extent permitted by law. Such zoning review and approvals required in this Division shall be in addition to any other generally applicable permitting requirement, including applicable building, excavation, rights-of-way, or other permits or approvals.
Principal or accessory use. Towers may be either a principal or accessory use in all non-residential zoning districts, subject to any applicable requirement relating to yard or setback. An accessory use subject to a leasehold interest of a person other than the lot owner may be approved for a Tower only if the leasehold area separately meets all requirements for a separate subdivided lot, including dedicated access, parking, setbacks, and lot size, applicable to a principal use in the district in which the use is proposed as if it was a separate subdivided lot. No other district shall allow Towers unless required by law.  All other Wireless Communications Facilities and Utility Poles other than Towers, may be a principal or accessory use in all districts subject to the requirements herein. 
Building codes, safety standards, and zoning compliance. Wireless Communications Facilities shall be constructed and maintained in compliance with all standards contained in applicable state and local building codes. A certified engineer's structural report shall be required for all applications to construct a new or modify, or any way alter, a Support Structure, a Utility Pole, or Antenna, including Small Wireless Facility and Fast Track, unless waived upon application to the Director stating why such report is unnecessary to the specific application and a determination in the discretion of the Director approving such statement. In addition to any other approvals required by this Division, no Wireless Communication Facility or portion thereof, except for a modification under 47 U.S.C. § 1455(a), shall be erected, replaced, or expanded prior to receipt of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance, unless otherwise required by law, and the issuance of a Building Permit. For sites within City rights-of-way, (1) the most restrictive adjacent underlying zoning district classification shall apply unless otherwise specifically zoned and designated on the official zoning map, (2) Wireless Communications Facilities shall be installed and maintained as not to obstruct or hinder the usual travel or public safety on the rights-of-way or obstruct the legal use of such rights-of-way by authorities or authorized rights-of-way users; and (3) such use shall be required to obtain applicable permits and comply with the City's ROW management rules and regulations set forth in Article III of Chapter 36.
Regulatory compliance. All Wireless Communications Facilities shall meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, FCC, and any other local, state, or federal agency with the authority to regulate Wireless Communications Facilities, and including all required licenses, permits, and taxes applicable to such structure and/or modification.  Should such standards or regulations be amended, then the owner shall bring such devices and structures into compliance with the revised standards or regulations within the time period mandated by the controlling agency. No approval for any placement, construction, or modification of any Wireless Communications Facilities permitted by this Division shall be granted for any applicant having an uncured violation of this Division, any zoning regulation regarding the lot on which the structure is proposed, or any other governmental regulatory, licensing, or tax requirement applicable to such Wireless Communications Facilities within the City unless preempted by applicable law. Modifications under 47 U.S.C. § 1455(a) shall be approved without regard to zoning regulations regarding the lot on which the modification is proposed.
Security. All Wireless Communications Facilities shall be protected from unauthorized access by appropriate security measures. A description of proposed security measures shall be provided as part of any application to install, build, alter, or modify Wireless Communications Facilities. Additional measures may be required as a condition of the issuance of a Building Permit as deemed necessary by the Director or by the City Council in the case of a Conditional Use Permit.
Lighting. Antenna, Small Wireless Facilities, Fast Track, and Support Structures shall not be lighted unless required by the FAA or other state or federal agency with authority to regulate, in which case a description of the required lighting scheme will be made a part of the application to install, build, alter, or modify the Antenna, Small Wireless Facilities, Fast Track, or Support Structure. Lighting may also be approved as a consistent component of a Disguised Support Structure. Equipment Cabinets and Shelters may have lighting only as approved by the Director or City Council on the approved site plan.
Advertising. Except for a Disguised Support Structure in the form of an otherwise lawfully permitted sign, the placement of advertising on Wireless Communications Facilities is prohibited other than on-premises signage of not greater than one square foot on ground equipment or required safety signage.
Design. 
Color. Subject to the requirements of the FAA or any applicable state or federal agency, Wireless Communications Facilities and attachments shall be painted a neutral color consistent with the natural or built environment of the site or an alternative painting scheme approved by the Director, or the City Council in the case of Conditional Use Permits, consistent with the requirements of this Division. 
Ground equipment. When authorized, equipment Shelters, or Cabinets shall have an exterior finish reasonably compatible with the natural or built environment of the site and shall also comply with any design guidelines as may be applicable to the particular zoning district in which the facility is located unless not feasible. All ground equipment shall be either placed underground, contained in a single Shelter or Cabinet, or concealed within a building or approved walled compound.
Antenna design. Antenna attached to a Disguised Support Structure or Tower shall be contained within the Disguised Support Structure or within or mounted flush on the surface to which they are mounted. Antenna attached to an existing building, Utility Pole, or structure shall be of a color matching the surface to which they are mounted. Antenna on the rooftop or attached to a building shall be screened or constructed and/or colored to match the structure to which they are attached. All Antenna shall be designed to be disguised and maximally concealed on or within the Support Structure or other structure. Exposed Antenna on "crow's nest" or other visible platforms or extensions are prohibited. 
Height. Support Structures and Antenna shall not exceed the height limitation of any airport overlay zone as may be adopted by the City or other regulatory agency. Support Structures and Utility Poles may exceed underlying zoning district height restrictions for buildings and structures only where shown to be necessary, provided that no reasonable and feasible alternative exists. To the extent permitted by applicable law, district height restrictions shall be considered by the City in determining the appropriateness of the design and location of the application under the applicable standards for approval. No Support Structure shall be approved at a height exceeding 120 feet AGL unless the applicant clearly demonstrates that such height is required for the proper function of the applicant's system.
Monopole design. All Towers shall be of a monopole design. Lattice, guyed Towers, or other non-monopole Tower designs shall not be permitted.
Compound walls/landscaping. All Towers shall be surrounded by a minimum of a six-foot high decorative wall constructed of brick, stone, or comparable masonry materials and a landscape strip of not less than ten feet in width and planted with materials, which will provide a visual barrier to a minimum height of six feet. The landscape strip shall be exterior to any security wall. In lieu of the required wall and landscape strip, an alternative means of screening may be approved by the Director, or by the City Council in the case of a Conditional Use Permit, upon demonstration by the applicant that an equivalent degree of visual screening will be achieved. Landscaping or other improvements may be required for Disguised Support Structures if needed to implement an approved disguise.
Setbacks. All Support Structures, including any portions of any Wireless Communications Facilities thereon and associated structures, fences, and walls (except for parking associated with the Wireless Communications Facility) shall be separated from any rights-of-way, sidewalk or street, alley, parking area, playground, or other building, and from the property line of any adjacent property at least a horizontal distance equal to the height of the Support Structure, including any portions of any Wireless Communications Facilities thereon.
Storage. Vehicle or outdoor storage on any Wireless Communications Facilities site is prohibited, unless otherwise permitted by the zoning district.
Parking. One hard-surfaced parking spot per Support Structure for periodic maintenance and service shall be provided.
Decorative poles. In districts where there are Utility Poles that were specifically designed for their aesthetic nature and compatibility with the built environment of that district, as determined by the City, such Utility Poles shall be deemed to be decorative Utility Poles. Such decorative Utility Poles, when authorized to be replaced by an applicant for Wireless Communications Facilities pursuant to applicable law and in compliance with this Division and Code, shall only be replaced with a substantially similar decorative Utility Pole that matches the aesthetics and decorative elements of the original decorative Utility Pole being replaced. Such replacement expenses shall be bore wholly by the applicant seeking to place Wireless Communications Facilities on such decorative Utility Pole.
Public property. Wireless Communications Facilities located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the City shall be subject to the requirements of this Division. A license or lease with the City authorizing the location of such Wireless Communications Facilities shall be required for each site.
As-built plans. Within 60 days of completion of the initial construction and any additional construction, three complete sets of plans drawn to scale and certified as accurately depicting the location of all Wireless Communications Facilities constructed shall be furnished to the City.
Historic preservation; 30-day hearing period. To the extent permitted by law, approval shall not be issued for any Wireless Communications Facility that the Director or City Council determines would create a significant negative visual impact or otherwise have a significant negative impact on the historical character and quality of any property within a Historic Preservation District or such District as a whole. For collocation of any certified historic structure as defined in Section 253.545 RSMo., in addition to all other applicable time requirements, there shall be a 30-day time period before approval of an application during which one or more public hearings on collocation to a certified historic structure are held. The City may require reasonable, technically feasible and technological neutral deign and concealment measures as a condition of approval of a Wireless Communication Facility within a historic district or on a historic structure.    
Administration. The Director shall have the authority to establish forms and procedures consistent with this Division and applicable federal, state, and local law to ensure compliance and to facilitate prompt review and administration of applications. (Ord. 4470, §1)
Sec. 42-400. Permitted Use.

Permitted use. The placement of Wireless Communications Facilities fully conforming with the applicable General Requirements in this Division are permitted in all zoning districts (including the right-of-way) only as follows:
Collocations on Existing Support Structures. The attachment of Antenna including Small Wireless Facilities, or associated  equipment to any existing fully conforming Support Structure or Utility Pole, or as otherwise authorized by state or federal law where local zoning is preempted, provided that building permit requirements, national safety codes, and other applicable codes including recognized accepted industry standards for structural, safety, capacity, reliability, and engineering are satisfied, including specifically the requirement to submit a certified structural engineering report as provided in Section 42-399.
Antenna on high-voltage Towers. The mounting of Antenna on or within any existing high-voltage electric transmission Tower, but not exceeding the height of such Tower by more than ten feet, provided that all requirements of this Division and the underlying zoning ordinance are met, except minimum setbacks provided in this Division shall not apply.
Antenna on existing buildings/structures. In all districts, except not on single-family residential or two-family dwellings, the mounting of Antenna on any existing and conforming building or structure (other than a Support Structure or Utility Pole) provided that the presence of the Antenna and equipment is concealed by architectural elements or fully camouflaged or concealed by painting a color identical to the surface to which they are attached, and further provided that all requirements of this Division and the underlying zoning ordinance are met. 
Collocation of Small Wireless Facilities on Authority Poles. In accordance with Section 67.5112 RSMo, a wireless provider may collocate Small Wireless Facilities and install, maintain, modify, operate, and replace Authority Poles, at heights below the height limitations outlined in this Subdivision, which shall be a permitted use in all districts except single-family residential and historic districts subject to Subsection b of this Section below.
New, replacement, or modification of Authority Poles under the following circumstances shall not be considered a permitted use under this Section:
Proposals to construct or modify an Authority Pole that exceeds the greater of 50 feet AGL or more than ten feet above the tallest existing Authority Pole as of January 1, 2019 within 500 feet of the proposed Authority Pole in the City; and
Proposals to collocate on an existing Authority Pole in place on August 28, 2018, that exceeds the height of the existing Authority Pole by more than ten feet.
Application procedure. Application for a Permitted Use under this Section shall require submission of an application with proof of owner consent as required by Section 42-398 and an application fee of $100.00 per Small Wireless Facility and an application fee of $500.00 for the installation, modification, or replacement of a Utility Pole and collocation of a Small Wireless Facility thereon as required to partly cover the City's actual costs, and not to exceed such amounts as may be limited by law. If the applicant is not a Wireless Services Provider, the applicant must submit evidence of agreements or plans, or otherwise provide attestations to the same, which conclusively demonstrate to the City that the proposed site(s) will become operational and used by a Wireless Services Provider within one year of the permit's issuance date. For any application for a Small Wireless Facility, the applicant shall provide an attestation that the proposed Small Wireless Facility complies with the volumetric limitations as required to meet the definition of a Small Wireless Facility in accordance with this Division and pursuant to applicable law.  Applicant shall also submit a certified structural analysis as required in the General Requirements of this Division. Applications requesting any information that is prohibited by federal or state law under the applicable circumstance shall be deemed inapplicable to the subject application. The Director shall issue a decision on the application for a permitted use within the time frame permitted by applicable law. A decision to deny an application shall be made in writing and state the specific reasons for the denial. With respect to a proposed collocation of a Small Wireless Facility or installation, modification, or replacement of a Utility Pole, the Director may deny the application only if the proposal could reasonably be expected to:
Materially interfere with the safe operation of traffic and control equipment or City-owned communications equipment;
Materially and demonstrably interfere with the safe operation of traffic control equipment or City-owned communications equipment;
Materially and demonstrably interfere with sight lines or clear zones for transportation, pedestrians, or nonmotorized vehicles;
Materially interfere with compliance with the American Disabilities Act, or similar federal or state standards regarding pedestrian access or movement;
Materially obstruct or hinder the usual travel or public safety on the rights-of-way;
Materially obstruct the legal use of the rights-of-way by the City, utility, or other third-party;
Fail to comply with the spacing requirements within Section 36-29.b;
Fail to comply with applicable national safety codes, including recognized engineering standards for Utility Poles or Support Structures;
Fail to comply with the decorative pole replacement requirements herein; or
Fail to comply with undergrounding requirements within Section 36-29.b;
(Ord. 4470, §1)

Sec. 42-401. Administrative Approval.

Administrative approval. The placement of Wireless Communications Facilities fully conforming with the General Requirements in this Division are permitted in all zoning districts (including the right-of-way) by Administrative Permit approved by the Director only as follows:
Disguised Support Structures. Any Disguised Support Structure shall have as a condition of approval, unless expressly exempted in the approval, an obligation that is recorded on the property that runs with the land for the benefit of the public, prohibiting modifications to the Disguised Support Structure that defeats the disguise, unless such proposed modification is approved by a duly authorized zoning or conditional use approval approved. If the applicant does not wish to have such a condition, the application shall not qualify for Administrative Permit approval, unless another mechanism is proposed and approved to ensure that the disguise is not subsequently defeated. A Disguised Support Structure proposed to be located within a public or private right-of-way, street, or other pedestrian or vehicular way may be exempted from the General Requirements of this Article relating to parking/access and setbacks, unless determined by the Director as applicable to the specific location for safety reasons or other applicable reasons.   
Fast-Track Small Wireless Facilities. An application for a Fast-Track may be approved administratively by the Director, subject to meeting the following requirements:
General requirements. The following requirements shall generally apply to all Fast-Track located within the City:
The Fast-Track shall substantially match any current aesthetic or ornamental elements of the Existing Structure or Utility Pole, or otherwise be designed to maximally blend in to the built environment, with attention to the current uses within the district at the proposed site;
Any portion above the Existing Structure or Utility Pole shall be concealed and of the same dimensions and appearance so as to appear to be a natural extension of the Existing Structure or Utility Pole in lieu of an enclosure or concealment;
The Fast-Track equipment shall not emit noise audible from the building line of any residentially zoned or used property; and
Location, placement, and orientation of the Fast-Track shall, to the extent feasible, minimize the obstruction to, or visibility from, the closest adjacent properties unless otherwise required by the City for safety reasons. 
Additional requirements when sited near pedestrian and vehicle ways. When a Fast-Track is proposed to be located on an Existing Structure or Utility Pole on or adjacent to public or private streets, sidewalks, or other pedestrian or vehicle ways:
The height of all portions of the Fast-Track shall be located at least eight feet above ground level;
No ground equipment shall be permitted; and
No portions of the Fast-Track shall extend horizontally from the surface of the Utility Pole or Existing Structure more than 16 inches.
Waiver for good cause shown. Additionally, the Director may for good cause shown increase any one or more of the maximum volumetric specifications from the definition of a Fast-Track by up to 50% if the applicant demonstrates that it:
Does not in any location nationally use equipment capable of meeting the specifications and the purpose of the equipment; and
Cannot feasibly meet the requirements as defined and described.
The City Council may further waive one or more of the requirements found in the definition of Fast-Track, or from the General Requirements or the Additional Requirements When Sited Near Pedestrian or Vehicle Ways of this Subdivision, upon good cause shown by the applicant, and provided a showing that the waiver is the minimum necessary to accomplish the purposes of this Division. The burden of proof for any waiver shall be wholly on the applicant. 
Application procedures. Applications for Administrative Permits shall be made on the appropriate forms to the Director consistent with the requirements of this Division. Applications requesting any information that is prohibited by federal or state law under the applicable circumstance shall be deemed inapplicable to the subject application.
General application requirements. Applicant shall submit along with its completed application form:
An application fee of not more than $100.00 per "Fast Track" Small Wireless Facility as required to partly cover the City's actual costs, and an application fee of not more than $500.00 for an application for a Disguised Support Structure and collocation of a Small Wireless Facility thereon and not to exceed such amounts as may be limited by law; any amount not used by the City shall be refunded to the applicant upon written request after a final decision; 
A detailed site plan, based on a closed boundary survey of the host parcel, shall be submitted indicating the exact location of the facility, all dimensions and orientations of the facility and associated equipment, in addition to all existing and proposed improvements including buildings, drives, walkway, parking areas, and other structures, rights-of-way, the zoning categories of the subject and adjoining properties, the location of and distance to off-site residential structures, required setbacks, required buffer and landscape areas, hydrologic features, and the coordinates and height AGL of the Utility Pole or Existing Structure, if applicable and determined by the Director to be necessary to determine compliance with this Division;
Specifications, dimensions, photos, or drawings of the completed installation;
Proof of owner consent as required by Section 36-29.b.
Certified structural analysis as required in the General Requirements of this Division;
If the applicant is not a Wireless Services Provider, the applicant must submit evidence of agreements or plans, or otherwise provide attestations to the same, which conclusively demonstrate to the City that the proposed site(s) will become operational and used by a Wireless Services Provider within one year of the permit's issuance date; and
All other information necessary to show compliance with the applicable requirements of this Division.
Fast-Track specific application requirements. In addition to the above general application requirements, applications for a Fast-Track shall include the following:
An attestation that the proposed Fast-Track meets the volumetric and other requirements to meet the definition of Fast-Track provided in this Division; and
Information demonstrating that the applicant's proposed plans are in compliance with § 67.5113.3(9) RSMo. to the satisfaction of the City.
Review. The application shall be reviewed by the Director to determine compliance with the above standards, including specifically design, location, safety, and appearance requirements and transmit the application for review and comment by other departments and public agencies as may be affected by the proposed facility. 
Additional information may be required. In reviewing an application, the Director may require the applicant to provide additional information, including technical studies, to the extent permitted by applicable law, and contained in an applicable code provision, ordinance, application, or other public guideline.     
Decisions; denials required in writing. The Director shall issue a decision on the permit within the time frame permitted by applicable law. The Director may deny the application or approve the application as submitted or with such modifications or conditions as are, in his/her judgment, reasonably necessary to protect the safety or general welfare of the citizens and property values consistent with and to affect the purposes of this Division, and subject to applicable law. The Director may consider the purposes of this Division and the factors established herein.  A decision to deny an application shall be made in writing and state the specific reasons for the denial. Provided that with respect to a proposed collocation of a Small Wireless Facility or installation, modification, or replacement of a Utility Pole, the Director may deny the application only for the reasons outlined in Section 42-400(b) above.
(Ord. 4470, §1)
Sec. 42-402. Conditional Use Permit.

Conditional Use Permit Required. All proposals to construct or modify a Wireless Communications Facilities not permitted by Section 42-400 or Section 42-401 or not fully complying with the General Requirements of this Division and except for modifications under 47 U.S.C. § 1455(a) which must be approved, shall be permitted only upon the approval of a Conditional Use Permit authorized consistent with Division 16 of Chapter 42 following a duly advertised public hearing, subject to the following additional requirements, procedures, and limitations:
Applications. Applications for Conditional Use Permits shall be filed on such forms required by the Director and processed subject to the requirements of and in the manner established by applicable law, herein, and for Conditional Use Permits in the Zoning Code and, in addition to such other requirements, shall be accompanied by a deposit of $1,500.00, to the extent permitted by applicable law to the specific Wireless Communications Facility. Any amount not used by the City shall be refunded to the applicant upon written request after a final decision. Applications requesting any information that is prohibited by federal or state law under the applicable circumstance shall be deemed inapplicable to the subject application.
Decision and findings required. A decision shall be contemporaneously accompanied by substantial evidence supporting the decision, which shall be made a part of the written record of the meeting at which a final decision on the application is rendered. Evidence shall be under oath and may be submitted with the application or thereafter or presented during the public hearing by the applicant or others.
Additional minimum requirements. No Conditional Use Permit shall be issued unless the applicant has clearly demonstrated by substantial evidence that placement of Wireless Communications Facilities pursuant to Section 42-400 or Section 42-401 of this Division is not technologically or economically feasible. The City may consider current or emerging industry standards and practices, among other information, in determining feasibility.
Findings required. In addition to the determinations or limitations specified herein and by the applicable provisions of Division 16 of Chapter 42 of this Zoning Code for the consideration of Conditional Use Permits, no Conditional Use Permit shall be approved by the City Council unless findings in the affirmative are made that the following conditions exist:
That the design of the Wireless Communications Facilities, including ground layout, maximally reduces visual degradation and otherwise complies with provisions and intent of this Division;
That the design is visually compatible with the area, will not distract from the view of the surrounding area, is maximally concealed or blended in with the environment, and will not adversely affect property values;
That such conditional use shall not be inconsistent or adversely affect the regular permitted uses in the district in which the same is located; and
That the proposal fully complies with applicable law including the General Requirements herein; provided that an exception to the General Requirements, other than building or safety code compliance, may be approved upon evidence that compliance is not feasible or is shown to be unreasonable under the specific circumstances shown. (Ord. 4470, §1)
Sec. 42-403. Commercial Operation of Unlawful Wireless Communications Facilities.
Notwithstanding any right that may exist for a governmental entity to operate or construct Wireless Communications Facilities, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect or operate for any private commercial purpose any Wireless Communications Facilities in violation of any provision of this Division, regardless of whether such Wireless Communications Facilities are located on land owned by a governmental entity. (Ord. 4470, §1)

Sec. 42-404. Removal of Support Structure.
Any Wireless Communications Facility or portion thereof that is no longer in use for its original communications purpose shall be removed at the owner's expense. In the case of multiple operators sharing use of a single Support Structure, this removal requirement shall not apply to the Support Structure until all users cease operations of the same. (Ord. 4470, §1)

Sec. 42-405. Penalty.
Except as may otherwise be provided by law, any person violating any provision in this Division shall be subject to Section 1-7. (Ord. 4470, §1)

Sec. 42-406. Appeals.
The procedures of the Board of Adjustment, pursuant to Division 21 of Chapter 42 shall govern appeals by any aggrieved person of a final action of any City Officer, employee, board, commission, or the City Council that are claimed by an aggrieved person to be unlawful or an unconstitutional taking of property without compensation. To the fullest extent permitted by law, the review procedures of Board of Adjustment, pursuant to Division 21 of Chapter 42 shall be exhausted before any action may be filed in any court against the City or its officers, employees, boards, officials or commissions. Nothing herein shall be deemed to unlawfully limit any remedy that is required to be available as a matter of law. (Ord. 4470, §1)

Secs. 42-407 to 42-412. Reserved.

Chapter 42 - Planning & Zoning: Article III - Rezoning
Article III - Chapters 138-412 (Zoning)
Article III - Chapters 413-8xx (Rezoning)
Previous Chapter | City Code Index Page


SUBDIVISION III. REZONING
§ 42-413. Rezoning a portion of the east half (E 1/2) of Section 36 from "R-1" single family district to "M-2" heavy manufacturing district; portions of the south half (S 1/2) of the south-east quarter (SE 1/4) of Section 36 from "R-1" single family district to "C-3" central business district; a portion of the north-east quarter of the northeast quarter (NE 1/4) of Section 1 from "R-1" single family district to "R-3" multi-family district.
§ 42-414. Rezoning a portion of the northeast corner of the NW 1/4 of the NE 1/4 of Section 13 from "R-1" (single family) district to "C-1" (neighborhood business) district.
§ 42-415. Rezoning the south half (S 1/2) of Lot 23 of the Railroad Addition from "R-1" (single family) district to "R-3" (multi-family) district.
§ 42-416. Rezoning Lot 24 of the Railroad Addition from "R-1" (single family) district to "R-3" (multi-family) district.
§ 42-417. Rezoning a fractional part of northwest quarter of Section 18 from its present district R-1 (single family) to C-1 (general retail).
§ 42-418. Rezoning a fractional part of the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 14 from its present district R-1 (single family) to C-2 (retail business).
§ 42-419. Rezoning six and three quarter (6.75) acres in Lot two (2) of the northwest quarter of Section 7 from its present district R-1 (single family) to R-3 (multi-family).
§ 42-420. Rezoning a portion of Railroad Lots 82 and 83 from its present district R-1 (single family dwelling) and C-2 (general district) to C-3 (commercial district).
§ 42-421. Rezoning a tract of land located south of Old St. James Road and east of Farrar Drive from its present R-1 (single family) district to C-3 (commercial) district; a tract of land located east of Farrar Drive and 1.386 ft. south of Old St. James Road from its present R-1 (single family) district to R-3 (apartment) district; a tract of land located east of Farrar Drive and 2,396 ft. south of Old St. James Road from its present R-1 (single family) district to C-3 (commercial) district; a tract of land located south of the proposed Eighteenth Street and west of the east line of the SW 1/4 of the NE 1/4 of Section 1 from its present R-1 (single family) district to R-2 (two family) district.
§ 42-422. Rezoning Lot 39 and 40 of Rolla Park 2nd Addition from its present district C-1 (neighborhood business) district to C-2 (general retail) district.
§ 42-423. Rezoning all that part of Railroad Lot 74 that lies west of South Rolla Street from its present district R-1 to C-2.
§ 42-424. Rezoning Lots 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 160, 161 and 162 in the resubdivision of Lots 149 through 176, Lots 182 through 199 and Tracts 1 and 2 of the Forum Addition from its present R-1 (single family) district to R-3 (multi-family) district.
§ 42-425. Rezoning those portions of the north 165 feet of Lot 38 and all of Lot 31 of the Railroad Addition from its present district R-2 (two-family district) to C-2 (general retail district).
§ 42-426. Rezoning all of a fractional part of Lot 6, Lot 7 and Lot 8 of Block 3 of Frisco Addition from its present district R-2 (two-family district) to C-2 (general retail district).
§ 42-427. Rezoning portions of Lot four (4) of the Rolla Park Addition; Lots 4, 3, 2, 1, and Lot 13 of the Rolla Park Addition; Lot 3, Block 23 of the Rolla Proper Addition; Lot 52, Block 22 of the James Addition; Lot six (6) of Null's First Addition (unrecorded); and the northeast corner of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 11 from its present district C-1 (neighborhood business) to R-1 (single family).
§ 42-428. Rezoning the southwest corner of Lot four (4), Block twenty-two (22) of Rolla Proper Addition from its present district C-1 (neighborhood business) to R-1 (single family).
§ 42-429. Rezoning all of Block seventy (70) in the County Addition as R-3 (multi-family).
§ 42-430. Rezoning Lots 8 through 11, inclusive; Lots 16 through 26, inclusive and Lots 28 through 31, inclusive in the Brookridge Estates (tract no. 1) Addition from its present district R-2 (two-family district) to R-1 (single-family district).
§ 42-431. Rezoning Lots 38 through 58 in the Woodcrest Estates Addition from its present district R-1 (one-family district) to R-3 (apartment district).
§ 42-432. Rezoning real estate situated in the SW 1/4 of the SE 1/4 of Section 12, township 37 north, range 8 west from its present R-1 (single-family) district and C-1 (neighborhood retail) district to C-2 (general retail) district.
§ 42-433. Rezoning Lots 17 through 20 and Lots 25 through 31 of Brookridge Estates, Third Addition, from its present R-1 (single family) district to R-2 (two-family) district.
§ 42-434. Rezoning approximately 20 acres in the northeast quarter of Section 3, township 37 north, range 8 west from its present R-1 (single family) district to R-3 (multi-family) district.
§ 42-435. Rezoning real estate situated on sites occupied by Frank B. Powell Lumber Company including the west half of the block bounded by Seventh, Rolla, Sixth and Main Streets; the east half of the block bounded by Sixth, Rolla, Fifth and Main Streets; and the block bounded by Sixth, Pine, Fifth and Rolla Streets from its present C-1 (neighborhood business district) to C-3 (commercial district).
§ 42-436. Rezoning a tract of land situated in Lot 2 of the northwest quarter of Section 18 from its present R-1 (one-family) district to C-1 (neighborhood business) district.
§ 42-437. Rezoning real estate on Rucker and Faulkner from its present C-1 (neighborhood business) district to C-2 (general retail) district.
§ 42-438. Rezoning real estate on Old St. James Road; Fractional parts of the S 1/2 of the NW 1/4 of Section 1 from its present R-1 (one-family) district to R-2 (two-family) district; R-3 (multi-family) district; and M-2 (heavy manufacturing) district.
§ 42-439. Real estate known as the Renick Property situated in Lot 5 of block 60 of County Addition zoned as M-2 (Heavy Manufacturing).
§ 42-440. Rezoning real estate known as the Buren Matthews Property, situated in a fractional part of Lot 2 in the northwest quarter of Section 18, from its present R-1 (Single-Family) District to C-1 (Neighborhood Business) District.
§ 42-441. Rezoning the Wiggins Tract, located on the west side of White Columns Drive and north of Regal Trailer Park and south of Chapman Drive, from R-1, (One Family) District to R-3 (Multi-Family) District.
§ 42-442. Zoning the Antolak Tract, located on the north side of East Tenth Street near the eastern city limits, to C-1 (Neighborhood Business) District.
§ 42-443. Zoning the Missouri Baptist Convention Tract as R-3 (Multi-Family) District.
§ 42-444. Rezoning the real estate known as the Bradford and Fitzsimmons Studio from R-3 (Multi-Family) District to C-1 (Neighborhood Commercial) District.
§ 42-445. Rezoning the Vivian Bradford Tract from R-1 (Single-Family) District to C-1 (Neighborhood Business) District.
§ 42-446. Zoning the Sally Tract as C-3 (Commercial) District.
§ 42-447. Zoning the Hempe-Harris Tract as R-1 (Single-Family) District.
§ 42-448. Rezoning the Spilman Tract from R-1 (Single-Family) District to C-3 (Commercial) District.
§ 42-449. Rezoning the Rist Tract from R-1 (Single-Family) District to C-1 (Neighborhood Business) District.
§ 42-450. Rezoning the Lynch Tract from R-1 (Single-Family) to C-2 (General Retail) District.
§ 42-451. Rezoning the Moutray Tract from R-1 (Single-Family) District to C-2 (General Retail) District.
§ 42-452. Rezoning the Schreiner Tract from R-2 (Two-Family) District to R-3 (Apartment) District.
§ 42-453. Zoning the UPS Tract as M-1 (Light Manufacturing) District.
§ 42-454. Rezoning the Sooter Tract from R-1 (Single-Family) District to C-1 (Neighborhood Business) and C-1 (Neighborhood Business) District to C-3 (Commercial District).
§ 42-455. Rezoning the Clayton International Leasing Tract from the C-1 (Neighborhood Business) District to the C-2 (General Retail) District.
§ 42-456. Rezoning the KTTR Tract from R-1 (One-Family) District to C-2 (General Retail) District.
§ 42-457. Rezoning the Lanning Tract from R-1 (One-Family) District to C-2 (General Retail) District.
§ 42-458. Rezoning a part of the Powell Tracts from R-1 (One-Family) District to C-3 (Commercial) District and another specified part of the Powell Tracts from C-2 (General Retail) District to C-3 (Commercial) District.
§ 42-459. Rezoning the real estate known as the Hayes Tract from "C-1" (Neighborhood Retail District) to "C-2" (General Retail District).
§ 42-460. Rezoning the real estate known as the Scott Tract from "R-1" (One Family District) to "R-2" (Two Family District); and by rezoning the real estate known as the a/k/a Newcastle Place from "R-1" (One Family District) to "R-3" (Multi-Family District).
§ 42-461. Rezoning the Renick 10th Street Property from "R-1" (Single Family District) to "R-3" (Multi-Family District).
§ 42-462. Rezoning the Watson, Smith, Cundiff Highway O Property from "R-1" (One Family District) to "R-3" (Multi-Family District).
§ 42-463. Rezoning the Watson, Smith, Cundiff Highway O and 72 Commercial Property from "C-1" (Neighborhood Business District) to "C-3" (Central Commercial District).
§ 42-464. Zoning the Ponzer Annexation Tract to "R-1" (Single Family District).
§ 42-465. Rezoning a portion of the combined Watson, Smith and Cundiff Tract from "R-1" (One Family District) to "R-3" (Multi Family District) and an additional part from "R-1" (One Family District) to "C-1" (Neighborhood Business District.)
§ 42-466. Zoning the Rolla Industrial Park incinerator site to M-2 (Heavy Manufacturing) District.
§ 42-467. Rezoning the Heritage Heights, Tract 2 and 5, from its present R-3 (Multi-Family) District to C-0 (Office) District.
§ 42-468. Rezoning the Hy-Point Industrial Park Property from M-2 (Heavy Manufacturing) District to M-1 (Light Manufacturing) District..
§ 42-469. Rezoning Eastmeadow Subdivision, Tract A-4, from R-1 (One Family) District to C-0 (Office) District.
§ 42-470. Rezoning Eastmeadow Subdivision, Tract B, from R-1 (One Family) District to C-0 (Office) District.
§ 42-471. Rezoning of Gideon real estate tract from R-1 (One Family) District to R-3 (Multi-Family) District.
§ 42-472. Rezoning the Perry Tract from R-3 (Multi-Family) District to C-O (Office) District.
§ 42-473. Rezoning Ridgeview Christian Church Real Estate from R-1 (Single Family District) to C-O (Office District).
§ 42-474. Rezoning Tract 1 of Forum Lakes Subdivision from C-3 (Central Commercial District) to R-1 (Single Family District).
§ 42-475. Rezoning Deskin rezoning, 1807 Vichy Road, from its R-2 (Two Family District) to C-O (Office District).
§ 42-476. Rezoning Forum Lakes Subdivision, Tract 4, from C-3 (Central Commercial District to R-1 (Single Family District).
§ 42-477. Zoning real estate known as Ramsey Zoning to R-1 (Single Family Dwelling) District.
§ 42-478. Zoning real estate known as Ponzer Third Addition Commercial Zoning to C-1 (Neighborhood Business District).
§ 42-479. Zoning real estate known as Ponzer Third Addition Residential Zoning to R-1 (Single Family Dwelling) District.
§ 42-480. Rezoning the real estate known as 938 W. 10th Street from R-1 (Single Family District) to R-3 (Multi-Family District)
§ 42-481. Rezoning real estate known as Schumacher (509 East 10th Street) from R-3 (Multi-Family District) to C-O (Office District).
§ 42-482. Rezoning real estate known as Ryce-Poe-Capps, (Highway 72 East) from its present R-1 (Single-Family District) to C-1 (Neighborhood Business District).
§ 42-483. Zoning real estate known as Briarwood to R-3 (Multi-Family District).
§ 42-484. Rezoning real estate known as Aaron-Wilson (908 & 912 West Tenth Street)
§ 42-485. Rezoning real estate known as Highway 63 North, Rhodes Rezoning, from
§ 42-486. Rezoning real estate known as 406 South Rolla Street, Morgan Rezoning, from
§ 42-487. Zoning real estate known as Highway 63 South (Lions Club) zoning from no zoning to C-2 (General Retail District).
§ 42-488. Rezoning real estate known as Forum Shopping Center (Eisenberg) rezoning
§ 42-489. Rezoning real estate known as Lot 43 and 44 Brookridge Estates (VERCO Inc.) rezoning from R-1 (One Family District) to R-2 (Two Family District).
§ 42-490. Rezoning real estate known as 603 and 601 West Highway 72 (Dean) rezoning from C-1 (General Retail District) to C-3 (Commercial District).
§ 42-491. Zoning real estate known as Oak Knoll Country Estates Subdivision from no zoning to R-1 (One-Family District).
§ 42-492. Rezoning real estate known as Parkview Fourth Subdivision Tract "A" (Stoltz) Rezoning from no zoning to C-3 (Commercial District).
§ 42-493. Rezoning real estate known as Tract 12 Forum Lakes Subdivision (SALLY) Rezoning from C-3 (Commercial District) to C-2 (General Retail District).
§ 42-494. Rezoning real estate known as Oaklane Drive (Neil) Rezoning from C-1 (Neighborhood Retail District) to C-3 (Commercial District).
§ 42-495. Rezoning real estate known as Highway 72 East (Smith) Rezoning from R-1 (One Family District) to C-1 (Neighborhood Retail District).
§ 42-496. Rezoning real estate known as Rolla Street (Powell) Rezoning from C-1 (Neighborhood Retail District) to C-3 (Commercial District).
§ 42-497. Rezoning two parcels of real estate known as Pine Tree Road (Scott) Rezoning from R-1 (One Family District) to R-2 (Two Family District) and from R-1 (One Family District) to C-1 (Neighborhood Retail District).
§ 42-498. Rezoning real estate known as Highway 63 (Dean, Etal) Rezoning from R-1
§ 42-499. Rezoning real estate known as Oak Lane Drive (Trevett) Rezoning from R-1
§ 42-500. Rezoning real estate known as Martin Spring Drive (Eagles) Rezoning from its
§ 42-501. Rezoning real estate known as 820 Highway 72 (Ferrell-Mooney) Rezoning
§ 42-502. Rezoning real estate known as Lots 16, 17 and 18 Maggi Place Addition
§ 42-503. Zoning real estate known as Highway "V" (Schuman Annexation) Rezoning
§ 42-504. Rezoning real estate known as Brookridge Estates No. 2 (Verco, Inc.).
§ 42-505. Rezoning real estate known as Lanning Lane (Lanning) from R-1 (One Family District) to C-1 (Neighborhood Retail District).
§ 42-506. Rezoning real estate known as Highway 72 East (SED Investments, Inc., et al) from C-1 (Neighborhood Retail District) to C-2 (General Retail District).
§ 42-507. Rezoning real estate known as Ramsey Place (Campbell) from R-1 (One Family District) to R-2 (Two Family District), and from R-1 (One Family District) to R-3 (Apartment District).
§ 42-508. Rezoning real estate known as Brookridge Estates No. 2 (VERCO, Inc.)
§ 42-509. Zoning real estate known as U.S.G.S. East side from No Zoning to C-1 (Neighborhood Retail District).
§ 42-510. Rezoning real estate known as Sherman Avenue.
§ 42-511. Rezoning real estate known as UMR/Interstate 44 (NW).
§ 42-512. Zoning real estate known as Northeast 40 acres.
§ 42-513. Zoning real estate known as Lots 1 and 2 Maxwell Subdivision (Gideon).
§ 42-514. Rezoning real estate known as Houston Woods (Scott).
§ 42-515. Rezoning real estate known as Rolla Recycling Center Subdivision.
§ 42-516. Zoning real estate known as Ozark Terrace Lots 4, 5, 6 & 7 (Rolla Lodge #2461 B.P.O.E.)
§ 42-517. Rezoning real estate known as Heritage Heights Subdivision fractional part of Lots 54, 55, 69, 70, 71 and all of lot 72 (Owsley).
§ 42-518. Zoning real estate known as James/Gilmore (North).
§ 42-519. Zoning real estate known as Bridge School Road (Pet Nutrition).
§ 42-520. Rezoning real estate known as Hutchinson Subdivision Plat No. 2, Highway 72 and Sheron Avenue (Chymiak).
§ 42-521. Rezoning real estate known as Lots 45, 46, 47, 48 & 49 Heritage Heights Subdivision (East 10th Street Corporation, Brown, Bailey, French).
§ 42-522. Rezoning real estate known as Highway 72 East (Phil's Marine Tract).
§ 42-523. Rezoning real estate known as Lot 1 Hutchinson Subdivision Plat No. 2 (Chymiak-Watson).
§ 42-524. Rezoning real estate known as Old St. James Road (Gilmore).
§ 42-525. Rezoning real estate known as 4 & 6 Vichy Road (Higley).
§ 42-526. Rezoning real estate known as the part of Lot 30 Railroad Addition (Woessner).
§ 42-527. Rezoning real estate known as the Martin Spring Drive/Bridge School Road (Dietzmann-Sooter).
§ 42-528. Rezoning real estate known as Ponzer 4th Addition (Ponzer & Stewart).
§ 42-529. Rezoning real estate known as Lot 3, Block 6, Townsend Addition (Russell).
§ 42-530. Rezoning real estate known as Old St. James Road (Lister, Brown, Havin Concrete, Suhre)
§ 42-531. Rezoning real estate known as the Ted Miller property.
§ 42-532. Rezoning real estate known as Newcastle Place.
§ 42-533. Rezoning real estate known as Rolla Mill Addition.
§ 42-534. Rezoning real estate known as Bray/Woessner/Word of Faith Church.
§ 42-535. Rezoning real estate known as the Whitehead.
§ 42-536. Rezoning real estate known as the Soest Road and LaGuille Court.
§ 42-537. Rezoning real estate known as the TI Commercial Park.
§ 42-538. Zoning real estate known as Hamilton Zoning.
§ 42-539. Rezoning real estate known as a part of Tract 4 of Heritage Heights Rezoning (Ware).
§ 42-540. Rezoning real estate known as Lot 1, resubdivision of Part of Tracts 2 and 3 of Heritage Heights Addition (Bass) Rezoning.
§ 42-541. Rezoning real estate known as (Tune) Rezoning.
§ 42-542. Rezoning real estate known as 1315 Highway 72 (Laird ) Rezoning.
§ 42-543. Rezoning real estate known as Lot 1 and Lot 2 Rolla Park Addition (Stoltz) Rezoning.
§ 42-544. Rezoning real estate known as 2025 Old St. James Road (Poe).
§ 42-545. Rezoning real estate known as 2059 Old St. James Road (MFA).
§ 42-546. Rezoning real estate known as Kingshighway and Fairgrounds Road (Buehler Park).
§ 42-547. Rezoning real estate known as 21 Southbrook Drive (Hoch).
§ 42-548. Rezoning real estate located at 117 West 8th and 100 West 7th Street.
§ 42-549. Rezoning real estate known as 601 Kingshighway (Samaras).
§ 42-550. Rezoning real estate located north and adjacent to Bridge School Road, formerly known as a portion of "Blue's Lake".
§ 42-551. Rezoning real estate at Highway 72 and Pine Tree Road (Huffman).
§ 42-552. Rezoning Lots 13, 14, 18 and 19 of King Amended and Lots 1 and 2 of King 2nd Addition.
§ 42-553. Rezoning real estate at 7th Street and Bishop Avenue (Labantschnig, Bennish, Vessel, Sherman & Campus Ministry.
§ 42-554. Zoning real estate at Oak Knoll South Subdivision (Morgan).
§ 42-555. Zoning real estate at 8 Kent Lane (Buenger).
§ 42-556. Rezoning real estate at 100 East Highway 72 and 405 Elm Street (Sooter).
§ 42-557. Rezoning real estate at the northwest corner of Bishop Avenue and Vichy Road (Woessner/Hamilton)
§ 42-558. Zoning real estate at the corner of Old St. James Road and Industrial Drive (Osborn).
§ 42-559. Rezoning real estate at 1412 Heller Street (Rolla Pentecostal Church of God).
§ 42-560. Rezoning real estate at Lots 1-4 of Hill Crest Addition and 500-512 Highway 72 (Dean).
§ 42-561. Zoning newly annexed area in the Southside Annexation Area (City of Rolla).
§ 42-562. Rezoning real estate at 603 and 615 South Bishop Avenue (Guffey/Saab).
§ 42-563. Rezoning real estate at 1402 East 10th Street (Fuller).
§ 42-564. Rezoning real estate at 451 Bridge School Road (Mace).
§ 42-565. Zoning real estate at Highway 72 and Dewing Lane (RMU).
§ 42-566. Annexation and zoning of 12010 Highway CC (Hodge).
§ 42-567. Rezoning real estate at 11601 Highway 72 (Brookshire).
§ 42-568. Rezoning real estate at Lots 18-21 and Lots 40-45 in the Parkview 2nd Subdivision (Mitchell).
§ 42-569. Rezoning real estate North of I-44 and east of County Road 8110 (Sally Road) (Hayes/Chymiak).
§ 42-570. Rezoning real estate at Lots 5 and 6 in the Southview Addition Subdivision (Clemens).
§ 42-571. Annexation and zoning of property west of Chapman Drive and northeast of Highway E (Lange).
§ 42-572. Rezoning real estate at Highway 72 and Osage Drive (Woessner).
§ 42-573. Rezoning real estate Lots 1-3 of Cowans Addition (Elrod/Bailey).
§ 42-574. Rezoning real estate Lots 37-39 of Parkview Second Subdivision (Voss).
§ 42-575. Rezoning real estate Lots 6 and 7 of Parkview 2nd Subdivision also known as 1300 South Bishop Avenue (Green/Key Sport).
§ 42-576. Rezoning real estate at 456 West Little Oaks Road (Pope).
§ 42-577. Rezoning real estate at 1006 Oak (Barrack).
§ 42-578. Rezoning real estate at 1400 Nagogami Road (Highway E) (Morris)
§ 42-579. Rezoning real estate at Highway 72 and Olive Street (Shockley/Friede).
§ 42-580. Rezoning real estate along Highway 72 East (Huffman).
§ 42-581. Rezoning and final plat of North Brook Phase II.
§ 42-582. Rezoning real estate at North of and adjacent to Highway 72 between Cedar and Olive Street (Fitzsimmons/Frueh).
§ 42-583. Rezoning real estate Lot 1, Block 2 of Cowans Addition (Adams).
§ 42-584. Annexation and zoning to R-3 (apartment district) of said property, north of 10th Street and west of Stoltz Road (Woessner/Rogers).
§ 42-585. Rezoning real estate at 604 Black Street (Chapman).
§ 42-586. Rezoning real estate, Lot 4, Block 12 of Cowan's Addition (Frost).
§ 42-587. Annexation of property west of Parkwood Drive and south of Cedar Grove Road and zone the property from no zone to R-2 (apartment district) Zoning (Morris/Phelps County)
§ 42-588. Rezoning real estate at 603 West Lions Club Drive (Link).
§ 42-589. Rezoning real estate at 1601 Highway 72 East (Ferrell).
§ 42-590. Rezoning real estate at west of Old St. James Road and north of I-44 (Carney)
§ 42-591. Rezoning real estate known as Maxwell Subdivision located at 18th Street and Maxwell Street (Blevins)
§ 42-592. Rezoning real estate known as Wild Rose Hill Subdivision (Sooter).
§ 42-593. Rezoning real estate at Lot 9 and Lots 158 through 162 of Parkwood Second Subdivision (Anderson/Stoltz)
§ 42-594. Zoning real estate located north of I-44 and east of Sally Road (Hayes/Chymiak)
§ 42-595. Rezoning real estate, Lots 34, 35 and 36 of Parkview 2nd Subdivision (Corey).
§ 42-596. Annexation of property west of Parkwood 2nd Subdivision and zone from no zone to R-1 (one family district) zoning (Stevenson).
§ 42-597. Annexation of property on Highway 63 North and zone from no zone to C-3 (Commercial District) zoning. (Woessner/Lange).
§ 42-598. Rezoning real estate at 103 West 3rd Street (Pope).
§ 42-599. Rezoning real estate at 217 Walker (Powell).
§ 42-600. Rezoning real estate between Old St. James Road and Farrar Drive (Crumpler).
§ 42-601. Rezoning real estate at 1380 South Bishop (Cardin).
§ 42-602. Rezoning real estate at Lots 2 and 3 of Hutchinson Subdivision Plat No. 2 (Chymiak/Watson).
§ 42-603. Annexation of property located at Highway V and County Road 2070 and zoning from no zone to M-1 (light manufacturing district) zoning (Strothkamp/Ray)
§ 42-604. Rezoning real estate at Lots 16 and 17 of Parkview 2nd Subdivision, (Mitchell).
§ 42-605. Rezoning real estate Cowan's Subdivision, Block 11, part of Lots 8, 9 and 10 (Pike).
§ 42-606. Rezoning real estate at Lot 2, Heritage Heights Resubdivision, Tract 2 and 3 (Cossette).
§ 42-607. Rezoning real estate at Lot 62, Rolla Gardens Subdivision (Frueh).
§ 42-608. Annexation of property located north of Hypoint Industrial Park and zone from no zone to R-2 zoning (Mattingly).
§ 42-609. Rezoning real estate south of Highway 72 and west of Highway O (Snelson).
§ 42-610. Rezoning real estate Lot 3, Rolla Park 2nd Subdivision (Franklin).
§ 42-611. Rezoning real estate north of Bridge School Road (Dietzmann).
§ 42-612. Rezoning real estate south of Highway 72 and west of Highway O (Snelson).
§ 42-613. Rezoning real estate north of and adjacent to Maxwell Subdivision (Lister).
§ 42-614. Rezoning real estate at 2307 Vichy Road (Callen).
§ 42-615. Rezoning real estate in the City of Rolla.
§ 42-616. Rezoning real estate at 105 West Third Street (Daniels).
§ 42-617. Rezoning real estate East of Rolla Street and North of Little Oaks Road described as Wild Horse Run Subdivision (Sooter).
§ 42-618. Rezoning real estate on Part of Lot 4, Railroad Addition (Brown).
§ 42-619. Annexation and zoning of Lot 1 of Municipal Acres No. 5 from no zone to GI (Government and Institutional District) zoning.
§ 42-620. Annexation and zoning of two tracts of property south of Timber Creek Subdivision and west of Condo Drive and zoning R-3 (multi-family) and C-1 (neighborhood business district) zoning. (Wilcox/Peters).
§ 42-621. Rezoning real estate situated at 2419 North Bishop (Cantrell).
§ 42-622. Rezoning real estate as part of Lot 86, Railroad Addition (Hayes).
§ 42-623. Rezoning real estate situated as a residual strip of property along North Bishop (City of Rolla).
§ 42-624. Rezoning real estate situated at 2005 Vichy Road. (Hall).
§ 42-625. Rezoning real estate for part of Lot B of the Resubdivision of Tract 7 of Forum Lakes (Holt).
§ 42-626. Rezoning a fractional part of Block 4 of Rolla Mill Addition (Martin).
§ 42-627. Rezoning real estate at 1848 East High 72 (Green).
§ 42-628. Rezoning real estate at Lot 1 and Lot 2, Block 4, Cowan's Addition (Eudaly).
§ 42-629. Rezoning real estate known as Country Ridge Subdivision (Huffman)
§ 42-630. Rezoning real estate located south of Martin Springs Drive and north of Bridge School Road (Dietzmann).
§ 42-631. Rezoning real estate known as the Resubdivision of Lots 3-26 of Maxwell Subdivision (Ellis/Shanks).
§ 42-632. Rezoning real estate known as 1344 South Bishop (Zung).
§ 42-633. Rezoning real estate known as .56 acre of property fronting I-44, behind St. Louis Bread Company (Drury Development Corporation).
§ 42-634. Rezoning real estate known as 1308 North Elm (Frueh).
§ 42-635. Rezoning real estate known as 2005 Vichy Road (Hall).
§ 42-636. Rezoning real estate known as 1805 North Oak, 1807 North Oak and 1804 North Elm (Town and Country Bank.
§ 42-637. Rezoning real estate known as Hy Point Industrial Park North Plat No. 1 (Pepsi Cola Bottling Co. of New Haven).
§ 42-638. Rezoning real estate known as 4020 Hy Point North (Brewer Science).
§ 42-639. Rezoning real estate known as Lots 21 and 22 of James Addition (Barrack).
§ 42-640. Rezoning real estate known as Lots 10 through 52 of University Park Subdivision (H&C Investments).
§ 42-641. Rezoning real estate known as 706 Oaklane Drive (A-1 Moving & Storage).
§ 42-642. Rezoning real estate known as 1328 Highway 72 (Carpenters Local 2298).
§ 42-643. Rezoning real estate known as Lots 4A and 4B of Scottsvale Subdivision (Steinmetz).
§ 42-644. Rezoning real estate known as part of Lots 9 and 10 of Block 11 of Cowans Addition (Kostelac).
§ 42-645. Rezoning real estate known as all of Block 47 in Bishops Addition (Family Video).
§ 42-646. Rezoning property at the Southwest Corner of 10th Street and Forum Drive.
§ 42-647. Rezoning real estate known as 0.97 acre tract south of Martin Springs Drive. (Hogan/Dietzmann)
§ 42-648. Rezoning real estate known as Halifax Court Subdivision. (Moorkamp)
§ 42-649. Rezoning real estate known as 1310 Highway 72. (Makridis)
§ 42-650. Rezoning real estate known as 310 South Walnut. (Mize)
§ 42-651. Rezoning real estate known as 1514 Bridge School Road. (Dietzmann)
§ 42-652. Annexing 0.82 acre west of Blues Lake Parkway and south of Martin Springs Drive and rezoning from no zone to C-2 (General Retail District) zoning.
§ 42-653. Rezoning real estate known as 1100 Highway 72. (Barrack).
§ 42-654. Rezoning real estate known as Lot 2, Park Plaza (Tenes).
§ 42-655. Rezoning real estate known as 1326 South Bishop Avenue. (Pope)
§ 42-656. Rezoning real estate known as 810 Highway O. (Seventh DayAdventist Church)
§ 42-657. Rezoning real estate known as 1099 State Route O. (Holt)
§ 42-658. Rezoning real estate known as 438 West Little Oaks Road. (Newberry)
§ 42-659. Rezoning real estate known as 2003 North Bishop Avenue. (Sinclair Oil Corp.)
§ 42-660. Rezoning real estate known as the Northwest part of Jordan's Pass Subdivision.(Jordan)
§ 42-661. Rezoning real estate known as 1801, 1803 and 1805 North Walnut. (Whitson/Kollme).
§ 42-662. Rezoning real estate known as Lots 3, 4, 5, and 6 of Frueh Estates located at the southwest corner of Vichy Road and Valli-Hi Avenue. (Frueh).
§ 42-663. Rezoning real estate known as part of Lot 9 of Ozark Terrace Addition from R-1 (Single Family) District to C-2 (General Retail) District zoning (Henry).
§ 42-664. Rezoning real estate known as Lot 2 of Park Place Subdivision from R-3 (Multi-Family) District to C-O (Office District) zoning (Howell).
§ 42-665. Rezoning real estate known as the proposed Breckenridge Subdivision from R-R (Rural Residential) to R-1 (Single Family) District Zoning (Holt).
§ 42-666. Rezoning real estate known as Four Acres west of Aldi Drive from C-3 (Highway Commercial) to R-3 (Multi Family) District zoning. (Terravest Development Corporation).
§ 42-667. Annexing and zoning property north of I-44 at the intersection of Hypoint Blvd. and Hypoint Industrial Park Drive from no zone to C-3 (Highway Commercial District) zoning. (Real Ventures LLC).
§ 42-668. Rezoning real estate known as 2.13 acres north of Houston Road from R-1 (Single Family) to C-3 (Highway Commercial) District zoning. (A-1 Moving and Storage).
§ 42-669. Annexing property at 10940 County Road 2076 and zone the property from No Zone to C-2 (General Retail District) zoning. (Reagan).
§ 42-670. Rezoning real estate known as 2300 Vichy Road from R-1 (Single Family)to R-2 (Two Family District) and R-3 (Multi-Family) District zoning.(Coverdell).
§ 42-671. Rezoning real estate known as 0.5 acres north of 18th Street between Farrar Drive and Maxwell Street from R-1 (Single Family) to R-3 (Multi-Family) District zoning. (G.R.A.C.E.)
§ 42-672. Annexing property north of I-44 and west of the intersection of Hypoint Blvd. and Hypoint Industrial Park Drive and zone the property from No Zone to C-3 (Highway Commercial Dsitrict). (Real Ventures LLC)
§ 42-673. Annexing property 0.91 acres between Lancelot Drive and Vichy Road and zone the property from No Zone to R-1 (Single Family) District zoning. (Peeler).
§ 42-674. Rezoning real estate known as Lot 108 Railroad Addition from R-1 (Single Family) to C-2 (General Retail) District zoning. (Guill)
§ 42-675. Rezoning real estate known as 8.2 acres south of Coventry Lane and east ofScottsvale Manor Subdivision from R-1 (Single Family) to R-2 (Two Family) district zoning. (Chapman)
§ 42-676. Rezoning real estate known Lot 10, Block 2 of Townsend Addition from R-2 (Two Family) to C-2 (General Retail) district zoning. (Cremer)
§ 42-677. Rezoning real estate known as 2003 Vienna Road from R-1 (single Family) to R-2 (Two Family) district zoning. (Brown)
§ 42-678. Rezoning real estate known 2204 Vichy Road from R-1 (Single Family) to R-2 (Two Family) district zoning. (Shishani)
§ 42-679. Rezoning real estate known as 541 Basswood from R-R (Rural Residential) to C-2 (General Retail) District zoning. (Parkview Baptist Corporation of Rolla)
§ 42-680. Rezoning real estate known as 804 East 18th Street from R-1 (Single Family) to C-2 (General Retail) District zoning. (Parsons)
§ 42-681. Rezoning real estate known as 1207 and 1209 North Oak Street from C-1 (Neighborhood Business District) to R-3 (Multi-Family) District zoning.(Frueh)
§ 42-682. Annexing property at 10201 County Road 8110 and zone the property from no zone to GI (Government and Institutional District) zoning. (MoDOT)
§ 42-683. Annexing property north of I-44 and east of Hypoint Boulevard and zone the property from no zone to C-3 (Highway Commercial District) zoning.(Parmentier/Real Ventures LLC)
§ 42-684. Rezoning real estate known as a fractional part of Lot 17 and Lot 28 of Railroad Addition to Rolla from R-3 (Multi-Family District) to C-2 (General Retail District) zoning. (Chirban)
§ 42-685. Rezoning real estate known as Lot 1 and a fractional part of Lots 2 and 3 of Investment Subdivision from R-2 (Two Family District) to C-2 (General Retail District) zoning. (Woessner)
§ 42-686. Rezoning real estate known as 901 Forum Drive from C-1 (Neighborhood Business District) to C-2 (General Retail District) zoning. (Banholzer)
§ 42-687. Rezoning real estate known as 1400 East 10th Street from R-1 (Single Family District) to C-2 (General Retail District) zoning. (Sho-Me-Power Electric Cooperative).
§ 42-688. Rezoning real estate known as property at the Southwest Corner of LionsClub Drive and Highway 72 from R-R (Rural Residential District) andR-1 (Single Family District) to C-2 (General Retail District) zoning.(St. Johns Health Systems)
§ 42-689. Rezoning real estate known as property at 1601 Highway 72 from C-2 (General Retail District) to R-1 (Single Family District) zoning. (James)
§ 42-690. Rezoning real estate known as Lot 8 Railroad Addition from R-1 (Single Family District) zoning to R-3b (Multi-Family District) zoning. (Wilson)
§ 42-691. Rezoning real estate at 10730 State Route E from No Zone to R-3 (Multi-Family District) zoning. (Refreshments International Inc.)
§ 42-692. Rezoning real estate known as property at 2050 Old St. James Road from R-3 (Multi-Family District) and M-1 (Light Manufacturing District) zoning to all M-1 (Light Manufacturing District) zoning. (Missouri Southern Seed Corporation).
§ 42-693. Rezoning real estate known as Lot 6A of Paul's Addition Replat of Lots 4, 6, 7, and 8 from R-2 (Two Family District) zoning to R-3 (Multi-Family District) zoning. (Coverdell).
§ 42-694. Rezoning real estate known as property at 1324 South Rolla Street from-R (Rural Residential District) zoning to R-1 (Single Family District)zoning. (Anderson).
§ 42-695. Rezoning real estate known as property at 1103 Joyce Avenue from R-1 (Single Family District) zoning to C-O (Office District) zoning. (Wedding)
§ 42-696. Rezoning real estate known as property at 1813 Vichy Road from R-1 (Single Family District) zoning to R-3 (Multi-Family District) zoning.(Young)
§ 42-697. Rezoning real estate known as Lots 1-14 of Maxwell Subdivision Plat No. 2 from R-1 (Single Family District) and R-3 (Multi Family District) zoning to R-3 (Multi Family District) zoning. (Development Contractors)
§ 42-698. Rezoning real estate known as approximately 14.04 acres of Arwood Hills Subdivision from R-1 (Single Family District) zoning to R-2 (Two Family District) zoning. (Chapman)
§ 42-699. Rezoning real estate known as Lot 149 of Parkview II Subdivision from R-R (Rural Residential District) zoning to R-1 (Single Family District) zoning and Lot 4 of Parkview Subdivision from R-R (Rural Residential District) to C-2 (General Retail District) zoning. (Buckey).
§ 42-700. Rezoning real estate known as Tract B and part of Tract Z of Maxwell Subdivision Plat No. 2 from M-2 (Heavy Manufacturing District) zoning to R-3 (Multi-Family District) zoning. (Development Contractors LLP).
§ 42-701. Rezoning real estate known as 1002 Strobach from R-1 (Single Family District) zoning to C-O (Office District) zoning. (Hopkins).
§ 42-702. Rezoning real estate known as part of Lots 1-3 and all of Lot 4, Block 6 of Cowan's Addition from C-1 (Neighborhood Business District) to C-2 (General Retail District) zoning. (Newkirk)
§ 42-703. Rezoning real estate known as 11.04 acres southwest of Vichy Road from R-1 (Single Family) to R-3 (Multi-Family District) zoning. (Chapman)
§ 42-704. Rezoning real estate known as Lot 72 of Rolla Gardens Subdivision. (Herrick)
§ 42-705. Annexing and rezoning 12.37 acres east of Hypoint Industrial Park Drive to C-2 (General Retail District) zoning. (Real Ventures LLC)
§ 42-706. Rezoning real estate known as 7.41 acres south of Martin Springs Drive.(Dietzmann)
§ 42-707. Rezoning real estate known as 1737 North Bishop Avenue. (Thompson Thrift Development Inc.)
§ 42-708. Rezoning real estate known as Lot 77 and Lot 78, Block 11 of James Addition. (Jasensky)
§ 42-709. Rezoning real estate known as 1603 and 1605 Martin Springs Drive along with a fractional part of Lot 111 of Railroad Addition. (Dietzmann)
§ 42-710. Rezoning real estate known as Buehler Park, a city park located at Kingshighway and Fairgrounds Road. (City of Rolla)
§ 42-711. Rezoning real estate known as Lot 6, Rolla Park Addition. (#2 Stephendale Court) (Doss)
§ 42-712. Rezoning real estate known as Lots 6-10, Block 8 of Cowan's Addition. (Batis Development)
§ 42-713. Rezoning real estate known as 1735 North Bishop Avenue. (Chrisco)
§ 42-714. Rezoning real estate known as 1101 Strobach Street. (Keller)
§ 42-715. Rezoning real estate known as 2000 Farrar Drive (Brown)
§ 42-716. Rezoning real estate known as 1501 Martin Springs Drive (Dietzmann)
§ 42-717. Rezoning real estate known as a fractional part of 1400 and 1500 North Elm and 1402 and 1404 North Elm along with a fractional part of 1500 North Elm and 103 East 14th Street. (Robertson)
§ 42-718. Rezoning real estate known as 2100, 2120 and 2250 North Bishop Avenue. (Timberline Land Co.)
§ 42-719. Rezoning real estate known as 400 East 6th Street (Block 70, County Addition) (Sowers)
§ 42-720. Rezoning real estate known as Lot 3 and part of Lot 4 and 5 of Block 16, Schuman Addition (1800 N. Pine) from C-2 and R-3 to all R-3 zoning. (Kappa Delta Sorority)
§ 42-721. Rezoning real estate known as 1008 Highway 72 and Lot 1 of Hutchinson Subdivision Plat No. 2 from C-1 to C-2 zoning. (Dollar General)
§ 42-722. Rezoning real estate known as the North 54 feet of the East half of Lot 6, and Lots 4 and 5 of Block 3, Frisco Addition from R-2 zoning to C-2 zoning. (Parsons)
§ 42-723. Rezoning real estate known as 601 Kingshighway and 505 West 6th Street from C-2 zoning to C-3 zoning. (Makridis)
§ 42-724. Rezoning real estate known as a Fractional part of 1349 Highwya 72 from R-3 to C-2 zoning. (Huffman)
§ 42-725. Rezoning real estate known as 1000 Strobach from C-O (office district) to C-1 (neighborhood business district) zoning. (Collins)
§ 42-726. Rezoning real estate known as 504 North Walnut Street from R-3 (Multi-Family District) zoning to C-1 (Neighborhood Business District) zoning. (Scholz/Klinski)
§ 42-727. Rezoning real estate known as 600 North Olive and 601 North Cedar Street from C-1 (Neighborhood Business District) zoning to C-3 (Highway Commercial District) zoning. (Scholz/Klinski)
§ 42-728. Rezoning real estate known as 602 North Cedar Street from R-3 (Multi-Family District) zoning to C-2 (General Retail District) zoning. (Scholz/Klinski)
§ 42-729. Rezoning real estate known as 1900 Old St. James Road from M-2 zoning to C-3 Zoning. (Smith)
§ 42-730. Rezoning real estate known as 110 Spilman Avenue from R-1 (Single Family District) zoning to C-3 (Highway Commercial District) zoning. (Voss)
§ 42-731. Rezoning real estate known as 515 E. 19th Street from M-2 (Heavy Manufacturing District) zoning to C-3 (Highway Commercial District) zoning. (Maxwell)
§ 42-732. Rezoning real estate known as Lot 3 of Cowboy Resubdivision (1601 Highway 72 East) from R-1 (Single Family District) and C-2 (General Retail District) zoning to R-1 (Single Family District) zoning. (Peterman)
§ 42-733. Rezoning realestate known as Lots 9-12 of Townsend Addition and the south half of the vacated alley (1101 North Bishop Avenue) from R-2 (Two Family District) and C-2 (General Retail District) zoning to C-3 (Highway Commercial District) zoning (Mousadakos).
§ 42-734. Rezoning real estate known as Lots 1, 2, 4, 5, 8, and a fractional part of a vacated alley (801 N. Park) from C-1 (Neighborhood Business District) zoning to R-3 (Multi-Family District) zoning (Sigma Phi Epsilon).
§ 42-735. Rezoning real estate known as 1301-1311 South Rolla Street (Southeast Corner of Lions Club Drive and Rolla Street) from R-R (Rural Residential) zoning to R-3 (Multi-Family District) zoning (Woessner/Eppelsheimer).(Peterman)
§ 42-736. Rezoning real estate knows as Lot 119, Railroad Addition (101 Fairgrounds Road) from GI (Government/Institutional District) to C-2 (General Retail District) zoning (Gingerbread/Woessner).
§ 42-737. Annexing a one acre tract south of and adjoining Martin Springs Drive and west of Blues Lake Parkway (1811 Martin Springs Drive) into the city pursuant to the provisions of section 71.012 RSMo., and sone the property to C-3 (Highway Commerical District) zoning (Dietzmann).
§ 42-738. Rezoning real estate Lot 1, Pope Place Subdivision (1402 East 10th Street) from C-1 (Neighborhood Business District) zoning to R-3 Multi-Famiy District) zoning (Blair).
§ 42-739. Annexing a corridor of State Route V and approximately 116 acres west and northwest of State Route V into the city pursuant to the provisions of Section 71.012 RSMo., and zone the property to M-2 and G-1 District Zoning (RCD/RMU and MoDOT).
§ 42-740. Rezoning real estate known as Lots 11-18 of Maxwell Resubdivision of Lots 3-26 from R-1 (Single Family District) zoning to R-3 (Multi-Family District) zoning (Development Contactors LLP).
§ 42-741. Rezoning real estate known as 1011 East 18th Street from R-1 (Single Family District) zoning to GI (Government and Institutional District) zoning (Rolla Public Schools).
§ 42-742. Rezoning real estate known as 1.45 acres on the west side of Highway 63 North near the existing city limit boundary from M-2 (Heavy Manufacturing District) to C-3 (Highway Commercial District) zoning. (Dollar General)
§ 42-743. Rezoning of real estate known as Lots 2 and 3 of Ozark Terrace Subdivision (527 Keeton Road) from R-1 (Single Family District) zoning to C-2 (Generaly Retail District) zoning (Bruns).
§ 42-744. Rezoning of real estate known as 1.03 acres at 1101 McCuthen Drive from R-3 (Multi-Family District) zoning to C-2 (General Retail District) zoning (Davis)
§ 42-745. Rezoning of real estate known as 600 and 602 North Elm Street from C-3 (Highway Commercial District) and C-C (Center City District) zoning to all C-C (Center City District) zoning (Wands).
§ 42-746. Rezoning of real estate known as the south half of Block 80 of Bishop's 3rd Addition from C-C (Center City District) and C-1 (Neighborhood Business District) to all C-C (Center City District) zoning (Miner Alumni Association).
§ 42-747. Rezoning of real estate known as 2011 Vienna Road from R-1 (Single Family Residential District) zoning to R-3 (Multi Family District) zoning (Burrell).
§ 42-748. Rezoning of real estate known as 501 West 5th Street from C-1 (Neighborhood Business District) zoning to C-O (Office District) zoning (Chapman)
§ 42-749. Rezoning of real estate known as 107 North Park Street from C-1 (Neighborhood Business District) zoning to C-O (Office District) zoning (Clay)
§ 42-750. Rezoning of real estate known as 302 East 12th Street from R-3 (Multi-Family District) zoning to R-2 (Two Family District) zoning (Radford)
§42-751. Rezoning of real estate known as as 2009 Vichy Road from R-1(Single Family District) Zoning to R-2 (Two Family District) Zoning (Hansen).
§42-752. Rezoning of real estate known as certain lots along 12th Street from Bardlsey Road to High Street from R-3 (Multi-Family District) Zoning to R-2 (Two Family District) Zoning (Administrative Rezoning).
§42-753.  Rezoning of real estate known as 900 West 10th Street from R-1(Single Family District) Zoning to C-0 (Office District) Zoning (Coverdell).
§42-754 Annexing a 12.59 acre Tract located north of Bridge School Road and west of Blue's Lake Parkway and zone from NZ (No Zone) to C-3 (Highway Commercial District) zoning (Dietzmann).
§42-755. Rezoning of 1000 North Oak Street from M-1 (Light Manufacturing District) and R-3 (Multi-Family District) Zoning to all M-1 (Light Manufacturing District) zoning. (Barrack)
§42-756. Rezoning of 100 East 12th Street from C-1 (Neighborhood Business District) to R-3 (Multi-Family District) zoning (Rome).
§42-757. Rezoning of 2009 Vichy Road from R-2 (Two Family District) zoning to R-3 (Multi-Family District) zoning. (Burrell)
§ 42-758. Rezoning of 112 East 12th Street from C-1 (Neighborhood Commercial District) to CC (Center City District) zoning. (Christian Campus Ministry Fellowship House)
§ 42-759. Rezoning of 500 North Bishop Avenue from GI (Government/Institutional District) zoning to C-3 (Highway Commercial District) zoning. (CVS Pharmacy)
§42-760. Rezoning of 715 West 11th Street from R-2 (Two Family Residential District) zoning to R-3 (Multi-Family District) zoning (Cheng).
§42-761. Rezoning property at 100 South Spilman Avenue from R-1 (Single Family District) zoning to R-3 (Multi-Family District) zoning (Larson).
§42-762. Rezoning property at 201 and 205 North Elm Street (Lots 10, 11 and 12 James Addition) from C-1 (Neighborhood Business District) zoning to C-2 (General Retail District) zoning (Daniels).
§42-763. Rezoning property at 1306 North Elm Street from C-1 (Neighborhood Business District) zoning to R-3 (Multi-Family District) zoning (Islamic Center)
§42-764.  Rezoning property at 1405 Highway 72 East Street from C-1 (Neighborhood Business District) to C-3 (Highway Commercial District) zoning (Wands).
§42-765. Rezoning property at 1705 N. Pine Street from C-2 (General Retail District) and R-3 (Multi-Family District) to all R-3 zoning (Lambda Chi Alpha Alumni and Students).
§42-766. Rezoning property at 107 East 6th Street from C-3 (Highway Commercial District) to Planned Unit Development (PUD) zoning. (Wands).
§42-767. Rezoning property at 101 East 3rd Street from C-2 (General Retail District) zoning to 3rd Street PUD (Planned Unit Development District) zoning (Larson/LIU). .
§42-768. Rezoning property at 809 and 811 Black Street and 103 South Walker Avenue from R-1 (Single Family District) to R-3 (Multi-Family District) zoning. (Dalton).
§42-769. Rezoning property at 1301 North Elm Street from C-1 (Neighborhood Business District) zoning to the 13th PUD (Planning Unit Development District) zoning (Frueh).
§42-770. Annexing a .91 acre tract adjoining State Route V at 10241 and annex said property into the city pursuant to the provisions of Section 71.012 RSMo and zone the property to R-3 (Multi-Family District) zoning (Lincoln).
§42-771. Rezoning Lot 4 McCutchen Acres No. 2, formerly a part of Tract B, McCutchen Acres No. 1, from R-1 (Single Family District) zoning to R-2 (Two Family District) zoning. (Davis)    (Revised 09/14)
§42-772. Rezoning 1800 and 1831 White Columns Drive from R-1 (Single Family District) zoning to R-3 (Multi-Family District) zoning. (Wagner).
§42-773. Rezoning 2101 Old Saint James Road, Lot 2 Country Hills Subdivision, from C-3 (Highway Commercial District) zoning to R-3 (Multi-Family District) zoning. (Hart)
§42-774. Rezoning a fractional part of 2100 State Route E, a fractional part of Lot 21, Gracie Place Subdivision, all in Section 3, T37N, R8W, Rolla, Missouri from R-3 (Multi-Family District) zoning to Claire Court Planned Unit Development (PUD) (Sowers).
§42-775. Revising the Pershing Hill Planned Unit Development (PUD) located on Lot 4 of the resubdivision of part of tract 2 & 3 of Heritage Heights Addition (Hancock).
§42-776. Rezoning part of Lot 3 of Poe's Subdivision, a resubdivision of part of Block 9 of the James Addition, from GI (Government/Institutional District) zoning to the Woolf Planned Unit Development (PUD) (Woolf).
§42-777. Rezoning property located at 103 East 5th Street and 503 North Oak Street, 103 East 5th Street, and 6th and Oak Street from C-3 (Highway Commercial District) zoning to R-3 (Multi-Family District) zoning. (Wands).
42-778. Rezoning a fractional part of Lot 12 of the Oak Knoll Subdivision located at 803 Southview Drive from R-1 (Single Family District) zoning to GI (Government/Institutional) zoning (RMU).
§42-779. Rezoning property located at 621 Houston Road from R-1 (Single Family District) zoning to R-3 (Multi-Family District) zoning (Clayton).
§42-780. Rezoning property located at 803 West 13th Street from R-1 (Single Family District) zoning to R-2 (Two Family District) zoning. (Rome).
42-781. Rezoning of Happy Jack's Subdivision, Lot 1 through Lot 3, from RR (Rural Residential District) zoning to R-1 (Single Family District) zoning, being a part of the Northeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of Section 14, Township 37, Phelps County, Missouri (Frost).
§42-782. Rezoning property located at 407 North Olive Street from C-2 (General Retail District) zoning to R-3 (Multi-Family District) zoning (Woolf).
§42-783. Rezoning property located at 1621 Martin Springs Drive from C-2 (General Retail District) zoning, R-1 (Single Family District) zoning, and C-3 (Highway Commercial District) zoning to all C-3 (Highway Commercial District) zoning (Sakelaris).
§42-784. Rezoning of Lot 2, RSBR Subdivision from M-2 (Heavy Manufacturing District) zoning to C-3 (Highway Commercial District) zoning (West).
§42-785. Rezoning of Lots 1 and 2 of Vienna Hills Subdivision from R-1 (Single Family District) zoning to R-3 (Multi-Family District) zoning (Brown-Vienna Hills).
42-786. Annexing and zoning of property at 2600 North Bishop Avenue from NZ (No Zone) to C-3 (Highway Commercial District) zoning. (Kingdom West).
§42-787. Rezoning of an 11.9 acre tract located in a fractional part of the SW ¼ of the NW ¼, of Section 24, T37N, R8W from R-1 (Single Family District) zoning to RR (Rural Residential District) zoning. (Joyner).
§42-788. Rezoning of a 4.56 acre tract described as a fractional part of the Forum Shopping Center, Tracts 2 & 3 from C-1 (Neighborhood Business District) zoning and C-2 (General Retail District) zoning to C-3 (Highway Commercial District) zoning. (Super Market Developers).
§42-789. Rezoning of a .95 acre parcel located in the Lost Acres Subdivision, Lot "A", to be rezoned from C-3 (Highway Commercial District) zoning to R-3 (Multi-Family District) zoning. (Goldberg).
§42-790. Rezoning of Lots 1 through 8 and Lot 10 of the Kayser North Subdivision No. 2, from R-1 (Single Family District) zoning to R-3 (Multi-Family District) zoning. (Rolla Investors, LLC).
§42-791. Rezoning of Lot 1, Country Hills Subdivision, from C-3 (Highway Commercial District) zoning to R-3 (Multi-Family District) zoning. (Rolla Residential, LLC)
§42-792. Annexing of a 2.02 acre tract at 100 Lovers Lane and zone the property from NZ (No Zone) to R-1 (Single-Family District) zoning. (Ismail)
42-793. Rezoning of three parcels located at 1805, 1807, and 1809 North Bishop Avenue from C-2 (General Retail District) zoning to C-3 (Highway Commercial District) zoning. (Vessell)
§42-794. Rezoning property located at 4030 Hypoint North from M-2 (Heavy Manufacturing District) to M-1 (Light Manufacturing District) zoning. (MO-SCI)
§42-795. Rezoning the property located in Section 10, Township 37 North, Range 8 West in the City of Rolla from R-1 (Single Family District) zoning and C-2 (General Retail District) zoning to C-3 (Highway Commercial District) zoning. (Westside Marketplace 2).
42-796. Rezoning of two lots totaling .19 acres (8,276 sq. ft.) from C-O (Office District) zoning and C-1 (Neighborhood Business District) zoning to C-2 (General Retail District) zoning. (McDonald)
§42-797. Rezoning of a .285 acre parcel located at 508 West 8th Street from C-1 (Neighborhood Business District) zoning to R-3 (Multi-Family District) zoning. (Hurst)
42-798. Rezoning of Lot 1, Spring Properties LLC, First Addition, & Lot 10, Block 10, Holloway First Addition From R-2 (Two Family District) zoning to R-3 (Multi-Family District) zoning. (Spring Properties LLC)
§42-799. Rezoning of a .51-acre tract (22,215 sq. ft.) located near the intersection of Highway 72 & King Drive from C-1 (Neighborhood Business District) zoning to C-3 (Highway Commercial District) zoning. (Walker).
42-800. Rezoning of 2106 Vichy Road, from R-1 (Single Family District) zoning to C-O (Office District) zoning, City of Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri (Parks).
§42-801. Rezoning all of Lot 9 of the Kayser North Hills Subdivision No. 2 from R-1 (Single Family District) zoning to R-3 (Multi-Family District) zoning (The Lodges At Rolla).
42-802. Rezoning all of Lots 3, 5, & 6 Block 7 of Cowan’s Addition and the West ½ of Lot 4, Block 7 of Cowan’s Addition from C-1 (Neighborhood Business District) zoning to C-3 (Highway Commercial District) zoning. (Sonic Complex).
§42-803. Rezoning of a 1.72 acre tract of land located in a fractional part of the SW ¼ of the NW ¼, Sec. 24, T37N, R8W, consisting of Lots 1-4 and the right-of-way of the proposed Joyner Estates Subdivision from R-R (Rural Residential District) zoning to R-1 (Single Family District) zoning. (Joyner Estates)
§42-804. Rezoning a 0.37 acre parcel located in the City of Rolla, Phelps County, Missouri, at 504 East 18th Street, from the Heavy Manufacturing District (M-2) to the Highway Commercial District (C-3). (Bax)
§42-805. Pending
§42-806. Pending
§42-807. Rezoning of a 0.51 acre tract of land that is located at 112 and 114 North Spilman Avenue from the Neighborhood Business District (C-1) to the General Retail District (C-2) and to amend the future land use category of said tract of lane to the Community Commerical Land Use Category.(Meyer)
§42-808. Rezoning of a 0.69-acre tract of land identified with the Phelps County Assessor's account numbers of 10668 and 10668.01 from the General Retail District (C-2) to the Multi-Family District (R-3). (Chen)
§42-809 Rezoning of the east half of Lot 4 of Block 7 of the Cowan’s Addition Subdivision, which is a parcel that is also known as 106 South Rucker Avenue, from the Neighborhood Business District (C-1) to the Highway Commercial District (C-3). Sonic)
§42-810 Rezoning Lot 1 and Lot 2 of the Rolla Skilled Nursing Facility Flat No. 1 Subdivision, which is also known as 2735 Eagleson Drive, from the Single-Family District (R-1) and the Two-Family District (R-2) to the Multi-Family District R-3B (R-3B) and to rezone Lot 29 and Lot 30 of the Arwood Hills No. 1 Subidvision from R-1 to R-2 and to amend the future land use map to designate Lot 1 and Lot 2 of the Rolla Skilled Nursing Facility Plat No. 1 as Residential Medium/High Density. (Silverstone)
42-811. Annexing the 42-06-acre parcel identified with the Phelps County Assessor’s Account Number of 12081 and the designation of said parcel as the Multi-Family District (R-3) on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Rolla. (St. Maria’s)
§42-812. Rezoning four parcels that are identified by their Phelps County Assessor Account Numbers of 7848, 7849, 7835.01, and 7847, which is also known as 1040 Kingshighway, from the General Commercial District (C-2) and the Government and Institutional District (GI) to the Highway Commercial District (C-3). (West Commons)
§42-813. Rezoning the parcel that is identified by its Phelps County Assessor Account Number of 10724, which is also known as 1150 S. Bishop Avenue, from the Light Manufacturing District (M-1) to the General Retail District (C-2). (Brown)
§42-814. Rezoning a 0.99-acre portion of Tract A of the Joyner Estates Subdivision, which is also known as 1335 Thomas Drive, from the Rural Residential District (R-R) to the Single-Family District (R-1). (Moutray)
§42-815. Approving the annexation of the 1.68-acre parcel identified with the Phelps County Assessor's Account Number of 3356.03 and the designation of said parcel as the Heavy Manufacturing District (M-2) on the official zoning map of the City of Rolla. (RCDC)


DIVISION 22. AMENDMENTS TO THE OFFICIAL ZONING DISTRICTS MAP
SUBDIVISION III. REZONING
Ordinances 400-499
Ordinances 500-599
Ordinances 600-699
Ordinances 700-799
Ordinances 800-899

