Chapter AO
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Title I Notes
NOTES AND APPENDIXES
Note — The city of Republic is a fourth class city by reason of an election
held October 27, 1891.
Note — Election ord. no. 05-78, adopted September 26, 2005, submitted
the following question to the voters at the April 4, 2006, election, "Shall
a commission be chosen to frame a charter?". Since this question was
approved by the voters, the commission was set up with the 13 candidates
receiving the highest number of votes, which shall, as the commission,
meet and deliberate as is necessary to draft a charter that may then be
submitted to the electorate for approval pursuant to Section 19 of Article 6
of the Constitution of the State of Missouri. All necessary expenses of the
commission shall be paid by the City.
Appendix I-A, Fee/Fine/Forfeiture, is included as an attachment to this Title.
Chapter 100
GENERAL PROVISIONS
AO:1

ARTICLE I
City Incorporation and Seal
Section 100.010. Municipal Incorporation.
The inhabitants of the City of Republic, as its limits now are, or may
hereafter be defined by law, shall be and continue a body corporate by
the name of, "The City of Republic", and as such shall have perpetual
succession, may sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, defend and be
defended in all courts of law and equity and in all actions whatever; may
receive and hold property, both real and personal, within such City, and may
purchase, receive and hold real estate within or without such City for the
burial of the dead; and may purchase, hold, lease, sell or otherwise dispose
of any property, real or personal, it now owns or may hereafter acquire; may
receive bequests, gifts and donations of all kinds of property, and may have
and hold one (1) common Seal, and may break, change or alter the same at
pleasure, and may do any act, exercise any power and render any service
which contributes to the general welfare, and all courts of this State shall
take judicial notice thereof.
Section 100.020. City Seal.
A. The Seal of the City of Republic shall be circular in form, one and seveneighths
(1 7/8) inches in diameter, with the words "Greene County,
Missouri" engraved across the face thereof, and the words "Seal of the
City of Republic" engraved on the face thereof and near the outer edge
of said Seal, and the same is hereby declared to be adopted as the Seal
of the City of Republic.
B. The City Clerk shall be the keeper of the common Seal of the City of
Republic, and any impression of said Seal to any contract or other
writing shall have no validity or binding obligation upon the City unless
such impression be accompanied by the attestation and signature of the
City Clerk, and then only in cases authorized by law or the ordinances
of this City.
Section
100.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
100.020
AO:3

ARTICLE II
General Code Provisions
Section 100.030. Contents of Code.
This Code contains all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the
City of Republic, Missouri, and includes ordinances dealing with municipal
administration, municipal elections, building and property regulation,
business and occupations, health and sanitation, public order, and similar
objects.
Section 100.040. Citation of Code.
This Code may be known and cited as the "Municipal Code of the City of
Republic, Missouri".
Section 100.050. Official Copy of Code.
The Official Copy of this Code, bearing the signature of the Mayor and
attestation of the City Clerk as to its adoption, shall be kept on file in the
office of the City Clerk. Two (2) additional copies of this Code shall be kept
in the City Clerk's office available for public inspection.
Section 100.060. Altering or Amending Code.
Section 100.070. Numbering of Code.
Each Section number of this Code shall consist of two (2) parts separated
by a period; the figure before the period referring to the Chapter number,
and the figure after the period referring to the position of the Section in the
Chapter. Both figures shall consist of three (3) digits.
Section 100.080. Definitions and Rules of Construction.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or
deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages,
or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Official Copy of the
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to
be misrepresented thereby. Any person, firm or corporation violating
this Section shall be punished as provided in Section 100.220 of this
Code.
B. This provision shall not apply to amendments, additions or deletions to
this Code, duly passed by the City Council, which may be prepared by
the City Clerk for insertion in this Code.
A. In the construction of this Code and of all other ordinances of the City,
the following definitions shall be observed, unless it shall be otherwise
expressly provided in any Section or ordinance, or unless inconsistent
with the manifest intent of the City Council, or unless the context
clearly requires otherwise:
Section
100.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
100.080
AO:5
BOARD OF ALDERMEN — The elected Governing Body of the City of
Republic, Missouri, prior to adoption of the City Charter.
CITY — The words "the City" or "this City" or "City" shall mean the City
of Republic, Missouri.
CITY COUNCIL — The elected Governing Body of the City of Republic
as set forth in the City Charter.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR — A staff member of the
City of Republic designated by the City Administrator to perform those
functions designated by the City Code or by specific assignment. This
designation may be in addition to other assigned or designated duties.
COUNTY — The words "the County" or "this County" or "County" shall
mean the County of Greene, and/or the County of Christian, Missouri.
DAY — A day of twenty-four (24) hours, beginning at 12:00 Midnight.
MAY — Is permissive.
MAYOR — An officer of the City, known as the Mayor of the City Council
of the City of Republic, Missouri.
MONTH — A calendar month.
OATH — Shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in
which an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases
the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm"
and "affirmed".
OWNER — The word "owner" as applied to a building or land, shall
include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or
tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land.
PERSON — May extend and be applied to bodies politic and corporate,
and to partnerships and other unincorporated associations.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Includes money, goods, chattels, things in
action and evidences of debt.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING — When used by way of reference to any
Section of this Code, shall mean the Section next preceding or next
following that in which the reference is made, unless some other
Section is expressly designated in the reference.
PROPERTY — Includes real and personal property.
PUBLIC WAY — Shall include any street, alley, boulevard, parkway,
highway, sidewalk or other public thoroughfare.
REAL PROPERTY — The terms "real property", "premises", "real estate"
or "lands" shall be deemed to be co-extensive with lands, tenements and
hereditaments.
SHALL — Is mandatory.
SIDEWALK — That portion of the street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line which is intended for the use of pedestrians.
Section
100.080
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
100.080
AO:6
Section 100.090. Words and Phrases — How Construed.
Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain or ordinary and usual sense,
but technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning
in law shall be understood according to their technical import.
Section 100.100. Headings.
The headings of the Chapters and Sections of this Code are intended
as guides and not as part of this Code for purposes of interpretation or
construction.
Section 100.110. Continuation of Prior Ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are in substance
the same as those of ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of
this Code, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not as new
enactments.
Section 100.120. Effect of Repeal of Ordinance.
STATE — The words "the State" or "this State" or "State" shall mean the
State of Missouri.
STREET — Shall mean and include any public way, highway, street,
avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley or other public thoroughfare, and
each of such words shall include all of them.
TENANT, OCCUPANT — The words "tenant" or "occupant", applied to a
building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or a
part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
WRITING, WRITTEN, IN WRITING and WRITING WORD FOR WORD
— Includes printing, lithographing, or other mode of representing
words and letters, but in all cases where the signature of any person
is required, the proper handwriting of the person, or his/her mark, is
intended.
YEAR — A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed, and the word
"year" shall be equivalent to the words "year of our Lord".
B. Newspaper. Whenever in this Code or other ordinance of the City it is
required that notice be published in the "official newspaper" or a
"newspaper of general circulation published in the City", and if there is
no newspaper published within the City, the said notice shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City,
regardless of its place of publication. Such newspaper shall not include
an advertising circular or other medium for which no subscription list is
maintained.
A. No offense committed and no fine, penalty or forfeiture incurred, or
prosecution commenced or pending previous to or at the time when any
ordinance provision is repealed or amended, shall be affected by the
Section
100.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
100.120
AO:7
Section 100.130. Repealing Ordinance Repealed — Former
Ordinance Not Revived — When.
When an ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision is
itself repealed, it does not revive the former ordinance, clause or provision,
unless it is otherwise expressly provided; nor shall any ordinance repealing
any former ordinance, clause or provision abate, annul or in anywise affect
any proceedings had or commenced under or by virtue of the ordinance so
repealed, but the same is as effectual and shall be proceeded on to final
judgment and termination as if the repealing ordinance had not passed,
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
Section 100.140. Severability.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the
Chapters, Sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this
Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, Section,
or Chapter of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise
invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent
jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the
remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, Sections, and Chapters
of this Code since the same would have been enacted by the City Council
without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional or
invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or Section.
Section 100.150. Tense.
Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context, all
words used in this Code indicating the present tense shall not be limited to
the time of adoption of this Code but shall extend to and include the time of
the happening of any act, event, or requirement for which provision is made
herein, either as a power, immunity, requirement, or prohibition.
Section 100.160. Notice.
repeal or amendment, but the trial and punishment of all such offenses,
and the recovery of the fines, penalties or forfeitures shall be had, in all
respects, as if the provision had not been repealed or amended, except:
1. All such proceedings shall be conducted according to existing
procedural laws; and
2. If the penalty or punishment for any offense is reduced or lessened
by any alteration of the law creating the offense prior to original
sentencing, the penalty or punishment shall be assessed according
to the amendatory law.
A. Whenever notice may be required under the provisions of this Code or
other City ordinance, the same shall be served in the following manner:
Section
100.120
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
100.160
AO:8
Section 100.170. Notice — Exceptions.
The provisions of the preceding Section shall not apply to those Chapters of
this Code wherein there is a separate definition of notice.
Section 100.180. Computation of Time.
In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Code or by a
notice or order issued pursuant thereto, the day of the act, event or default
after which the designated period of time begins to run is not to be included.
The last day of the period so computed is to be included, unless it is a
Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the
end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday nor a legal holiday.
When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven (7) days,
intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the
computation.
Section 100.190. Gender.
When any subject matter, party or person is described or referred to by
words importing the masculine, females as well as males, and associations
and bodies corporate as well as individuals, shall be deemed to be included.
Section 100.200. Joint Authority.
Words importing joint authority to three (3) or more persons shall be
construed as authority to a majority of such persons unless otherwise
declared in the law giving the authority.
Section 100.210. Number.
When any subject matter, party or person is described or referred to by
words importing the singular number, the plural and separate matters and
persons and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; and when
words importing the plural number are used, the singular shall be included.
1. By delivering the notice to the person to be served personally or by
leaving the same at his/her residence, office or place of business
with some person of his/her family over the age of fifteen (15)
years;
2. By mailing said notice by certified or registered mail to such person
to be served at his/her last known address; or
3. If the person to be served is unknown, or may not be notified under
the requirements of this Section, then by posting said notice in
some conspicuous place at least five (5) days before the act or
action concerning which the notice is given is to take place. No
person shall interfere with, obstruct, mutilate, conceal, or tear
down any official notice or placard posted by any City Officer,
unless permission is given by said officer.
Section
100.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
100.210
AO:9

ARTICLE III
Penalty
Section 100.220. General Penalty.
A. Fine; Imprisonment. [Ord. No. 16-07 §1, 3-28-2016]
1. Whenever in this Code or any other ordinance of the City, or in any
rule, regulation, notice or order promulgated by any officer or
agency of the City under authority duly vested in him/her or it, any
act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful or an offense,
misdemeanor or ordinance violation or the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an
offense or a misdemeanor or ordinance violation, and no specific
penalty is provided for the violation thereof, upon conviction of a
violation of any such provision of this Code or of any such
ordinance, rule, regulation, notice or order, the violator shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
or by imprisonment in the City or County Jail not exceeding one
hundred eighty (180) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment;
provided, that in any case wherein the penalty for an offense is
fixed by a Statute of the State that clearly preempts the City
penalty, the statutory penalty, and no other, shall be imposed for
such offense, except that imprisonments may be in the City Prison
or workhouse instead of the County Jail.
2. [Ord. No. 16-16 §1, 8-8-2016]
a. Should a minor traffic violation, as defined in Section 479.350,
RSMo., result in a fine and cost being assessed, the amount of
fine and cost shall not exceed that allowed by Section 479.353,
RSMo. of two hundred twenty-five dollars ($225.00) for minor
traffic violations.
b. Should a municipal ordinance violation, as defined in Section
479.350, RSMo., result in a fine and cost being assessed, the
amount of fine and cost shall not exceed that allowed by
Section 479.353, RSMo. for municipal ordinance violations
committed within a twelve-month period beginning with the
first violation: Two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the first
municipal ordinance violation, two hundred seventy-five
dollars ($275.00) for the second municipal ordinance violation,
three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for the third municipal
ordinance violation, and four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00)
for the fourth and any subsequent municipal ordinance
violations. [NOTE: This Subsection (A)(2)(b) currently applies
to Code Chapters 405, 410, and 425.]
c. If other ordinance violations limits become included in
Sections 479.350 and 479.353 RSMo., then the limits on those
offenses shall apply.
Section
100.220
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
100.220
AO:11
d. Should the provisions of Section 479.350, RSMo. and/or
479.353, RSMo. be declared invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, then the penalty provisions of Subsection (A)1
above shall apply instead of the provisions of this Subsection
(A)2.
3. For a violation of a City ordinance, State law, Federal law or any
rule or regulation an administrative action may be instituted to
abate the violation pursuant to the procedures set forth in this
Code without regard to whether or not a summons for a violation
has been issued.
B. Every day any violation of this Code or any other ordinance or any such
rule, regulation, notice or order shall continue shall constitute a
separate offense.
C. Whenever any act is prohibited by this Code, by an amendment thereof,
or by any rule or regulation adopted thereunder, such prohibition shall
extend to and include the causing, securing, aiding, or abetting of
another person to do said act. Whenever any act is prohibited by this
Code, an attempt to do the act is likewise prohibited.
Section
100.220
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
100.220
AO:12
ARTICLE IV
City Limits
Section 100.230. City Limits. [CC 1999 §1-11]
A map showing the City limits and describing such limits is on file in the
office of the City Clerk.
Section
100.230
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
100.230
AO:13
Chapter 105
ELECTIONS
Section
100.230
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
100.230
AO:14
ARTICLE I
In General
Section 105.010. Conformance of City Elections With State Law.
All City elections shall be conducted and held in conformance with the
provisions of Chapter 115, RSMo.
Section 105.020. Date of Municipal Election.
Section 105.030. Declaration of Candidacy — Dates For Filing.
Any person who desires to become a candidate for an elective City office
at the general City election shall file with the City Clerk, not prior to the
hour of 8:00 A.M., on the fifteenth (15th) Tuesday prior to, nor later than
5:00 P.M., on the eleventh (11th) Tuesday prior to the next City municipal
election, a written declaration of his/her intent to become a candidate at
said election. The City Clerk shall keep a permanent record of the names
of the candidates, the offices for which they seek election, and the date of
their filing, and their names shall appear on the ballots in that order.
Section 105.040. Declaration of Candidacy — Notice To Public.
The City Clerk shall, on or before the fifteenth (15th) Tuesday prior to any
election at which City offices are to be filled by said election, notify the
general public of the opening filing date, the office or offices to be filled,
the proper place for filing and the closing filing date of the election. Such
notification may be accomplished by legal notice published in at least one
(1) newspaper of general circulation in the City.
Section 105.050. Declaration of Candidacy — Form.
The form of said written declaration of candidacy shall be substantially as
follows:
A. A municipal election for the qualified voters of this City shall be held on
the first (1st) Tuesday after the first (1st) Monday in April of each year.
B. On the first (1st) Tuesday after the first (1st) Monday in April of evennumbered
years, a municipal election of the qualified voters of the City
of Republic shall be held for the purpose of electing a Mayor, and one
(1) Councilmember from each ward who shall hold his/her office for a
term of two (2) years, and until his/her successor is elected and
qualified.
C. On the first (1st) Tuesday after the first (1st) Monday in April of oddnumbered
years, a municipal election of the qualified voters of the City
of Republic shall be held for the purpose of electing one (1)
Councilmember from each ward who shall hold his/her office for a term
of two (2) years, and until his/her successor is elected and qualified.
Section
105.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
105.050
AO:15
DECLARATION OF CANDIDACY
STATE OF MISSOURI )
) SS
COUNTY OF GREENE )
I, ____________________________, being first duly sworn, state that I reside at
____________________________, City of Republic, County of Greene, Missouri;
that I am a qualified voter; that I do hereby declare myself a candidate for
the office of ____________________________, to be voted upon at the municipal
election to be held on the first (1st) Tuesday after the first (1st) Monday in
April, ___________, and I meet all the qualifications required of a candidate
for said office, and I hereby request that my name be printed upon the
official ballot for said election for said office and state that I will serve as
such officer, if elected.
Signed:
Subscribed and sworn to before me this ______ day of ______, ______.
City Clerk
City of Republic
(S E A L)
Section 105.060. Notice of Elections.
In City elections, the City Clerk shall notify the County Clerk prior to 5:00
P.M. on the tenth (10th) Tuesday prior to any City election except as noted
in Section 115.125.1, RSMo. The notice shall be in writing, shall specify that
the City Council is calling the election, the purpose of the election, the date
of the election, and shall include a certified copy of the legal notice to be
published including the sample ballot. The written notice shall be executed
on behalf of the City Council by the Mayor of the Board and shall include
the attestation of the City Clerk and shall have affixed thereto the Seal of
the City of Republic. The notice and any other information required by this
Section may, with the prior notification to the election authority receiving
the notice, be accepted by facsimile transmission prior to 5:00 P.M. on the
tenth (10th) Tuesday prior to the election, provided that the original copy of
the notice and a certified copy of the legal notice to be published shall be
received in the office of the election authority within three (3) business days
from the date of the facsimile transmission.
Section
105.050
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
105.060
AO:16
ARTICLE II
Wards
Section 105.070. Ward Boundaries. [CC 1999 §10-1; Ord. No. 02-44
§§1 — 6, 10-29-2002; Ord. No. 05-32 §§1 — 7, 5-23-2005; Ord. No.
07-77, 11-26-2007; Ord. No. 11-26 §§1 — 4, 10-24-2011]
A. The City of Republic is currently divided into four (4) separate wards as
required by Article VIII, Section 8.4 of the Charter adopted by the
voters of the City of Republic on April 3, 2007. The four (4) separate
wards are designated as Ward I, Ward II, Ward III, and Ward IV.
B. The Boundaries for Ward I, Ward II, Ward III, and Ward IV are depicted
on "Exhibit A", "Certified Copy of Official City of Republic Ward Map,
Dated October 24, 2011". The approved map will be on file in the City
offices and incorporated herein by reference.1 The City of Republic
Ward Boundary Map will remain in effect until changed by ordinance,
by City Council, following the release of data of the next United States
decennial census.
C. The inhabitants of each ward shall include those residents residing
within the enclosed geographical boundaries as depicted on the
"Certified Copy of Official City of Republic Ward Map, Dated October
24, 2011".2 For boundary lines determined by City streets, the
centerline of the street will be the boundary line. Residents living on a
City street used as a boundary line between wards will be placed in
their corresponding ward as determined by even and odd addresses.
Residents whose property abut or are divided by a section line or
property line used as a boundary between wards will be placed in the
corresponding ward as determined by the official street address of the
main residence of the property.
1. Editor's Note: The Ward Map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
2. Editor's Note: The Ward Map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
Section
105.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
105.070
AO:17
Chapter 110
ADMINISTRATION POLICIES
Section
105.070
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
105.070
AO:18
ARTICLE I
Budgetary Year
Section 110.010. Budgetary Year — Publication of Reports. [CC
1999 §2-143]
A. The City's budgetary year shall be January first (1st) to December
thirty-first (31st) of each year.
B. The City shall prepare and publish semi-annual statements, and to
make out and spread upon their records a full and detailed account and
statement of the receipts and expenditures and indebtedness of the City
for the half year which account and statement shall be published in
some newspaper in the City on January thirty-first (31st) and July thirtyfirst
(31st) of each year.
Section
110.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.010
AO:19

ARTICLE II
Purchasing And Surplus Property Disposal
Section
110.020.01
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.010
AO:21

DIVISION 1
Purchasing Policy
Section 110.020.01. Routine Expenditures. [Ord. No. 17-28 § 3,
8-1-20173]
A. The City Administrator shall have authority and responsibility for
making expenditures required for public purposes, wherein the total is
equal to or less than the current competitive bid requirement. The
competitive bid requirement shall be twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000.00). The City Administrator shall issue written instructions
outlining procedures for compliance with this Chapter in accordance
with the following minimum requirements:
1. Small Expenditure Limitation. Expenditures for day-to-day supplies
and operational needs will be effected through utilization of
prudent and practical selectivity of best price sources, per
procedures provided by written administrative policy. The
limitation for such expenditures from the effective date of this
ordinance through December 31, 2017, shall be five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00), and thereafter shall be adjusted annually in
accordance with the All Items Consumer Price Index for Urban
Consumers (CPI-U), South Region, for the preceding twelve (12)
months, rounded to the nearest one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
2. Intermediate Expenditure Limitation. All expenditures by the City
for public purposes, wherein the expenditure therefor is between
the small expenditure limitation and the competitive bid
requirement shall be made only after solicitation of comparable
written price quotations from at least three (3) separate suppliers.
Expenditures of less than the competitive bid requirement from
State bid sources shall be exempt from this provision.
3. Expenditures In Excess Of Fifteen Thousand Dollars ($15,000.00).
Each expenditure exceeding fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00)
shall be specifically listed in the City Administrator's written report
presented at the next regular meeting of the City Council.
4. Lowest Price Quote. For all expenditures not requiring City Council
approval, the City Administrator shall attempt to select the lowest
price quotation. If the City Administrator does not select the lowest
price quotation, he/she shall explain the reason in the City
Administrator's written report presented at the next regular
meeting of the City Council.
3. Editor's Note: Former Article II, Purchasing Policy, containing Section 110.020 was
repealed and the Article title has been changed to "Purchasing And Surplus Property
Disposal."
Section
110.020.01
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.020.05
AO:23
Section 110.020.05. Large Expenditures. [Ord. No. 17-28 § 3,
8-1-2017]
Where the amount of expenditure exceeds the bid limitation as established
by Section 110.020.01, the City Administrator shall invite competitive
sealed bids thereon by optional advertisement in any newspaper of general
circulation in an area of resource which will supply the need, and by
mandatory advertisement in any locally-published newspaper, at least once
fifteen (15) or more days prior to an established date on which no further
bids shall be accepted. Other prospective bidders who may not have access
to local newspapers may be advised by mail of the specifications and
solicitation for bids, although this shall not be required. Bids received
pursuant to such solicitations shall be opened and read at the date and
time established for such opening in the presence of the appropriate
departmental director or their designee. The City Administrator shall have
exclusive power to award the bid to the lowest responsive and responsible
bidder, after approval of the City Council. The expenditure shall be awarded
on the basis of lowest responsive and responsible bidder; provided,
however, that the City Administrator may reject any and all such bids or
waive non-prejudicial irregularities. Except for emergencies as provided in
Subsection 110.020.10(B), and change orders within the limits as provided
in Subsection 110.020.10(C), no bid contract expenditure approved by the
City Council shall be increased without further approval of City Council;
provided, however, that the estimated total cost of unit-price contracts may
be exceeded without prior Council approval unless the scope of the work,
or the price per unit, is increased. By written report presented at the next
regular meeting of the City Council, the City Administrator shall report the
amount by which any unit-price contract has exceeded the bid estimate.
Section 110.020.10. Bid Process Exemption. [Ord. No. 17-28 § 3,
8-1-2017]
A. Generally. In situations when there is a sole source of supply as
determined by the City Administrator, the City Administrator shall by
writing certify such conditions as effect such "sole source" supply, and
competitive bidding requirements may be waived or modified by further
resolution of the City Council.
B. Emergency Expenditures. Upon a failure of existing facilities, the
immediate repair or replacement of which must be accomplished to
avoid threat to the health, peace or safety of citizens of the City, the City
Administrator with the consent of the Mayor and/or Mayor Pro Tem is
authorized and responsible to effect emergency repairs by the most
expeditious available means. Such instances will be exempt from the
competitive bid process. The City Administrator will submit a full
written report of such emergency procedures to the City Council and
certify the need for effecting such procedure, justifying both method
and cost in effecting emergency repair, at the next regular meeting of
the Council. This procedure may be used for emergency situations
Section
110.020.05
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
110.020.10
AO:24
Section 110.020.15. Approval Of Payment. [Ord. No. 17-28 § 3,
8-1-2017]
Section 110.020.20. Contracts For Professional Services. [Ord. No.
17-28 § 3, 8-1-2017]
described herein even if an emergency is not declared pursuant to
Chapter 230, Article II of this Code.
C. Change Orders. Change orders that do not exceed fifteen percent (15%)
of the approved project amount and are within the spending authority
of the City Administrator shall not require City Council's approval.
However, all change orders over and above the amount specified by
Subsection 110.020.01(A)(3) of this Code shall be reported in the City
Administrator's written report presented at the next regular meeting of
the City Council.
A. The City Administrator may approve or disapprove any bills, debts, or
liabilities asserted as claims against the City for payment out of any
funds appropriated for that purpose when funds on hand are adequate
to pay such bills, debts or liabilities.
B. Funds shall be deemed appropriated as follows:
1. When the expenditure is specified in a budget currently approved
by the City Council or is otherwise specifically approved by vote of
the City Council; or
2. For emergency expenditures less than thirty thousand dollars
($30,000.00), when the payment is stated by writing of the City
Administrator at a regular meeting of the City Council; provided,
however, that the budget shall thereafter be amended to reflect the
expense, and shall remain a balanced budget.
A. Professional Service Procurement. Procurement for professional
services, such as but not limited to engineering, architectural, and land
surveying, will be selected based on qualification and not price,
according to procedures provided by written administrative policy and,
where applicable, State law.
B. When procurement for professional services does not exceed the bid
limitation as established by Section 110.020.01, evaluation of
qualifications and selection of the most capable firm shall be performed
by the City Administrator, who may contract for the services subject to
the provisions of Section 110.020.20.
C. When procurement for professional services exceeds the bid limitation
as established by Section 110.020.01, evaluation of qualifications and
selection of the most capable firm shall be performed by the City
Administrator with the approval of the City Council.
Section
110.020.10
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.020.20
AO:25

DIVISION 2
Disposal Of Surplus Property By City
Section 110.020.30. Surplus Property Disposal Policy. [Ord. No.
17-28 § 3, 8-1-2017]
Section 110.020.35. Capital Assets. [Ord. No. 17-28 § 3, 8-1-2017]
The Capital Asset threshold of the City shall be five thousand dollars
($5,000.00).
Section 110.020.40. Inventory. [Ord. No. 17-28 § 3, 8-1-2017]
The City shall maintain an inventory of all property valued over five hundred
dollars ($500.00). Items valued over five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall
be capitalized in the accounting records.
A. The City Administrator, or his/her duly authorized representative, may
sell or exchange any municipal supplies, materials, or equipment, which
have a value of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more, as
determined by the City's Finance Director, after declaration as surplus
by the City Council. Such sales as are made of these surpluses shall be
by competitive bidding processes including sale by auction as approved
by the City Council. The City Administrator may dispose of such surplus
by:
1. Selling the items at public auction, including approved online
auction sites.
2. Utilizing said items for trade-in.
3. Disposing of the items as otherwise authorized by State law,
including transfer to another governmental entity within the State.
B. The City Administrator, or his/her duly authorized representative, may
declare any municipal supplies, materials, or equipment which have a
value of less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), as determined by
the City's Finance Director, surplus or obsolete to the needs of the City.
C. The procedure for disposal of surplus, worn-out, or obsolete items with
a value over five hundred dollars ($500.00) yet under ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) shall be addressed through administrative policy.
D. Upon determination by the City Administrator that surplus City
supplies, materials, or equipment have negligible or no value, the
administrator is authorized and directed to dispose thereof through
recommended industry practice, in compliance with disposal
requirements.
Section
110.020.30
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.020.40
AO:27

ARTICLE III
Personnel Policy
Section 110.030. Personnel Policy. [CC 1999 §2-145; Ord. No. 09-33
§§1 — 2, 10-26-2009; Ord. No. 09-46 §§1 — 2, 1-11-2010; Ord. No.
15-02 §§1 — 3, 1-26-2015]
The City Council hereby adopts as a personnel policy for the City of
Republic the personnel manual on file in the City Clerk's office and
incorporated herein by reference.
Section
110.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.030
AO:29

ARTICLE IV
Conflicts Of Interest
Section 110.040. Conflicts of Interest — Disclosure. [CC 1999
§2-146; Ord. No. 00-24 §§1 — 4, 7-24-2000; Ord. No. 02-30 §§1 — 4,
8-13-2002; Ord. No. 04-52 §1 — 4, 8-9-2004; Ord. No. 06-59 §§1 — 4,
7-24-2006; Ord. No. 08-58 §§1 — 4, 7-28-2008; Ord. No. 10-38 §§1 —
5, 8-9-2010; Ord. No. 12-46 §§1 — 5, 7-23-2012; Ord. No. 14-18 §§1
–– 5, 7-28-2014; Ord. No. 16-12 §§1 — 5, 8-8-2016; Ord. No. 18-32,
6-26-2018]
A. Declaration Of Policy. The proper operation of government requires that
public officials and employees be independent, impartial and
responsible to the people; that government decisions and policy be
made in the proper channels of the governmental structure; that public
office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence
in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, there is
hereby established a procedure for disclosure by certain officials and
employees of private financial or other interests in matters affecting the
City.
B. Conflicts Of Interest.
1. All elected and appointed officials as well as employees of a
political subdivision must comply with Section 105.454, RSMo., on
conflicts of interest as well as any other State law governing official
conduct.
2. Any member of the Governing Body of a political subdivision who
has a "substantial or private interest" in any measure, bill, order or
ordinance proposed or pending before such Governing Body must
disclose that interest to the Secretary or Clerk of such body and
such disclosure shall be recorded in the appropriate journal of the
Governing Body. "Substantial or private interest" is defined as
ownership by the individual, his/her spouse, or his/her dependent
children, whether singularly or collectively, directly or indirectly of:
a. Ten percent (10%) or more of any business entity; or
b. An interest having a value of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00)
or more; or
c. The receipt of a salary, gratuity, or other compensation or
remuneration of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more per
year from any individual, partnership, organization, or
association within any calendar year.
C. Disclosure Reports. Each elected official, candidate for elective office,
the Chief Administrative Officer, the Chief Purchasing Officer, and the
full-time general counsel shall disclose the following information by
May 1, or the appropriate deadline as referenced in Section 105.487,
Section
110.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.040
AO:31
RSMo., if any such transactions occurred during the previous calendar
year.
1. For such person, and all persons within the first degree of
consanguinity or affinity of such person, the date and the identities
of the parties to each transaction with total value in excess of five
hundred dollars ($500.00), if any, that such person had with the
political subdivision, other than compensation received as an
employee or payment of any tax, fee or penalty due to the political
subdivision, and other than transfers for no consideration to the
political subdivision.
2. The date and the identities of the parties to each transaction known
to the person with a total value in excess of five hundred dollars
($500.00), if any, that any business entity in which such person had
a substantial interest, had with the political subdivision, other than
payment of any tax, fee or penalty due to the political subdivision or
transactions involving payment for providing utility service to the
political subdivision, and other than transfers for no consideration
to the political subdivision.
3. The Chief Administrative Officer, Chief Purchasing Officer, and
candidates for either of these positions also shall disclose by May 1,
or the appropriate deadline as referenced in Section 105.487,
RSMo., the following information for the previous calendar year:
a. The name and address of each of the employers of such person
from whom income of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or
more was received during the year covered by the statement;
b. The name and address of each sole proprietorship that he/she
owned; the name, address and the general nature of the
business conducted of each general partnership and joint
venture in which he/she was a partner or participant; the name
and address of each partner or co-participant for each
partnership or joint venture unless such names and addresses
are filed by the partnership or joint venture with the Secretary
of State; the name, address and general nature of the business
conducted of any closely held corporation or limited
partnership in which the person owned ten percent (10%) or
more of any class of outstanding stock or limited partnership
units; and the name of any publicly traded corporation or
limited partnership that is listed on a regulated stock exchange
or automated quotation system in which the person owned two
percent (2%) or more of any class of outstanding stock, limited
partnership units or other equity interests;
c. The name and address of each corporation for which such
person served in the capacity of a director, officer, or receiver.
D. Filing Of Reports.
Section
110.040
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
110.040
AO:32
1. The financial interest statements shall be filed at the following
times, but no person is required to file more than one (1) financial
interest statement in any calendar year:
a. Every person required to file a financial interest statement
shall file the statement annually not later than May 1 and the
statement shall cover the calendar year ending the
immediately preceding December 31, provided that any
member of the City Council may supplement the financial
interest statement to report additional interests acquired after
December 31 of the covered year until the date of filing of the
financial interest statement.
b. Each person appointed to office shall file the statement within
thirty (30) days of such appointment or employment covering
the calendar year ending the previous December 31.
c. Every candidate required to file a personal financial disclosure
statement shall file no later than fourteen (14) days after the
close of filing at which the candidate seeks nomination or
election or nomination by caucus. The time period of this
statement shall cover the twelve (12) months prior to the
closing date of filing for candidacy.
2. Financial disclosure reports giving the financial information
required in Subsection (C) shall be filed with the local political
subdivision and with the Missouri Ethics Commission. The reports
shall be available for public inspection and copying during normal
business hours.
E. Filing Of Ordinance. A certified copy of this Section, adopted prior to
September 15, shall be sent within ten (10) days of its adoption to the
Missouri Ethics Commission.
Section
110.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.040
AO:33

ARTICLE V
Social Security
Section 110.050. Preparation, Execution of Plan and Agreement.
[CC 1999 §2-53; Ord. No. 1978 §1, 10-1-1956]
The City Administrator and Director of Finance are authorized and directed,
on behalf of the City, to prepare, execute and submit to the Division of
Budget and Comptroller of the State, as State agency, a plan and agreement
for extending benefits to the eligible employees and officials of the City,
in the form prepared by the State agency and approved and adopted by
the City Council, which plan and agreement are to become effective upon
approval thereof by the State agency, and are further authorized and
directed to execute agreements and modifications and amendments thereof
with the State agency, providing for the extension of such benefits to such
employees and officials as set forth in such plan and agreement, as provided
for in Section 110.060, such plan and agreement to provide the effective
date upon which benefits are to be extended.
Section 110.060. Purpose and Policy of City. [CC 1999 §2-54; Ord.
No. 1978 §1, 10-1-1956]
It is the policy and purpose of the City to extend to all eligible employees
and officials of the City who are not excluded by law or this Code and
whether employed in connection with a governmental or proprietary
function of the City the benefits of the system of Federal Old Age and
Survivors Insurance as authorized by the Social Security Act Amendments
of 1950, and by Section 105.300 et seq., of the Revised Statutes of Missouri,
as the same may be now and hereafter in effect.
Section 110.070. Effective Date — Deduction of Wages, Etc. [CC
1999 §2-55; Ord. No. 1978 §1, 10-1-1956]
There shall be deducted from the wages of all employees and officials of the
City, to whom the benefits of the system of Federal Old Age and Survivors
Insurance are extended, by virtue of the plan and agreement provided for
in Section 110.060, the amount of each of such employee's and official's
contributions, as determined by the applicable State and Federal laws and
by such plan and agreement, the aggregate amount of such deductions to
be paid into the contributions fund created by Section 105.300 et seq., of
the Revised Statutes of Missouri; provided however, that from the first (1st)
payment of wages made to each of such employees and officials after the
benefits of the system have been extended to such employees and officials,
there shall be deducted a sum equal to the amount which would have
been due and payable from each of such employees and officials had such
extension of benefits been provided and effective on October 1, 1956.
Section
110.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.080
AO:35
Section 110.080. Contributions By City. [CC 1999 §2-56; Ord. No.
1978 §1, 10-1-1956]
There is authorized to be appropriated from the water-sewer operating and
general revenue fund of the City the sum of money necessary to pay the
contributions of the City which shall be due and payable by virtue of the
extension of the benefits of the Federal Old Age and Survivors Insurance
System to the eligible employees and officials of the City, such sum of money
to be paid into the contributions fund created by Section 105.300 et seq.,
of the Revised Statutes of Missouri; provided however, that in making the
first (1st) payment to the contributions fund, after the benefits of such
system have been extended to such employees and officials, such first (1st)
payment shall include a sum equal to the amount which would have been
due and payable had such extension of benefits been provided and effective
on October 1, 1956. The fund from which such appropriation is made will,
at all times, be sufficient to pay the contributions of the City by this Section
directed to be paid to such contributions fund.
Section 110.090. Administration — Compliance With State and
Federal Laws, Etc. [CC 1999 §2-57; Ord. No. 1978 §1, 10-1-1956]
The City, from and after the approval of the plan and agreement of this
City by the State agency, shall fully comply with and shall keep such
records, make such reports and provide such methods of administration
of such plan and agreement as may be required by all applicable State
and Federal laws, rules and regulations now and hereafter in effect with
respect to the extension of the benefits of the Federal Old Age and Survivors
Insurance System to the employees and officials of this City. For the purpose
of administering the plan and agreement the City Administrator shall
designate a member of the City staff to be the official who shall make all
required reports, keep all records, and be responsible for the administration
of the plan and agreement on behalf of this City.
Section
110.080
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
110.090
AO:36
ARTICLE VI
Returned Check Policy
Section 110.100. Imposition of Service Charge On Returned
Checks.4 [CC 1999 §24-13(A); Ord. No. 4967, 1977; Ord. No. 99-20
§1, 4-12-1999; Ord. No. 01-08 §1, 5-14-2001]
A service charge of twenty dollars ($20.00) is hereby imposed upon any
person or entity who, in an attempt to discharge any indebtedness owed to
the City, issues or passes to any City Official or employee any check or other
similar sight order for the payment of money which is not honored by the
drawee for any reason.
4. Cross Reference — As to bad checks, place of payment for water and sewer bills, see
§705.120.
Section
110.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.100
AO:37

ARTICLE VII
Collective Bargaining Policy
Section 110.110. Coverage for Collective Bargaining. [Ord. No.
14-01 §1, 1-27-2014]
All employees of the City shall be covered by this Article for the exercise of
their collective bargaining rights.
Section 110.120. Authorization to Adopt Procedural Rules. [Ord.
No. 14-01 §1, 1-27-2014]
The City Administrator shall have the authority by administrative order
to adopt rules, regulations and forms and to from time to time amend or
repeal such rules and regulations as he/she deems necessary to carry out
the provisions of this Article and to be in compliance with requirements of
law. Administrative orders are to be used primarily for but are not limited
to procedural or process matters.
Section 110.130. Establishment of Bargaining Unit. [Ord. No. 14-01
§1, 1-27-2014]
A. A petition for certification (or a representation petition) may be filed by
an employee, a group of employees, a labor organization, or the
employer alleging that one (1) or more labor organizations have
presented a claim to be recognized as the exclusive bargaining
representative of a majority of the employees in an appropriate
bargaining unit. Any petition seeking designation of a bargaining agent
to represent employees of the City must contain a specific, written
description of the bargaining unit sought, together with specific
exclusions via certified mail to the City Clerk addressed to the City
Administrator. Upon submission of a petition, the petition shall be
reviewed pursuant to the following procedures:
1. The petition must be accompanied by a showing of interest of not
less than forty-five percent (45%) of the employees in the unit
alleged to be appropriate. Any evidence submitted as a showing of
interest must contain legible signatures, and each signature must
be dated by the employees.
2. Upon the filing of any petition, within fourteen (14) days of receipt,
the City Administrator shall appoint a three-person Recognition
Committee (consisting of the City Administrator or his or her
designee and two (2) members appointed from among the members
of the public or City staff). The Recognition Committee shall
investigate the petition to determine the facts. The Recognition
Committee shall determine whether or not a valid question
concerning representation of employees exists in a prima facie
appropriate unit.
Section
110.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.130
AO:39
Section 110.140. Determining Representative Status of Labor
Organization. [Ord. No. 14-01 §1, 1-27-2014]
3. If the Recognition Committee determines the evidence submitted
meets the appropriate level of a showing of interest, the Committee
shall order an election be conducted to determine whether
employees in the petitioned-for unit desire exclusive representation
by the petitioning labor organization for purposes of collective
bargaining. The order shall contain the date of the election and set
forth the date of eligibility for purposes of voting in the election.
4. If the Recognition Committee determines that there is reasonable
cause to believe that there are unresolved issues relating to the
question concerning representation of employees, the City
Administrator or his or her designee shall set the matter for
hearing before the Recognition Committee, which shall consider
the appropriateness of the requested unit and on the behalf of the
City take one of the below actions:
a. Agree to the unit;
b. Send the description back to the labor organization for further
specificity, or
c. Reject the unit as being inappropriate with specific written
reasons for rejection. All parties shall be given a minimum of
fourteen (14) days' notice of the hearing.
B. The labor organization submitting the application can either accept the
Recognition Committee's decision regarding the bargaining unit or
appeal to the City Council within fourteen (14) days of the date of the
Committee's decision.
C. Any appeal taken pursuant to Subsection B above must be sent via
certified mail and must be received by the City Clerk within fourteen
(14) days after the Recognition Committee's decision is issued. The City
Council decision with respect to the appropriateness of the bargaining
unit shall be final and binding.
D. In evaluating the appropriateness of the proposed bargaining unit, the
City Council may consider, but is not bound by, precedent from other
cities, other states and/or the National Labor Relations Act and
administrative orders entered by the City Administrator.
A. Within forty-five (45) days after establishing the appropriate bargaining
unit, there will be a secret ballot election to determine whether the
majority of employees in the bargaining unit want to be represented by
the labor organization for purposes of collective bargaining. Notice of
the election shall be given pursuant to rules established by
administrative order.
Section
110.130
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
110.140
AO:40
B. The City Administrator or his or her designee shall conduct the election
according to rules established in an administrative order.
C. Each of the interested parties, including the City Administrator, may
designate an observer for the poll. Unless otherwise stipulated by the
parties, observers must be non-supervisory employees of the public
employer.
D. Any observer or authorized officer may challenge an employee's
eligibility to vote pursuant to procedures established by administrative
order.
E. No labor organization will be recognized as representing any employee
by any other means.
F. The election will be held by secret ballot. The ballot may be on a form
substantially similar to the form utilized by the National Labor
Relations Bond for conducting union election, or as follows:
Shall [insert name of petitioning labor organization here] be
recognized as the bargaining agent for the employees of the [describe
bargaining unit as recognized by the City]?
____YES ____NO
G. After the election has concluded, the person conducting the election
will immediately and publicly count the ballots and issue a report on
election indicating how many ballots were cast for representation by
the labor organization and how many votes were cast against
representation.
H. Any disputes concerning the election must be referred for decision to
the Recognition Committee for consideration within seven (7) days of
the election. The decision of the Recognition Committee on such
disputes will be final and binding.
I. If there is no dispute concerning the election, then the results of the
election will become final seven (7) days after the report on election is
issued.
J. After the results of the election become final, if a majority of the
members of the bargaining unit voted to be represented by the labor
organization, the City will recognize the labor organization as
representing the employees of the bargaining unit.
K. No labor organization may seek to represent any bargaining unit (or
portion of any bargaining unit) by secret ballot election more than once
in any consecutive twelve-month period.
L. In the event that the majority of the employees in a designated
bargaining unit determine that they no longer wish to be represented
by a recognized labor organization, they may revoke their designation
of the labor organization by tendering a signed and dated petition for
Section
110.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.140
AO:41
Section 110.150. Collective Bargaining. [Ord. No. 14-01 § 1,
1-27-2014]
Section 110.160. Legal Compliance. [Ord. No. 14-01 § 1, 1-27-2014]
In accordance with Section 105.530, RSMo., strikes and other unlawful
conduct by any employee, whether individually or in concert with others
(including sympathy, unfair labor practice or wildcat strikes), sit-downs,
slow-downs, work stoppages, boycotts, any acts honoring a picket line, or
any other acts that interfere with the City's operations are prohibited.
Section 110.170. through Section 110.190. (Reserved)
revocation to the City Administrator. Upon receipt of such a petition,
the City Administrator will designate a three-person Recognition
Committee (consisting of the City Administrator or his or her designee
and two (2) members appointed from among the public or City staff)
to determine if the petition to revoke representation is authentic. Upon
the report of the Recognition Committee, if the petition is determined to
be authentic, an election shall be ordered using substantially the same
election procedure set forth in this Section for establishing a collective
bargaining unit.
A. In the event that the majority of members of the bargaining unit vote to
be represented by the labor organization for purposes of collective
bargaining, a City negotiator, designated by the City Administrator, will
meet with the labor organization to confer and discuss wages, benefits
and other terms and conditions of employment with the goal of reaching
a mutually satisfactory proposed collective bargaining agreement to be
submitted to the City Council for approval.
1. If the City negotiator and the labor organization reach agreement
on a proposed collective bargaining agreement, the proposed
agreement will be submitted to the City Council as an agenda item
for consideration on its next scheduled meeting. At that meeting,
the City Council will approve, reject or hold the proposed collective
bargaining agreement open for further discussion.
2. If the City negotiator and the labor organization cannot reach an
agreement on the terms of a proposed collective bargaining
agreement after substantial negotiations, the City negotiator may
unilaterally submit the City negotiator's proposed collective
bargaining agreement to the City Council for consideration as set
forth in Subsection (A)(1) above.
3. The decision of the City Council with regard to approving or
rejecting a proposed collective bargaining agreement shall be final
and binding.
Section
110.140
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
110.170
AO:42
ARTICLE VIII
Authority To Enter Into Contracts Policy
Section 110.200. Persons Authorized To Enter Into Contracts On
Behalf Of City. [Ord. No. 17-36 § 1, 9-19-2017]
The City Administrator and Finance Director are hereby authorized to enter
into contracts on behalf of the City without prior City Council approval in
an amount not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) in value,
provided that the City Administrator and Finance Director jointly approve
entry into such contracts and that the City Council has appropriated funds
for such contracts in the budget or by City Council action.
Section
110.200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
110.200
AO:43
Chapter 115
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
Editor's Note — At the discretion of the editor, ch. 115 has been
renumbered. Due to a change in government, this chapter has been
reorganized. The changes were set out in ord. no. 07-28. The entire chapter
derived from the 2002 Codification. Additionally, sections 115.170
"meetings generally" and 115.180 "special meetings" derived from CC 1999
§2-13, 2-15; R.O. 1916 §114.
Section
110.200
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
110.200
AO:44
ARTICLE I
Mayor and City Council — Generally
Section 115.010. Council Shall Publish Semi-Annual Statements.
[Ord. No. 07-28 §1, 6-11-2007]
The City Council shall semi-annually each year, at times to be set by the
City Council, make out and spread upon their records a full and detailed
account and statement of the receipts and expenditures and indebtedness of
the City for the half year ending with the last day of the month immediately
preceding the date of such report, which account and statement shall be
published in some newspaper in the City.
Section 115.020. No Money of City To Be Disbursed Until Statement
Is Published — Penalty. [Ord. No. 07-28 §1, 6-11-2007]
In the event the financial statement of the City is not published as required
by Section 115.010, the Treasurer of the City shall not pay out any money
of the City on any warrant or order of the City Council after the end of the
month in which such financial statement should have been published until
such time as such financial statement is published. Any Treasurer violating
the provisions of this Section shall be deemed guilty of an ordinance
violation.
Section 115.030. Mayor To Sign Commissions. [Ord. No. 07-28 §1,
6-11-2007]
The Mayor shall sign the commissions and appointments of all City Officers
elected or appointed in the City and shall approve all official bonds unless
otherwise prescribed by ordinance.
Section 115.035. Introduction and Adoption Procedures For
Ordinances. [Ord. No. 07-68 §1, 10-22-2007]
A. Section 3.11 of the City Charter provides for two (2) readings of an
ordinance before final passage except for emergency ordinances. The
vote on final passage is the vote that takes place after the second (2nd)
reading of the ordinance or after the reading of an emergency
ordinance.
B. An ordinance is introduced by filing a Council bill with the City Clerk
setting forth the language of the ordinance to be considered.
C. Generally, a Council bill is to be filed before the agenda of the meeting
at which the bill is to be considered is posted so that consideration of
the Council bill can be set forth on the agenda unless unusual or
unforeseen circumstances prevent the filing of the Council bill before
the posting of the agenda. In that case, the Council bill should be filed
as soon as possible with a written explanation as to the unusual or
unforeseen circumstances.
Section
115.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.035
AO:45
D. The call for the reading of an ordinance is by motion and second with
approval of a majority of the Council. Upon approval of the call for the
reading, the City Clerk may read the ordinance by title. After the
reading of the bill, discussion may follow and such motions or actions
may be made or taken as are deemed appropriate and within the
established rules of the Council. There shall, however, be no need for a
motion to approve the reading of an ordinance after the City Clerk
reads the ordinance.
E. Upon the close of discussion after the first (1st) reading of the
ordinance, the matter shall be placed on the next agenda for second
(2nd) reading unless otherwise directed by the Mayor or by a majority
vote of the Council. An ordinance may be considered for emergency
passage after the first (1st) reading, upon a motion and second seeking
declaration of an emergency and approval by a majority vote of Council.
The ordinance may then be considered for final passage pursuant to the
requirements set forth in the Charter for emergency passage. If the
motion for emergency consideration or if the ordinance itself fails to
receive the required number of votes for emergency passage, then the
ordinance shall be treated as a first (1st) reading ordinance for further
consideration by Council.
F. Upon the dose of discussion after the second (2nd) reading of an
ordinance or after declaration of an emergency, a motion and second to
approve final passage of the ordinance shall be in order. Prior to the
vote on the motion for final passage, such further discussion or action
as may be deemed in order under Council rules may be allowed. Upon
the close of discussion, the final passage of the ordinance shall require
a majority vote of the entire Council or, in the case of an emergency
ordinance, a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the entire Council shall be required
for final passage. If a higher number of votes is required for a particular
issue by Charter, ordinance or State law, then that number of votes shall
be required for final passage of the ordinance.
Section
115.035
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
115.035
AO:46
ARTICLE II
City Council Meetings
Section 115.040. Duty To Attend Meetings. [CC 1999 §2-2; R.O.
1916 §1; Ord. No. 07-28 §1, 6-11-2007]
It shall be the duty of each member of the City Council to be present at each
meeting of the Council unless leave of absence is granted, or such member
is sick and unable to attend.
Section 115.050. Power of Mayor To Summon Absentees To
Meetings. [CC 1999 §2-4; R.O. 1916 §3; Ord. No. 07-28 §1,
6-11-2007]
Upon a call of the City Council, the names of the members shall be called
over alphabetically, the absentees noted and those who do not appear may
be sent for by a special messenger on the written order of the Mayor.
Section 115.060. Rules of Order — Generally. [CC 1999 §2-23; R.O.
1916 §59; Ord. No. 07-28 §1, 6-11-2007]
In all proceedings of whatever nature provided for by this Code or other
ordinance and regulated by law, Robert's Rules of Order shall be the guide
and rule.
Section
115.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
115.060
AO:47
Chapter 120
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Editor's Note — At the discretion of the editor, ch. 120 has been
renumbered. Due to a change in government, this chapter has been
reorganized. The changes were set out in ord. no. 07-28. Sections 120.100
— 120.110 derived from CC 1999 §§2-79 — 2-80; R.O. 1916 §§142 — 143.
Sections 120.130 — 120.150 derived from CC 1999 §§2-89 — 2-91; ord. no.
4206 §4. Sections 120.170 — 120.180 derived from CC 1999 §§2-132 —
2-133. Sections 120.200 — 120.210 derived from CC 1999 §§2-135 — 2-136.
Section 120.240 derived from CC 1999 §2-139.
Section
115.060
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
115.060
AO:48
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 120.010. Officers To Be Current in Taxes. [Ord. No. 07-28
§1, 6-11-2007]
No person shall be elected or appointed to any office who shall at the time
be in arrears for any unpaid City taxes or forfeiture or defalcation in office.
Section 120.020. Salaries Fixed By Ordinance. [Ord. No. 07-28 §1,
6-11-2007]
The City Council shall fix the compensation of all the officers and employees
of the City by ordinance. The salary of an officer shall not be changed during
the time for which he/she was elected or appointed.
Section 120.025. Mayor and Council Compensation. [Ord. No. 08-30
§1, 4-14-2008]
Section 120.030. Powers and Duties of Officers To Be Prescribed By
Ordinance. [Ord. No. 07-28 §1, 6-11-2007]
The duties, powers and privileges of officers of every character in any
way connected with the City Government, not herein defined, shall be
prescribed by ordinance. Bonds may be required of any such officers for
faithfulness in office in all respects.
A. Mayor — Compensation. The Mayor shall be paid the sum of four
hundred dollars ($400.00) per month during his tenure in office.
B. City Council — Compensation. Each member of the City Council shall
be paid the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per month during his
tenure in office.
C. That Ordinance 97-68 is repealed.
Section
120.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
120.030
AO:49

ARTICLE II
City Clerk and Deputy City Clerk
Section 120.040. Duty — As To Permitting Removal of Records or
Documents. [CC 1999 §2-79; R.O. 1916 §142; Ord. No. 07-28 §1,
6-11-2007]
The City Clerk shall not permit any records or documents in his/her charge
to be removed from his/her office except by some City Officer entitled to the
use thereof or for the inspection of the City Council.
Section 120.050. Custodian of The City Seal. [CC 1999 §2-80; R.O.
1916 §143; Ord. No. 07-28 §1, 6-11-2007]
The City Clerk shall be the custodian of the Seal of the City and shall affix
the same to all public instruments or official acts of the Mayor, which by law
this Code or other ordinance are required to be attested by the City Seal;
and he/she shall prepare all commissions and all other official documents,
unless otherwise provided for by ordinance, which the Mayor is required to
sign and, whenever it is required, affix the City Seal to and countersign or
attest the same.
Section 120.055. Deputy City Clerk — Duties and Appointment.
[Ord. No. 07-65 §1, 10-8-2007]
A. The City Administrator may appoint or designate one (1) or more
individuals as a Deputy City Clerk to perform the duties of the City
Clerk when the City Clerk is unavailable to or unable to perform duties.
The Deputy City Clerk shall perform the duties of City Clerk until such
time as the City Clerk becomes available to perform duties or in the
case of a vacancy in office until a City Clerk or Interim City Clerk is
appointed. A current City employee may be appointed or designated as
Deputy City Clerk.
B. The duties of the Deputy City Clerk may be further defined, expanded
or limited pursuant to an established job description or by a resolution
adopted by City Council. If more than one (1) individual is appointed as
a Deputy City Clerk, the appointees may be designated as first (1st),
second (2nd), etc. for the purpose of establishing duties.
Section
120.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
120.055
AO:51

ARTICLE III
City Treasurer
Section 120.060. Treasurer — Duties — Bond. [Ord. No. 07-28 §1,
6-11-2007]
The Treasurer shall receive and safely keep all monies, warrants, books,
bonds and obligations entrusted to his/her care and shall pay over all
monies, bonds or other obligations of the City on warrants or orders, duly
drawn, passed or ordered by the City Council and signed by the Mayor
and attested by the City Clerk and having the Seal of the City affixed
thereto, and not otherwise; and shall perform such other duties as may be
required of him/her by ordinance. Before entering upon the duties of his/her
office, he/she shall give bond in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000.00). Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, the Treasurer shall
be the Director of Finance for the City.
Section
120.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
120.060
AO:53

ARTICLE IV
City Attorney
Section 120.070. Duties Generally. [CC 1999 §2-84; R.O. 1916 §147;
Ord. No. 447 §2]
A. In addition to the duties imposed upon him/her by the laws governing
Home Rule Cities, it is hereby made the duty of the City Attorney:
1. To prepare all charges and complaints against parties for violations
of this Code or other ordinance and appear before the Municipal
Judge and prosecute all offenders against such Code or other
ordinance.
2. To prosecute or defend all suits originating or pending in any court
in the State in which the City may be a party, unless otherwise
specially provided for.
3. To defend all actions before the Municipal Judge or magistrate
brought against any officer, servant or agent of the City on account
of his/her official acts.
4. To make affidavits on behalf of the City in all cases where the same
may be necessary in procuring changes of venue, continuances or
taking appeals; and to report to the City Council in writing the
condition of all suits pending in any court at the next meeting of the
City Council after the adjournment of the court.
5. To advise the City Council or its committees, or any City Officer, on
such legal questions as may arise in relation to business of the City;
and he/she shall furnish written opinions on legal questions
whenever the same may be required by the City Council; and he/
she shall draw up any ordinance when requested so to do by any
committee of the City Council and give any such committee his/her
opinion in writing upon all questions of law submitted to him/her by
such committee.
6. In condemnation proceedings by the City, to prepare all legal
papers connected therewith and to see that all notices, returns of
service thereon, decisions of juries, and all other necessary matters
are made out in legal form and in accordance with this Code or
other ordinance of the City and laws governing Home Rule Cities.
7. To act as tax attorney and to prosecute and defend all tax matters
concerning the City.
Section
120.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
120.070
AO:55

ARTICLE V
City Administrator
Section 120.080. City Administrator — Bond. [CC 1999 §2-134; Ord.
No. 07-28 §1, 6-11-2007]
The City Administrator, before entering upon the duties of his/her office,
shall file with the City a bond in the amount of fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00); such bond shall be approved by the City Council and such
bond shall insure the City for the faithful and honest performance of the
duties of the City and for rendering a full and proper account to the City
for funds and property which shall come into the possession or control of
the City Administrator. The costs of such bond shall be paid by the City;
however, should the City Administrator be covered by a blanket bond to the
same extent, such individual shall not be required.
Section 120.090. City Administrator — Duties. [CC 1999 §2-137;
Ord. No. 05-55 §1, 7-11-2005; Ord. No. 07-28 §1, 6-11-2007]
A. Purchasing. The City Administrator shall be the purchasing agent for
the City and all such purchases shall be made in accordance with
purchasing rules and procedures approved by the City Council.
B. Budget. The City Administrator shall be the budget officer for the City.
C. Financial Reports. The City Administrator shall make monthly reports
to the Mayor and the City Council relative to the financial condition of
the City. Such reports shall show the financial condition of the City in
relation to the budget.
D. Personnel System. The City Administrator shall act as the personnel
officer of the City and shall recommend an appropriate position
classification system and pay plan to the Mayor and the City Council.
The City Administrator, after consultation with department heads, shall
approve advancements and appropriately budgeted pay increases
within the approved pay plans and position classification system. The
City Administrator shall have the power to amend and create job
descriptions and to appoint and remove employees in accordance with
personnel system regulations approved by the City Council.
E. Policy Formulation. The City Administrator shall recommend to the
Mayor and the City Council adoption of such measures as he/she may
deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety or welfare of the City
or for the improvement of administrative services for the City.
F. City Council Agenda. The City Administrator shall submit to the Mayor
a proposed agenda for each Council meeting by the close of business on
the Wednesday preceding the time of the regular Council meeting.
G. Bid Specification. The City Administrator shall prepare all bid
specifications for services and equipment for presentation to the City
Council.
Section
120.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
120.090
AO:57
Section 120.100. City Administrator — Powers. [CC 1999 §2-138;
Ord. No. 07-28 §1, 6-11-2007]
H. State And Federal Aid Programs. The City Administrator shall
coordinate Federal and State programs which may have application to
the City of Republic.
I. Conference Attendance. The City Administrator may attend State and
regional conferences and programs applicable to his/her office and the
business of the City of Republic.
J. Press Releases. The City Administrator shall be responsible for keeping
the public informed in the purposes and methods of City Government
through all available news media after first having all news releases
approved by the Mayor.
K. Planning. To engage in and to coordinate long-range planning activities
for the City.
L. To see that the provisions of all franchises, leases, contracts, permits
and privileges granted by the City are fully observed and upon
information of any violation thereof to take such steps as may be
necessary to stop or prevent further violation of same.
M. Record Keeping. The City Administrator shall keep full and accurate
records of all actions taken by him/her in the course of his/her duties,
and he/she shall safely and properly keep all records and paper
belonging to the City of Republic and entrusted to his/her care; all such
records shall be and remain the property of the City of Republic and be
open to inspection by the Mayor and City Council at all times.
A. City Property. The City Administrator shall have responsibility for all
real and personal property of the City of Republic. He/she shall have
responsibility for all inventories of such property and for the upkeep of
all such property. Personal property may be sold by the City
Administrator in accordance with the purchasing policy.
B. Set Administrative Policies. The City Administrator shall have the
power to prescribe such rules and regulations as he/she shall deem
necessary or expedient for the conduct of administrative agencies
subject to his/her authority, and he/she shall have the power to revoke,
suspend or amend any rule or regulation of the administrative service
except those prescribed by the City Council.
C. Coordinate Departments. The City Administrator shall have the power
to coordinate the work of all the departments of the City and shall have
the authority to temporarily assign the employees of the City to any
department whenever they are needed for the most effective discharge
of the functions of City Government.
D. Investigate And Report. The City Administrator shall have the power to
investigate and to examine or inquire (without notice) into the affairs or
Section
120.090
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
120.100
AO:58
Section 120.110. City Administrator — Severance Clause. [CC 1999
§2-140; Ord. No. 07-28 §1, 6-11-2007]
The provisions of this Article are declared to be severable and if any
Section, sentence, clause or phrase of this Article shall for any reason be
held invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity
of the remaining Sections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this Article but
they shall remain in effect, it being the legislative intent of the City Council
that this Article shall stand notwithstanding the invalidity of any part.
operation of any department of the City under his/her jurisdiction and
shall report on any condition or fact concerning the City Government
requested by the Mayor or the City Council.
E. Coordinate Officials. The City Administrator shall have the power to
overrule any action taken by a department head and may supersede
him/her in the functions of his/her office.
F. Appear Before City Council. The City Administrator shall have the
power to appear before and address the City Council at any meeting.
G. At no time shall the duties or powers of the City Administrator
supersede the action by the Mayor and the City Council.
Section
120.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
120.110
AO:59

ARTICLE VI
Miscellaneous Provisions
Section 120.120. Officers To Report Receipts and Expenditures.
[Ord. No. 07-28 §1, 6-11-2007]
It shall be the duty of all the officers of the City to report annually to the
City Council, such reports to embrace a full statement of the receipts and
expenditures of their respective offices and such other matters as may be
required by the City Council by ordinance, resolution or otherwise.
Section 120.130. Mayor or Council May Inspect Books and Records
of Officers. [Ord. No. 07-28 §1, 6-11-2007]
The Mayor or City Council shall have power, as often as he/she or they
may deem it necessary, to require any officer of the City to exhibit his/her
accounts or other papers or records and to make report to the City Council,
in writing, touching any matter relating to his/her office.
Section 120.140. Acceptance of Easements Dedicated To Public
Use. [Ord. No. 13-07 §1, 2-11-2013]
A. The Director of Public Works may accept easements on behalf of the
City when all of the conditions in Subsections (1) through (3) exist and
at least one (1) of the conditions in Subsection (4) exists.
1. The easement is offered at no cost to the City or can be obtained at
a cost that does not exceed the authorizations for purchases
established in the City purchasing manual for a department head or
the City Administrator;
2. The easement is adjacent to, or an extension of, an existing
easement or improvement owned by or dedicated to the City;
3. The easement is necessary for the construction or maintenance of a
public improvement or storm water drainage area;
4. The easement is necessary or expedient:
a. To follow a maintenance directive of the City Council;
b. To improve water, sanitary sewer and storm water drainage; or
c. To obtain additional right-of-way up to the amount prescribed
in subdivision regulations of the Land Development Code.
5. In addition, the Public Works Director may accept easements as
part of a project for which obtaining easements was a known
element of the project and proceeding with the project has been
approved by City Council. This authorization is subject to meeting
the requirements of the City purchasing manual for expenditures if
not otherwise authorized by City Council.
Section
120.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
120.140
AO:61
Chapter 125
RESERVED
Editor's Note: Former Article I, Capital Improvements Committee, of
Chapter 125, Boards Commissions And Committees, was repealed
6-26-2018 by Ord. No. 18-29. With there being no remaining content within
said Chapter after the repeal of Article I, the Chapter has been left reserved
for the City's future use.
Chapter 130
MUNICIPAL COURT
Section
120.140
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
120.140
AO:62
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 130.010. Court Established. [CC 1999 §9-1]
There is hereby established in this City a Municipal Court to be known as
the "Republic Municipal Court, a Division of the 31st Judicial Circuit Court
of the State of Missouri". This Court is a continuation of the Police Court
of the City as previously established and is termed herein "the Municipal
Court".
Section 130.020. Jurisdiction. [CC 1999 §9-2]
The jurisdiction of the Municipal Court shall extend to all cases involving
alleged violations of the ordinances of the City.
Section 130.030. Selection of Judge. [CC 1999 §9-3; Ord. No. 08-65
§1, 8-25-2008]
The Judge or Judges of the Circuit Court of Greene County, Municipal
Division at Republic (hereinafter referred to in this Chapter as "Municipal
Judge") shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent and approval
of the majority of all of the members of the City Council. The Mayor
may designate a Presiding Judge of the Municipal Division to have
superintending control of the Municipal Court, its personnel and Judges
subject, however, to the requirements of Section 130.070. Salary and
benefits may be established by resolution, contract or as set forth in the City
budget.
Section 130.040. Term of Office. [CC 1999 §9-4; Ord. No. 08-65 §1,
8-25-2008; Ord. No. 17-12 § 1, 4-4-2017]
The Municipal Judge or Judges shall be appointed for two-year terms at
the first meeting after the newly elected Mayor and Council are sworn into
office in even-numbered years and in each even-numbered year thereafter.
The term of the Municipal Judge shall be two (2) years or until a successor
is appointed, and if the appointment was made for less than two (2) years
then until the unexpired portion of the two-year term is completed. If for
any reason the Municipal Judge vacates his/her office during his/her term,
a successor shall be selected to complete the term of office. The selection
shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Section 130.030 of this
Chapter.
Section 130.050. Vacation of Office. [CC 1999 §9-5]
A. The Municipal Judge shall be required to vacate his/her office as
follows:
1. Upon removal from office by the State Commission on Retirement,
Removal and Discipline of Judges.
Section
130.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
130.050
AO:63
Section 130.060. Limitations, Privileges and Qualifications For
Office. [CC 1999 §9-6]
Section 130.070. Superintending Authority. [CC 1999 §9-7]
The Municipal Court of the City shall be subject to the rules of the Circuit
Court of which it is a part and to the rules of the State Supreme Court. The
Municipal Court shall be subject to the general administrative authority of
the Presiding Judge of the Circuit Court, and the Judge and Court personnel
of said Court shall obey his/her directives.
Section 130.080. Report To City Council. [CC 1999 §9-8]
The Municipal Judge shall cause to be prepared within the first (1st) ten
(10) days of every month a report indicating the following:
A list of all cases heard and tried before the Court during the preceding
month, giving in each case the name of the defendant, the fine imposed
if any, the amount of cost, the names of the defendants committed and in
the cases where there was an application for trial de novo, respectively.
The same shall be prepared under oath by the Municipal Court Clerk or
the Municipal Judge. This report will be filed with the City Clerk, who shall
thereafter forward the same to the City Council of the City for examination
at its first (1st) session thereafter. The Municipal Court shall, within the ten
(10) days after the first (1st) of the month, pay to the Municipal Treasurer
2. Upon obtaining his/her seventy-fifth (75th) birthday.
3. Should he/she lose his/her license to practice law.
A. The Municipal Judge shall have the following limitations and privileges
and shall possess the following qualifications:
1. He/she shall be a licensed attorney qualified to practice law within
the State of Missouri.
2. He/she need not reside within the City limits.
3. He/she must be a resident of the State of Missouri.
4. He/she must be at least twenty-one (21) years of age.
5. He/she may serve as Municipal Judge for more than one (1)
municipality.
6. He/she may not hold any other office in any City for which he/she
serves as Municipal Judge.
7. His/her office shall be considered a part-time position, and he/she
may accept other employment consistent with those rules and
regulations adopted or enacted by the Missouri Supreme Court or
Missouri State Legislature.
Section
130.050
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
130.080
AO:64
the full amount of all fines collected during the preceding months, if they
have not previously been paid.
Section 130.090. Docket and Court Records. [CC 1999 §9-9]
The Municipal Judge shall be a conservator of the peace. He/she shall keep
a docket in which he/she shall enter every case commenced before him/her
and the proceedings therein and he/she shall keep such other records as
may be required. Such docket and records shall be records of the Circuit
Court of Greene County. The Municipal Judge shall deliver the docket and
records of the Municipal Court, and all books and papers pertaining to his/
her office, to his/her successor in office or to the Presiding Judge of the
Circuit.
Section 130.100. Municipal Judge — Powers and Duties Generally.
[CC 1999 §9-10]
A. The Municipal Judge shall be and is hereby authorized to:
1. Establish a Municipal Court Violations Bureau as provided for in
the Missouri Rules of Practice and Procedure in Municipal and
Traffic Courts and Section 479.050 of the Revised Statutes of
Missouri.
2. Administer oaths and enforce due obedience to all orders, rules and
judgments made by him/her and may fine and imprison for direct
contempt committed before him/her while holding Court and for
indirect contempt after hearing in the same manner and to the
same extent as a Circuit Judge or as allowed by State law, Supreme
Court Rule or ordinance. For an indirect contempt, the judge or
prosecutor may issue a notice of a show cause hearing to determine
if the defendant should be found in contempt. [Ord. No. 14-11 §1,
5-12-2014]
3. Commute the term of any sentence, stay execution of any fine or
sentence, suspend any fine or sentence, and make such other
orders as the Municipal Judge deems necessary relative to any
matter that may be pending in the Municipal Court.
4. Make and adopt such rules of practice and procedure as are
necessary to implement and carry out the provisions of this
Chapter, and to make and adopt such rules of practice and
procedure as are necessary to hear and decide matters pending
before the Municipal Court, and to implement and carry out the
provisions of the Missouri Rules of Practice and Procedure in
Municipal and Traffic Courts. Any and all rules made or adopted
hereunder may be annulled or amended by an ordinance limited to
such purpose; provided that such ordinance does not violate, or
conflict with, the provisions of the Missouri Rules of Practice and
Procedure in Municipal and Traffic Courts, or State Statutes.
Section
130.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
130.100
AO:65
Section 130.110. Municipal Court Violations Bureau. [CC 1999
§9-11]
Should the Municipal Judge determine that there shall be a Municipal
Court Violations Bureau, the City shall provide all expenses incident to
the operation of the same. The Court Clerk is hereby designated as the
Municipal Court Violations Clerk for said Bureau, if established.
Section 130.120. Issuance and Execution of Warrants. [CC 1999
§9-12]
All warrants issued by a Municipal Judge shall be directed to the Chief of
Police or any other Police Officer of the municipality or to the Sheriff of
the County. The warrant shall be executed by the Marshal, Chief of Police,
Police Officer or Sheriff any place within the limits of the County and not
elsewhere unless the warrants are endorsed in the manner provided for
warrants in criminal cases and, when so endorsed, shall be served in other
Counties, as provided for in warrants in criminal cases.
Section 130.130. Arrests Without Warrants. [CC 1999 §9-13]
The Chief of Police or other Police Officer of the City may, without a warrant,
make arrest of any person who commits an offense in his/her presence, but
such officer shall, before the trial, file a written complaint with the Judge
hearing violations of municipal ordinances.
Section 130.140. Jury Trials. [CC 1999 §9-14; Ord. No. 16-16 §2,
8-8-2016]
Upon conviction and entry of a sentence, any person so convicted may
request a trial de novo pursuant to Supreme Court Rule and may request a
jury trial for the de novo proceeding at the Associate Circuit Court.
Section 130.150. Duties of The City's Prosecuting Attorney and
Public Defender. [CC 1999 §9-15; Ord. No. 14-08 §1, 4-14-2014]
5. The Municipal Judge shall have such other powers, duties and
privileges as are or may be prescribed by the laws of this State, this
Code or other ordinances of this City.
A. It shall be the duty of an attorney designated by the municipality to
prosecute the violations of the City's ordinances before the Municipal
Judge or before any Circuit Judge hearing violations of the City's
ordinances. The salary or fees of the attorney and his/her necessary
expenses incurred in such prosecutions shall be paid by the City. The
compensation of such attorney shall not be contingent upon the result
in any case.
B. The City may, in its sole discretion, establish a Public Defender service
for the Republic Municipal Court. Nothing contained herein shall be
construed to require the establishment of or contracting for Public
Section
130.100
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
130.150
AO:66
Section 130.160. Summoning of Witnesses. [CC 1999 §9-16]
It shall be the duty of the Municipal Judge to summon all persons whose
testimony may be deemed essential as witnesses at the trial and to enforce
their attendance by attachment, if necessary. The fees of witnesses shall
be the same as those fixed for witnesses in trials before Associate Circuit
Judges and shall be taxed as other costs in the case. When a trial shall be
continued by a Municipal Judge, it shall not be necessary to summon any
witnesses who may be present at the continuance; but the Municipal Judge
shall orally notify such witnesses as either party may require to attend
before him/her on the day set for trial to testify in the case, and enter the
names of such witnesses on his/her docket, which oral notice shall be valid
as a summons.
Section 130.170. Transfer of Complaint To Associate Circuit Judge.
[CC 1999 §9-17]
If, in the progress of any trial before a Municipal Judge, it shall appear to
the Judge that the accused ought to be put upon trial for an offense against
the criminal law of the State and not cognizable before him/her as Municipal
Judge, he/she shall immediately stop all further proceedings before him/
her as Municipal Judge and cause the complaint to be made before some
Associate Circuit Judge within the County.
Section 130.180. Jailing of Defendants. [CC 1999 §9-18]
If, in the opinion of the Municipal Judge, the City has no suitable and safe
place of confinement, the Municipal Judge may commit the defendant to the
County Jail, and it shall be the duty of the Sheriff, if space for the prisoner
is available in the County Jail, upon receipt of a warrant of commitment
from the Judge to receive and safely keep such prisoner until discharged by
due process of law. The municipality shall pay the board of such prisoner at
the same rate as may now or hereafter be allowed to such Sheriff for the
keeping of such prisoner in his/her custody. The same shall be taxed as cost.
Section 130.190. Parole, Probation and Sentencing Conditions. [CC
1999 §9-19]
Defender services. The City Administrator is authorized to seek
proposals from and to contract with a licensed attorney to provide
Public Defender services for the Republic Municipal Court. The salary
or compensation will be set out in a contract for services. The funding
will be within the limits established by Council for the services in the
City's annual budget or amended budget or in an amount within the
limits of the City Administrator's authority set forth in the purchasing
manual. The Public Defender's duty shall be to represent those to
which the Defender is appointed. The judge may upon determining a
defendant qualifies for a Public Defender appoint a Defender in matters
pending before Republic Municipal Court or in those matters described
in the contract for services.
Section
130.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
130.190
AO:67
A. Any Judge hearing violations of municipal ordinances may, when in his/
her judgment it may seem advisable, grant a parole or probation to any
person who shall plead guilty or who shall be convicted after a trial
before such Judge. When a person is placed on probation he/she shall
be given a certificate explicitly stating the conditions on which he/she is
being released.
B. In addition to such other authority as exists to order conditions of
probation, the Court may order conditions which the Court believes will
serve to compensate the victim of the crime, any dependent of the
victim, or society in general. Such conditions may include, but need not
be limited to:
1. Restitution to the victim or any dependent of the victim, in an
amount to be determined by the Judge; and
2. The performance of a designated amount of free work for a public
or charitable purpose, or purposes, as determined by the Judge.
C. A person may refuse probation conditioned on the performance of free
work. If he/she does so, the Court shall decide the extent or duration of
sentence or other disposition to be imposed and render judgment
accordingly. Any County, City, person, organization, or agency, or
employee of a County, City, organization or agency charged with the
supervision of such free work or who benefits from its performance
shall be immune from any suit by the person placed on parole or
probation or any person deriving a cause of action from him/her if such
cause of action arises from such supervision of performance, except for
intentional torts or gross negligence. The services performed by the
probationer or parolee shall not be deemed employment within the
meaning of the provisions of Chapter 288, RSMo.
D. The Court may modify or enlarge the conditions of probation at any
time prior to the expiration or termination of the probation term.
E. When any person shall be unable to pay any fine and costs assessed
against him in his sentence, or probation, the Judge shall have power, at
the request of the defendant, to commute such fine and costs to
imprisonment in the County Jail, which shall be credited at the rate of at
least ten dollars ($10.00) of such fine and costs for each day's
imprisonment. [Ord. No. 14-11 §1, 5-12-2014]
F. If a defendant defaults in the payment of a fine or costs as sentenced,
the Judge may order the defendant to show cause at a hearing why the
defendant should not be held in contempt of court. [Ord. No. 14-11 §1,
5-12-2014]
G. If a defendant fails to abide by the terms and conditions of a sentence or
probation, the Judge may order the defendant to show cause at a
hearing why the defendant should not be held in contempt of court.
[Ord. No. 14-11 §1, 5-12-2014]
Section
130.190
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
130.200
AO:68
Section 130.200. Right of Appeal. [CC 1999 §9-20]
In any case tried before the Municipal Judge, except where there has been
a plea of guilty or where the case has been tried with a jury, the defendant
shall have a right of trial de novo, before a Circuit Court Judge or upon
assignment before an Associate Circuit Court Judge. An application for a
trial de novo shall be filed within ten (10) days after judgment and shall be
filed in such form and perfected in such manner as provided by Supreme
Court rule.
Section 130.210. Breach of Recognizance. [CC 1999 §9-22]
In the case of a breach of any recognizance entered into before a Municipal
Judge or an Associate Circuit Judge hearing a municipal ordinance violation
case, the same shall be deemed forfeited and the Judge shall cause the same
to be prosecuted against the principal and surety, or either of them, in the
name of the municipality as plaintiff. Such action shall be prosecuted before
a Circuit Judge or Associate Circuit Judge, and in the event of cases caused
to be prosecuted by a Municipal Judge, such shall be on the transcript of
the proceedings before the Municipal Judge. All monies recovered in such
actions shall be paid over to the municipal Treasury to the General Revenue
Fund of the municipality.
Section 130.220. Disqualification of Municipal Judge From Hearing
Particular Case. [CC 1999 §9-23]
A Municipal Judge shall be disqualified to hear any case in which he/she is in
anywise interested or, if before the trial is commenced, the defendant or the
prosecutor files an affidavit that the defendant or the municipality, as the
case may be, cannot have a fair and impartial trial by reason of the interest
or prejudice of the Judge. Neither the defendant nor the municipality shall
be entitled to file more than one (1) affidavit or disqualification in the same
case.
Section 130.230. Temporary Municipal Judge. [CC 1999 §9-24; Ord.
No. 08-65 §1, 8-25-2008]
If a Municipal Judge be absent, sick or disqualified from acting, and in the
absence of multiple Judges in the Municipal Division, the Mayor of the City
Council may request the Presiding Judge of the Circuit Court to designate
a special Municipal Judge or the Mayor may designate some competent,
eligible person to act as Municipal Judge until the Presiding Judge can make
such appointment with such appointment to continue until such absence or
disqualification shall cease.
Section 130.240. Clerk of Municipal Court. [CC 1999 §9-25]
The Court Clerk is hereby designated as the Clerk of the Municipal Court.
Section
130.200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
130.240
AO:69

ARTICLE II
Court Costs and Fees
Section 130.250. Court Costs. [CC 1999 §9-26; Ord. No. 03-02 §§1 —
2, 1-27-2003; Ord. No. 12-25 §1, 2-27-2012]
A. In addition to any fine or other punishment imposed by the Court, costs,
fees, charges and surcharges shall be assessed as follows:
1. Twelve dollars ($12.00) as per the provisions of Section 479.260,
RSMo.
2. A surcharge of two dollars ($2.00) for violations of all municipal
ordinances, such surcharge to be collected, administered and used
as a law enforcement training fee in accordance with the provisions
of Section 590.140, RSMo.
3. A surcharge of one dollar ($1.00) for violations of all municipal
ordinances, such surcharge to be collected and disbursed as
provided in Section 590.178, RSMo., for the Peace Officer
Standards and Training Commission Fund.
4. A surcharge of seven dollars fifty cents ($7.50) for the Crime
Victims' Compensation Fund to be collected, administered and
distributed in accordance with the provisions of Section 595.045,
RSMo.
5. Service charges, witness fees and/or jail costs incurred as a result
of the apprehension, confinement and/or prosecution of any
defendant.
6. A surcharge of two dollars ($2.00) for violations of all municipal
ordinances, such surcharge to be collected and disbursed as
provided in Section 488.5026, RSMo., for installation and
maintenance of a biometric verification system and expenses
related to custody and housing and other expenses for prisoners.
7. Supreme Court Operating Rule 21.01 (a) (21) establishes a fourdollar
fee for payments made by other than cash or negotiable
instrument and further authorizes a Court, by local Court rule, to
opt out of charging a four-dollar fee for payments made by other
than cash or negotiable instrument. The Presiding Judge of the
Republic Municipal Court is authorized to issue a local court rule to
opt out of charging a four-dollar fee for payments made by other
than cash or negotiable instrument. Unless an order is entered
opting out of the fee, the fee shall be collected as other court cost.
[Ord. No. 13-36 §1, 11-12-2013]
8. In addition to all court fees and costs prescribed by law, a
surcharge of ten dollars ($10.00) as authorized by Section
488.2206, RSMo. shall be assessed as a cost in each court
Section
130.250
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
130.250
AO:71
Section 130.260. Reimbursement of Cost For Alcohol and Drug-
Related Offenses.
Section 130.270. Assess Against Prosecuting Witness. [CC 1999
§9-28]
The costs of any action may be assessed against the prosecuting witness
and judgment be rendered against him/her that he/she pay the same and
stand committed until paid in any case where it appears to the satisfaction
of the Municipal Judge that the prosecution was commenced without
probable cause and from malicious motives.
Section 130.280. Installment Payment of Fine. [CC 1999 §9-29]
When a fine is assessed for violating an ordinance, it should be within the
discretion of the Judge assessing the fine to provide for the payment of a
proceeding filed in Municipal Court. [Ord. No. 14-20 §1,
8-25-2014]
B. All other costs, fees, charges and surcharges shall be collected by the
Municipal Court Clerk in accordance with Chapter 488, RSMo.
C. Costs, fees, charges and surcharges shall only be assessed against, and
collected from, defendants who have pled guilty or been found guilty, or
who have agreed to pay the same in exchange for dismissal of a charge.
A. Upon a plea or a finding of guilty for a first (1st) offense of violating the
provisions of an ordinance of the City of Republic, involving alcohol- or
drug-related traffic offenses, the Court may, in addition to imposition of
any penalties provided by law, order the convicted person to reimburse
the Police Department for the costs associated with such arrest.
B. Such costs hereby authorized shall include the reasonable cost of
making the arrest, including the cost of any chemical test made as
authorized or required by law or ordinance to determine the alcohol or
drug content of the person's blood, and the costs of processing,
charging, booking and holding such person in custody.
C. The Chief of Police shall establish a schedule of such costs hereby
authorized and shall submit the same to the Municipal Judge. However,
the Court may order the costs reduced if it determines that the costs
are excessive.
D. Upon receipt of such additional costs authorized by this Subsection, the
City Treasurer shall retain such costs in a separate fund to be known as
the "DWI/Drug Offense Cost Reimbursement Fund". Monies with such
fund shall be appropriated by the City Council to the Police Department
in amounts equal to those costs so collected and shall be used by such
Department specifically to enhance and support the enforcement and
prosecution of alcohol- and drug-related traffic laws within the City.
Section
130.250
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
130.280
AO:72
fine on an installment basis under such terms and conditions as he/she may
deem appropriate.
Section 130.290. Processing Fees — Individuals Charged With
Offenses in Other Jurisdictions. [Ord. No. 99-34 §§1 — 3, 6-14-1999]
A. As used herein the term "jurisdiction" shall mean and include any
political subdivision, agency or department of any State or of the
Federal Government.
B. Whenever any officer of the Republic, Missouri, Police Department
arrests any individual within the City limits of Republic because of a
pending charge or warrant from a jurisdiction other than the City of
Republic, and such officer thereafter detains, houses, processes, bonds
and/or fingerprints such individual because of such pending charge or
warrant, the City shall charge such other jurisdiction a processing fee
of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). For each subsequent day the City shall
detain or house any such individual, the City shall charge such other
jurisdiction an additional housing fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
day.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, the fee established in
Subsection (B) shall not be assessed against any jurisdiction which does
not charge a fee to the City of Republic for the detention, housing,
processing, bonding and/or fingerprinting of persons arrested in such
other jurisdictions on pending charges or warrants issued by the City of
Republic.
D. If it becomes necessary for any member of the Republic Police
Department to transport an individual to another jurisdiction or to the
Greene County Jail, because of any pending charge or warrant issued
by another jurisdiction, then the City shall charge such other
jurisdiction, in addition to the fee described in Subsection (A)
hereinabove, such additional sums as will compensate the City of
Republic for personnel expenses and mileage expenses incurred by the
City and resulting from such transportation.
E. If any individual arrested under the circumstances described in
Subsection (B) above thereafter receives any medical or health care
treatment, all expenses associated with any such treatment shall be
charged to the jurisdiction issuing the warrant or process upon which
such individual was arrested.
F. If any jurisdiction shall become obligated to the City of Republic for the
payment of any fee or item of expense provided herein, and shall not
pay the same within sixty (60) days of the billing therefor, then the
amount owed to the City shall be deducted from any subsequent bill
sent to the City by such other jurisdiction.
G. In addition to those arrested by Republic Police Officers as described in
Subsection (B) above, a person arrested by a Law Enforcement Agency
Section
130.280
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
130.290
AO:73
on the warrant of another City in Greene County may be processed and
detained at the Republic jail if the City with the outstanding warrant
has entered into a mutual aid agreement with the City of Republic for
jail and court services. The costs set out in Subsection (B) will apply to
the detention unless otherwise superseded by the terms of the mutual
aid agreement. The other provisions of this Section shall apply to a
person arrested on another City's warrant unless superseded by the
terms of the mutual aid agreement. [Ord. No. 15-10 §3, 5-11-2015]
H. In addition to detaining and processing persons arrested as described
in Subsections (B) and (G) above, the Republic jail may accept prisoners
from other Law Enforcement Agencies under the circumstances
described in Code Section 200.020(F). [Ord. No. 15-10 §3,
5-11-2015]
I. Cost of court services, if applicable, will be as stated in the mutual aid
agreement subject to the cost being revised by City Council by
resolution or ordinance. [Ord. No. 15-10 §3, 5-11-2015]
Section
130.290
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
130.290
AO:74
Chapter 135
TAXATION AND FINANCE
Section
130.290
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
130.290
AO:75

ARTICLE I
Fiscal Year
Section 135.010. Fiscal Year Established.
The fiscal year for the City of Republic shall begin January first (1st) of each
year and all City budgets, audits and other statutory requirements shall
be prepared on a January fiscal year and all required matters concerning
same be required to use such dates for those statutory and other necessary
purposes.
Section
135.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
135.010
AO:77

ARTICLE II
Budget
Section 135.020. Budget Required — Contents — Expenditures Not
To Exceed Revenues.
Section 135.030. Budget Officer.
A. Prior to the commencement of each fiscal year, a budget for the City
shall be prepared and the same will be presented to and approved by
the City Council.
B. The annual budget shall present a complete financial plan for the
ensuing fiscal year and shall include at least the following information:
1. A budget message describing the important features of the budget
and major changes from the preceding year;
2. Estimated revenues to be received from all sources for the budget
year, with a comparative statement of actual or estimated revenues
for the two (2) years next preceding, itemized by year, fund, and
source;
3. Proposed expenditures for each department, office, commission,
and other classification for the budget year, together with a
comparative statement of actual or estimated expenditures for the
two (2) years next preceding, itemized by year, fund, activity, and
object;
4. The amount required for the payment of interest, amortization, and
redemption charges on the debt of the City; and
5. A general budget summary.
C. In no event shall the total proposed expenditures from any fund exceed
the estimated revenues to be received plus any unencumbered balance
or less any deficit estimated for the beginning of the budget year;
provided, that nothing herein shall be construed as requiring the City to
use any cash balance as current revenue or to change from a cash basis
of financing its expenditures.
A. The budget shall be prepared under the direction of a Budget Officer.
Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, the Budget Officer
shall be designated by the City Council of the City. All officers and
employees shall cooperate with and provide to the Budget Officer such
information and such records as he/she shall require in developing the
budget. The Budget Officer shall review all the expenditure requests
and revenue estimates, after which he/she shall prepare the proposed
budget as defined herein.
B. After the Budget Officer has prepared the proposed budget, he/she
shall submit it, along with such supporting schedules, exhibits, and
Section
135.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
135.030
AO:79
Section 135.040. City Council May Revise Budget, Limits —
Approval.
The City Council may revise, alter, increase or decrease the items contained
in the proposed budget, subject to such limitations as may be provided
by law; provided, that in no event shall the total authorized expenditures
from any fund exceed the estimated revenues to be received plus any
unencumbered balance or less any deficit estimated for the beginning of
the budget year. Except as otherwise provided by law, the City Council
shall, before the beginning of the fiscal year, approve the budget and
approve or adopt such orders, motions, resolutions, or ordinances as may be
required to authorize the budgeted expenditures and produce the revenues
estimated in the budget.
Section 135.050. Increase of Expenditure Over Budgeted Amount
To Be Made Only On Formal Resolution.
After the City has approved the budget for any year and has approved
or adopted the orders, motions, resolutions, or ordinances required to
authorize the expenditures proposed in the budget, the City shall not
increase the total amount authorized for expenditure from any fund, unless
the City Council adopts a resolution setting forth the facts and reasons
making the increase necessary and approves or adopts an order, motion,
resolution or ordinance to authorize the expenditures.
other explanatory material as may be necessary for the proper
understanding of the financial needs and position of the City to the
City Council. He/she shall submit at the same time complete drafts of
such orders, motions, resolutions, or ordinances as may be required
to authorize the proposed expenditures and produce the revenues
necessary to balance the proposed budget.
Section
135.030
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
135.050
AO:80
ARTICLE III
Levy of Taxes
Section 135.060. Council To Provide For Levy and Collection of
Taxes — Fix Penalties.
The City Council shall, from time to time, provide by ordinance for the
levy and collection of all taxes, licenses, wharfage and other duties not
herein enumerated, and for neglect or refusal to pay the same, shall fix such
penalties as are now or may hereafter be authorized by law or ordinance.
Section 135.070. Council To Fix Rate of Levy.
The City Council shall, within a reasonable time after the Assessor's books
of each year are returned, ascertain the amount of money to be raised
thereon for general and other purposes and fix the annual rate of levy
therefor by ordinance.
Section 135.080. Assessment — Method of.
In the absence of a City Assessor, and until such City Assessor is duly
appointed and qualified, it shall be the duty of the Mayor of the City to
procure from the County Clerk of Greene County, Missouri, on or before
the first (1st) day of October of each year a certified abstract from his/
her assessment books of all property within the corporate limits of the
City made taxable by law for State purposes, and the assessed valuation
thereof as agreed upon by the Board of Equalization, which abstract shall
be immediately transmitted to the City Council, and it shall be the duty of
the City Council to establish by ordinance the rate of taxes for the year.
Section 135.090. (Reserved)5
Section 135.100. Taxes Delinquent — When.
On the first (1st) day of January of each year, all unpaid City taxes shall
become delinquent and the taxes on real estate are hereby made a lien
thereon; and all such delinquent taxes shall bear interest thereon at the rate
of two percent (2%) per month from the time they become delinquent, not to
exceed eighteen percent (18%) per year, until paid; and shall also be subject
to the same fees, penalties, commissions and charges as provided by law
of the State of Missouri for delinquent State and County taxes, and shall
be collected from the property owners and the enforcement of all taxes,
penalties, fees, commissions and charges authorized by law and provided
for herein to be paid by property owners shall be made in the same manner
and under the same rules and regulations as are or may be provided by
law for the collection and enforcement of the payment of State and County
taxes, including fees, penalties, commissions and other charges.
5. Editor's Note — As a result of the 2007 review and changes directed by the city attorney,
this section 135.090 "collector to prepare tax books" has been deleted.
Section
135.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
135.100
AO:81

ARTICLE IV
Sales Tax6
Section 135.110. Sales Tax. [CC 1999 §21-18]
There is imposed a tax for general revenue purposes on all sellers for the
privilege of engaging in the business of selling tangible personal property
or rendering taxable services at retail at the rate of one percent (1%) on the
receipts from the sale at retail of all tangible personal property or taxable
services at retail within this City, if such property and services are subject to
taxation by the State of Missouri under the provisions of Sections 144.010
to 144.525, RSMo., pursuant to the authority granted by and subject to the
provisions of Sections 94.500 to 94.570, RSMo.
Section 135.120. Imposition of City Transportation Sales Tax.
Pursuant to the authority granted by and subject to the provisions of
Sections 94.700 through 94.755, RSMo., a tax for transportation purposes
is hereby imposed on all sellers for the privilege of engaging in the business
of selling tangible personal property or rendering taxable services at retail
to the extent and in the manner provided in Chapter 144, RSMo., and the
rules and regulations of the Director of Revenue issued pursuant thereto.
The rate of tax shall be one-half of one percent (0.5%) on the receipts from
sale at retail of all tangible personal property or taxable services at retail
within the City limits of the City of Republic, Missouri, if such property and
taxable services are subject to taxation by the State of Missouri under the
provisions of Chapter 144, RSMo., as amended. The tax shall be collected
pursuant to the provisions of Sections 94.700 through 94.755, RSMo., as
amended.
Section 135.130. Capital Improvements Sales Tax. [Ord. No. 17-17
§§ 1 — 2, 4-18-2017; Ord. No. 17-34 § 1, 9-19-20177]
A. Pursuant to Section 94.577 of the Revised Statutes of Missouri (the
"Act"), a sales tax at the rate of one quarter of one percent (1/4 of 1%) is
hereby imposed on all persons in the City of Republic, Missouri, who
are engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property and
taxable services subject to a sales tax under the provisions of Sections
144.010 to 144.525, inclusive, of the Revised Statutes of Missouri (the
"Sales Tax Law"), for the purpose of funding infrastructure capital
improvements as well as various departmental capital needs with said
tax to be collected for a period of ten (10) years beginning October 1,
2017. Said tax is for the privilege of engaging in such business in the
City and shall be in the manner and to the extent provided in the Sales
6. Cross Reference — As to exchange telephone service — license tax, 605.140.
7. Editor's Note: Former Section 135.130, Stormwater Collection System Tax, which was set
to terminate on October, 1, 2017, was replaced by the tax set out herein after approval by
a majority of the electorate in the election held August 8th, 2017. This capital
improvements tax will terminate on September 30, 2027.
Section
135.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
135.130
AO:83
Section 135.140. Park Improvement Tax.8 [Ord. No. 02-02 §1,
1-14-2002; Ord. No. 04-42 §1, 6-28-2004]
There is hereby extended the imposition of the existing sales tax currently
imposed under Section 94.577 et seq. of the Revised Statutes of Missouri,
as amended, in the amount of one-quarter of one percent (¼ of 1%) on
all receipts from the sale at retail of all tangible personal property or
taxable services at retail within the City which are subject to taxation under
the provisions of Sections 144.010 to 144.525, inclusive, of the Revised
Statutes of Missouri, as amended, for the purpose of funding local park
improvements.
Section 135.145. Additional Park Improvement Tax. [Ord. No. 03-55
§1, 8-11-2003]
There is hereby imposed a sales tax in the amount of one-quarter of one
percent (0.25%) on all receipts from the sale at retail of all tangible personal
property or taxable services at retail within the City which are subject
to taxation under the provisions of Sections 144.010 to 144.525, RSMo.,
inclusive, as amended, for the purpose of funding local park improvements
including, but not limited to, the construction, operation and maintenance
of an aquatic facility. Said tax shall terminate automatically twenty (20)
years after the imposition thereof.
Section 135.147. Fire Tax. [Ord. No. 13-01 §§1 — 2, 1-14-2013]
Tax Law and the rules and regulation of the Director of Revenue of the
State of Missouri issued pursuant thereto.
B. All sales tax collected by the City from said tax shall be deposited in a
special trust fund and shall be used solely for the purpose of
infrastructure capital improvements as well as various departmental
capital needs, said trust fund shall be designated as the City of
Republic, Capital Improvements Sales Tax Trust Fund and shall be
expended only in the manner and for the purposes enumerated in the
Act.
A. Pursuant to Section 321.242, RSMo. (the "Act"), a sales tax at the rate
of one-eighth of one percent (1/8 of 1 %) is hereby imposed on all
persons in the City of Republic, Missouri, who are engaged in the
business of selling tangible personal property and taxable services
subject to a sales tax under the provisions of Sections 144.010 to
144.525, inclusive, RSMo. (the "Sales Tax Law"), for the purpose of
providing revenues for the operation of a City Fire Department, with
said tax to be collected for a period of fifteen (15) years beginning
October 1, 2013. Said tax is for the privilege of engaging in such
business in the City and shall be in the manner and to the extent
8. Editor's Note — This tax will terminate automatically on September 30, 2024.
Section
135.130
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
135.147
AO:84
provided in the Sales Tax Law and the rules and regulation of the
Director of Revenue of the State of Missouri issued pursuant thereto.
B. All sales tax collected by the City from said tax shall be deposited in a
special trust fund and shall be used solely for the purpose of providing
revenues for the operation of a City Fire Department; said trust fund
shall be designated as the City of Republic Fire Protection Sales Tax
Trust Fund and shall be expended only in the manner and for the
purposes enumerated in the Act.
Section
135.147
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
135.147
AO:85

ARTICLE V
Identity Theft Prevention Policy
Section 135.150. Identity Theft Prevention Policy. [Ord. No. 09-13
§1, 4-27-2009]
The Identity Theft Prevention Policy, which is on file in the City Clerk's
office, is hereby adopted and approved.
Section
135.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
135.150
AO:87
Chapter 140
OPEN MEETINGS AND RECORDS POLICY
Section
135.150
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
135.150
AO:88
ARTICLE I
In General
Section 140.010. Open Meetings and Records.
The City meetings and records policy shall be in compliance with Chapter
610 of the Revised Statutes of the State of Missouri as they now exist or as
they may be revised or amended. The City Administrator and City Clerk are
authorized to adopt written procedures or guidelines in line with Chapter
610, RSMo., to implement the City policy.
Section 140.020. Custodian Designated — Response To Request For
Access To Records.
The City Clerk shall be the custodian of records and will be responsible
for maintenance and control of all records. The custodian may designate
deputy custodians in operating departments of the City and such other
departments or offices as the custodian may determine. Deputy custodians
shall conduct matters relating to public records and meetings in accord with
the policies enumerated herein.
Section 140.030. Records Pertaining To Internal Investigations and
Investigations of Allegedly Illegal Conduct.
In order to allow the fullest cooperation by employees and members of
the public in investigation of matters wherein an employee of the City is
alleged to have engaged in any form of misconduct, all files, records and
documents relating to investigations of allegations of misconduct by City
employees will be considered to be personnel records and shall be closed
records under the custody of the respective department head.
Section 140.040. Records Pertaining To Medical Condition or
History.
A. All information obtained by the City regarding medical examinations,
medical condition or medical history of City employees or job
applicants, if retained by the City, shall be collected and maintained on
separate forms and in separate medical files and shall be treated as
closed and confidential records, except that:
1. Supervisors and managers may be informed regarding necessary
restrictions on the work duties of employees and necessary
accommodations;
2. First aid and safety personnel may be informed, when appropriate,
if the information reflects the existence of a disability which might
require emergency treatment; or
3. Government officials investigating compliance with State or
Federal law pertaining to treatment of persons with disabilities
may be allowed access to such records.
Section
140.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
140.045
AO:89
Section 140.045. Records Pertaining To Operational Guidelines,
Policies And Specific Response Plans. [Ord. No. 13-30 §1, 9-9-2013]
Because disclosure would impair the City's ability to protect the security
or safety of persons or real property, and because the public interest in
nondisclosure outweighs the public interest in disclosure under the
circumstances, it is hereby determined that all operational guidelines,
policies and specific response plans developed, adopted, or maintained by
any agency, department, board or commission of the City responsible for
law enforcement, public safety, first response, or public health for use in
responding to or preventing any critical incident which is or appears to be
terrorist in nature and which has the potential to endanger individual or
public safety or health shall be closed records; except that financial records
related to the procurement of or expenditures relating to operational
guidelines, policies or plans purchased with public funds shall be open
records.
Section 140.050. Fees. [Ord. No. 04-59 §1, 8-23-2004]
Fees associated with requests for public records shall be determined in
accordance with Section 610.026, RSMo., the Sunshine Law, as now
existing or hereafter amended.
Section
140.045
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
140.050
AO:90
Chapter 145
FINANCIAL POLICY AND PROCEDURES
Section 145.010. Financial Policy and Procedures Manual. [Ord. No.
99-15, 3-22-1999]
Ordinance number 99-15 adopted March 22, 1999, which enacted the
Financial Policy and Procedures Manual for the City of Republic, and any
amendments thereto, are hereby referred to and made a part hereof as
if fully set out herein. There shall be a copy of the Financial Policy and
Procedures Manual on file in the City Clerk's office.
Chapter 150
FRAUD PREVENTION AND DETECTION POLICY
Section 150.010. Adoption of Policy. [Res. No. 15-R-04 §1,
1-26-2015]
The attached Fraud Prevention and Detection Policy is hereby adopted.9
Chapter 155
CITY FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
Section 155.010. Financial Assistance Program. [Ord. No. 15-27 §1,
10-12-2015]
A. The Finance Department is authorized to administer a financial
assistance program related to the implementation of the Fats, Oils,
Grease and Sand (FOGS) project detailed in Code Section 715.190.
B. Council may authorize use of the financial assistance program by
resolution for projects, activities or work (actions) for which funds have
been or will be set aside in the budget or by amendment to the budget.
The department involved with the actions shall provide a written
recommendation outlining the public health and safety issues involved
in the actions and the need to assure that the actions can be
accomplished in a timely manner through use of the financial assistance
program. Upon approval of the Director of Finance and the City
Administrator of the recommendation and upon presentation to and
approval of the use of the financial assistance program by Council
resolution above, the recommending department will be authorized to
use the financial assistance program.
C. The Director of Finance is authorized to promulgate rules and
regulations to implement the financial assistance program, subject to
9. Editor's Note: Said policy is on file in the City offices.
Section
140.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
155.010
AO:91
approval by the City Administrator and notice to the City Council. Such
rules and regulations shall become effective twenty (20) days after
they have been filed with the City Clerk, with notice thereof to the
City Council. The rules and regulations may be amended using this
procedure.
D. The rules and regulations shall include, but not be limited to, the
following criteria for applicants desiring to participate in the program:
1. A requirement for a description of the actions to be financed
pursuant to this program. The actions shall be by individuals or
entities with a valid business license issued by the City of Republic
or by individuals or entities exempt from a business license
requirement, and all necessary permits to perform such actions
must be obtained. The property owner or an authorized agent must
submit bids for the actions to the City from two (2) licensed
businesses before performance of the actions and subject to
approval of the bids by the City.
2. For individuals or entities to be eligible for the program, the
individual or entity shall be current on all sums due the City and, if
applicable, shall provide a no-tax-due letter from the State of
Missouri and shall have a current City business license.
3. Disbursements of financial assistance to participants shall be by
check payable jointly to the participant and the business that
performs the actions after the actions are satisfactorily completed,
inspected and accepted by the City.
4. The maximum amount of any financial assistance for the
performance of the FOGS project shall be one hundred percent
(100%) up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and fifty percent
(50%) of any amount beyond one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) with
the total dollar amount of the loan not to exceed five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00). The total amount of financial assistance will be
repaid in equal monthly payments over a term not to exceed thirtysix
(36) months at an interest rate of two percent (2%). Participants
shall be required to execute such assurances of repayment as may
be required by the rules and regulations promulgated by the
Finance Director. Upon Council adopting a resolution to include
other actions in a financial assistance program, the resolution may
include limits on the not-to-exceed percent of assistance, a not-toexceed
dollar amount, a term length and interest amount based
upon the specific nature of the projects, activities or work (actions).
5. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Subsection, the unpaid
balance of the financial assistance, together with accrued interest,
shall become due and payable upon sale or transfer of such real
property, whether voluntary or involuntary.
6. Failure to make timely repayment or to remain qualified for
participation in the financial assistance program may result in and
Section
155.010
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
155.010
AO:92
Title II Notes
NOTES AND APPENDIXES
Appendix II-A, Fee/Fine/Forfeiture, is included as an attachment to this
Title.
Chapter 200
POLICE DEPARTMENT
is cause for revocation of a business license in addition to such
other remedies as the City may have under the program, the City
Code or laws of the State of Missouri for collection of any
outstanding balance due the City.
Section
155.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
155.010
AO:93

ARTICLE I
In General
Section 200.010. Establishment. [CC 1999 §2-105]
There is hereby established a Police Department consisting of a Chief of
Police and such Police Officers as the City Council may provide.
Section
200.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
200.010
AO:95

ARTICLE II
Mutual Aid
Section 200.020. Law Enforcement Mutual Aid. [CC 1999 §2-109
(v)]
A. City of Springfield.
1. Any Police Officer of the City of Republic shall have the authority to
respond to an emergency situation outside the City boundaries
when the emergency situation arises within the City of Springfield.
2. Any Police Officer of the City of Republic shall have the authority to
respond to an emergency situation outside the City boundaries
when the emergency situation arises within any political
subdivision that also has authorized its Police Officers to respond to
emergency situations arising within the City of Springfield.
3. Police Officers of the City of Springfield, Missouri, are hereby
authorized to respond to any emergency situation arising in the
City of Republic, Missouri, after receiving a request for assistance
from the Republic Police Department or one (1) of its Law
Enforcement Officers.
4. Police Officers of any political subdivision that has authorized its
Police Officers to respond to the City of Springfield are also hereby
authorized to respond to any emergency situation arising in the
City of Republic, Missouri, after receiving a request for assistance
from the Republic Police Department or one (1) of its Law
Enforcement Officers.
5. As used in this Section, "response" shall mean to take any and all
action which the officer may lawfully take as if exercising his/her
powers within his/her own jurisdiction.
6. An emergency situation shall include a lack of jail space at the
Greene County detention facility. The Republic Police Department
may accept prisoners into Republic's jail facility from a Law
Enforcement Agency or municipality on a space-available basis
when no alternative detention facility is available and when such
prisoners present no escape risk. The agency shall be responsible
to Republic for the cost of detention as authorized in Code Sections
130.290 and 200.040, and the detention shall be subject to the
policy and procedures established by the City of Republic. [Ord.
No. 15-10 §1, 5-11-2015]
B. National Park Service. The Republic Chief of Police is hereby authorized
and directed to execute a memorandum of understanding for mutual aid
services between the City of Republic and the National Park Service in
Section
200.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
200.020
AO:97
substantially the form as the attached item "1."10 [Ord. No. 14-28 §1,
10-13-2014]
C. City of Battlefield. The City Administrator is hereby authorized and
directed to execute the agreement on behalf of the City of Republic,
Missouri, for the purpose of the City and the City of Battlefield
providing mutual aid pursuant to the terms of the agreement which will
be substantially in the form set forth in Exhibit A attached.11 [Ord. No.
14-36 §1, 1-12-2015]
10.Editor's Note: Said memorandum of understanding is on file in the City offices.
11.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the City offices.
Section
200.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
200.020
AO:98
ARTICLE III
Forfeited Property
Section 200.030. Application For and Acceptance By City of
Forfeited Property.
The Mayor or his/her designate is hereby authorized to make application
for and receive on behalf of the City of Republic any property or cash of a
total value of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) or less. Any property or
cash in excess of this amount may be accepted with the approval of the City
Council.
Section
200.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
200.030
AO:99

ARTICLE IV
Jail Operations
Section 200.040. Jail Use by Republic and Other Law Enforcement
Agencies. [Ord. No. 15-10 §2, 5-11-2015]
A. The Republic Police Department shall have the responsibility to oversee
jail operations to the extent that it is determined that the jail facility
should be used to detain prisoners and funding is provided for the
operation of the jail. Policies developed for operation shall keep in mind
the appropriate State and Federal regulations and/or guidelines.
B. The City of Republic may authorize entry into mutual aid agreements to
provide jail services to other Law Enforcement Agencies, municipalities
and courts as deemed appropriate and sustainable and conditioned on
space availability that does not interfere with the needs of the City of
Republic for jail space.
C. The Republic Police Department may accept prisoners into Republic's
jail facility from other Law Enforcement Agencies on a space-available
basis when no alternative detention facility is available and when such
prisoners present no escape risk. The Agency shall be responsible to
Republic for the cost of detention as provided for in a mutual aid
agreement or pursuant to the cost set forth in Code Section 130.290.
D. The City of Republic shall have an absolute right to determine whether
or not a prisoner should be taken into custody in the Republic jail
facility or whether or not a prisoner should be retained in the Republic
jail after being taken into custody.
Section
200.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
200.040
AO:101
Chapter 205
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Cross References — As to building regulations, see ch. 500; as to tampering
with fire hydrants, see §705.020; as to adoption of fire code, see §205.043
et seq.
Section
200.040
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
200.040
AO:102
ARTICLE I
Fire Fighters and Interchange of Fire Fighting Services
Section 205.010. Use of Fire Fighting Equipment Outside The City
Limits Prohibited. [CC 1999 §11-6; Ord. No. 1543 §1; Ord. No. 99-50
§1(11-6), 11-8-1999]
The fire fighting trucks and all fire equipment belonging to the City shall be
used exclusively within the limits of the City. No person shall use, transport
or remove any such fire truck or fire fighting equipment outside the limits of
the City in response to call for aid in combating any fire to property outside
of the limits of the City, except through mutual-aid agreements.
Section 205.020. Employment of Reserve Fire Fighters. [CC 1999
§11-7; Ord. No. 99-50 §1(11-7), 11-8-1999; Ord. No. 08-28 §1,
3-24-2008; Ord. No. 17-18 § 1, 5-2-2017]
The Fire Chief shall approve employment of reserve fire personnel to serve
with the Republic Fire Department on a part-time basis and to be paid
in accordance with Section 205.030. The number of reserve fire fighters
employed shall be sufficient to assist full-time personnel in providing fire
protection for the City of Republic as determined by the Fire Chief.
Section 205.030. Compensation For Reserve Fire Fighters. [CC
1999 §11-8; Ord. No. 99-50 §1(11-8), 11-8-1999; Ord. No. 05-07 §1,
1-10-2005; Ord. No. 05-99 §1, 12-27-2005; Ord. No. 08-28 §3,
3-24-2008; Ord. No. 17-18 § 2, 5-2-2017]
Reserve fire personnel will be paid on a schedule consistent with the pay
schedule established for other part-time employees of the City unless the
City Administrator and Fire Chief determine that a more efficient payment
method is in the best interest of the City. The hourly rate of pay for reserve
fire fighters shall be determined annually by the City Administrator in
consultation with the Fire Chief and as established in the City’s annual
budget.
Section 205.040. Interchange of Fire Fighting Services With
Various Fire Protection Agencies. [CC 1999 §11-9; Ord. No. 99-50
§1(11-9), 11-8-1999]
The City of Republic has contracts with various Fire Protection Agencies.
Said contracts are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
Section
205.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.040
AO:103

ARTICLE II
Fire Prevention — General Regulations
Section 205.043. Adoption of International Fire Code.12 [Ord. No.
05-20 §1, 6-16-2005; Ord. No. 06-73 §1, 10-9-2006; Ord. No. 07-44
§1, 6-25-2007; Ord. No. 12-26 §§1 — 2, 5-29-2012]
A certain document, at least one (1) copy of which is on file in the office
of the City Clerk of the City of Republic, being marked and designated
as the "International Fire Code, 2012", as published by the International
Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the City of
Republic in Greene County in the State of Missouri for the control of fire
safety of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said building
codes are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set
out in this Section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if
any, prescribed in Section 205.045.
Section 205.045. Amendments To Specific Sections of The Code
Herein Adopted. [Ord. No. 05-20 §2, 6-16-2005; Ord. No. 06-73 §2,
10-9-2006; Ord. No. 07-44 §2, 6-25-2007; Ord. No. 12-26 §§1, 3,
5-29-2012]
The following Sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Insert: City of Republic, Missouri.
Section 105.4.2 Is hereby amended to read as follows:
Construction documents shall be drawn to scale upon suitable
material. Electronic media documents are allowed to be submitted
when approved by the Fire Code official. Construction documents
shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent
of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to
the provisions of this code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations as determined by the Fire Code official. In addition to
construction documents an eight and one-half (8½) by eleven (11)
copy of floor plan will be provided for Fire Department pre-plan
purpose.
Section 105.6.4 Delete in its entirety.
Section 105.6.12 Delete in its entirety.
Section 105.6.15 Delete in its entirety.
Section 105.6.17 Delete in its entirety.
Section 105.6.18 Delete in its entirety.
Section 105.6.19 Delete in its entirety.
Section 105.6.27 Insert: In addition LP Gas storage within the City of
Republic shall be subject to Section 205.055.
12.Cross Reference — As to additional technical code adoptions, §500.001 et seq.
Section
205.043
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.045
AO:105
Section 105.6.31 Delete in its entirety.
Section 105.6.32 Delete in its entirety.
Section 109.3 Insert: Misdemeanor, one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), one
hundred eighty (180) days.
Section 111.4 Not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
Section 503.1 Is hereby amended to read as follows:
(a) The Fire Chief may designate fire lanes of private and public property.
Such area shall be designated by signs at each end of the lane which
say "No Parking — Fire Lane" with appropriate curb markings. Curb
markings shall be red painted background with white painted letters
at least four (4) inches in size. Fire lanes may be established on
driveways and access roads required by the planning and zoning as
recommended by the Fire Department applicable to the property in
question, provided that fire lanes may not be established on property
containing one- or two-family residential dwellings.
(b) Upon notice by the Fire Chief of designation of a fire lane, it shall be
the duty of the owner, occupant or his agent, of the premises upon
which the fire lane has been designated, to post proper signs and to
maintain such signs in good condition.
Section 505.1 Is hereby amended to read as follows:
(a) All such numbers shall be placed facing street, plainly visible from
the street, shall be of a contrasting color to the background, shall be
not less than four (4) inches high, shall be in plain Arabic type, shall
be made with a width equivalent to at least a half of an inch wide
and shall not be more than fifty (50) feet from the street, except as
provided in Subsection (b) of this Section.
(b) If the number is more than fifty (50) feet from the street, the numbers
shall be a minimum of six (6) inches in height, except in no event shall
such number be more than one hundred (100) feet from the street.
(c) All businesses shall affix a street number to the rear of the business
so as to be plainly visible from the rear access area. The size of the
number posted shall be in accordance with the requirements set out
in Subsections (a) and (b) of this Section.
(d) In multi-family complexes comprised of two or more buildings, each
building shall have an illuminated number or letter designation visible
to emergency personnel upon entering the complex.
Section 506.1 Is hereby amended to read as follows:
The key box shall be a "Knox Box", it shall be installed with the bottom
of the vault six (6) feet above the finished grade, at the main entrance
of the building or at a location designated by the Fire Chief or his/
her designee. In multi-building complexes the Fire Chief or his/her
designee shall determine if multiple boxes shall be required.
Section 903.3.1 Standards. Is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section
205.045
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
205.045
AO:106
Sprinkler systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with
Sections 903.3.1.1, 903.3.1.2, 903.3.1.3 and, in addition, a structure
designed with the intent of providing multiple tenant spaces with
adjustable floor space determined by occupancy, the following shall
apply:
1. All possible "infill" occupancies shall be segregated from the
facility sprinkler system by the addition of a "butterfly valve" or
approved gate valve device to the cross main that shall also
include a tamper device wired to the fire alarm panel.
2. All possible "infill" occupancies shall have a fire alarm audible
device for the occupants' notification of sprinkler activation.
3. All "infill" incorporating a lowered ceiling shall provide access to
and indicate the location of the valve by signage stating
"Sprinkler Valve Access" on appropriate, adjacent ceiling
material.
4. In multi-family dwellings sprinkler branch lines shall be
designed so they are not subject to freezing conditions such as
found in breezeways.
Section 903.4.2 Is hereby amended to read as follows:
All NFPA 13 and NFPA 13D installed sprinkler systems shall be
monitored by a third party UL Central Station for "water flow" and
"tamper".
Approved audible and visual devices shall be connected to every
automatic sprinkler system. Such sprinkler water flow alarm devices
shall be activated by water flow equivalent to the flow of a single
sprinkler of the smallest orifice size installed in the system. Alarm
devices shall be provided on the exterior of the building in an
approved location. Where a fire alarm system is installed, actuation
of the automatic sprinkler system shall actuate the building fire alarm
system.
Section 907.2.9 Where fire alarm systems are required, each occupant
dwelling area shall have a minimum of one (1) centrally located audio/
visual notification appliance.
Appendix B105.1 Is hereby amended to read as follows:
The minimum fire-flow requirements for one- and two-family
dwellings having a fire-flow calculation area which does not exceed
three thousand six hundred (3,600) square feet (344.5 m 2) shall be
one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons per minute (3785.4 L/min).
Fire-flow and flow duration for dwellings having a fire-flow calculation
area in excess of three thousand six hundred (3,600) square feet
(344.5 m 2) shall not be less than that specified in Table B105.1.
Section
205.045
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.050
AO:107
Section 205.050. Enforcement of Chapter. [CC 1999 §11-2; Ord. No.
99-50 §1(11-2), 11-8-1999]
It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief, Fire Fighters, Police Chief, Police
Officers and the Building Inspector to report any and all violations of this
Chapter to the appropriate City Officials for action.
Section 205.055. Regulation of Propane Storage Tanks For
Domestic Use. [Ord. No. 08-55 §1, 7-14-2008]
Section 205.060. Regulation of Propane Storage Tanks. [CC 1999
§11-3; R.O. 5139; Ord. No. 99-50 §1(11-3), 11-8-1999]
A. All liquid petroleum storage tanks greater than one hundred (100)
pounds within the City limits of Republic which are used for
consumption by residential or commercial consumers shall be
prohibited.
Exception:
1. Residential use within "AG" Agricultural and "R1-L" Low Density
Single-Family Residential District as defined by Section 405.070.
The tank shall be installed in accordance with the International
Fire Code, International Building Code and other applicable
Sections of this Code.
2. Franchise partners refuse service to an area within the City limits
of Republic.
3. LP storage tanks regulated by Section 205.060.
B. Existing propane storage tanks in operation at the time of adoption of
this Section may continue in operation and use, subject to the
provisions of this Section.
A. All liquid petroleum tanks within the City limits of Republic which are
used for refueling motorized vehicles and which are for private
consumption by individuals or businesses shall be subject to the
pertinent Sections of the International Building Code and International
Fire Code in addition to the following regulations:
1. No tank larger than two thousand (2,000) gallons shall be installed
within the City limits.
2. All tanks shall be set upon a six (6) inch concrete reinforced
foundation of adequate size for said tank.
3. All tanks are to be mounted securely to said foundation.
4. A six (6) foot metal chain link fence must be erected around the
complete perimeter of said installation with a gate and lock. Said
gate shall be kept locked at all times except during the refueling of
vehicles.
Section
205.050
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
205.060
AO:108
Section 205.065. Fire Walls and Fire Suppression Systems in
Residential Dwelling Units. [Ord. No. 12-29 §1, 3-26-2012; Ord. No.
18-12, 2-20-2018]
5. A fire extinguisher of adequate size, and in any case no less than
twenty (20) pounds dry chemical, must be installed at a convenient
location within the perimeter fenced area.
6. All said tanks shall be installed no less than fifty (50) feet from any
house, property line or heavily populated area.
7. No tank shall be operated after installation until first personally
checked by the Republic Fire Chief or his/her designated
representative, who shall personally inspect said tank and facilities
and issue his/her written authorization of approval of said
installation.
8. The rules and regulations covering LP gas, effective October 15,
1977, issued by the Division of Weights and Measures, Department
of Agriculture, State of Missouri are hereby incorporated by
reference in this Section as if fully set forth herein. The City Clerk
shall maintain on file a copy of said rules and regulations for
inspection by persons interested therein.
B. This Section shall not apply to liquid petroleum tanks used for
commercial resale of LP fuel.
A. Purpose. The intent of this regulation is to mitigate fire hazards in
residential structures where dwelling units are attached by a common
wall or walls by requiring certain fire-rated fire walls between units as
provided in this Section.
B. Definitions. The following terms as used in this Section shall be defined
as follows:
ATTACHED SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A single-family residential
building containing two (2) dwelling units attached to each other and
divided by a common wall. Individual dwelling units within an attached
single-family dwelling are characterized by their location on separate
parcels of real property normally under separate ownership.
DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A single-family residential
building not attached to any other dwelling units and housing only one
(1) family.
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING — A residential building containing three
(3) or more dwelling units being attached to each other and sharing
common walls, floors and/or ceilings.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A residential building containing two (2)
dwelling units divided by a common wall and under common ownership
with no division of real property between the dwelling units.
Section
205.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.065
AO:109
C. General Regulations. Each wall separating individual, attached
residential units shall observe the following standards:
1. All attached single-family and two-family dwellings:
a. Two (2) Hour Concrete Masonry Fire Partition Wall. A two-hour
rated partition wall is required between each individual
dwelling unit in all attached single-family and two-family
dwellings. The fire partition wall shall be constructed using
two-hour rated eight-inch concrete masonry units (CMU) from
the top of the concrete footing continuously up to the
underside of the roof decking material. The roof decking
material shall be two-hour fire retardant treated wood within
four (4) feet of the masonry fire partition wall. The wall shall be
constructed following the requirements of the International
Residential Code Section R606.
b. Fire Wall Labeling. All fire partition walls shall be labeled in
the under floor and attic areas in letters at least two (2) inches
tall and the lettering spaced on the surface of the wall no wider
than ten (10) feet. The label shall be placed in such a manner
as to be obvious to workers in the crawl space, attic or
concealed space on both sides of the wall and shall read as
follows:
"FIRE WALL: DO NOT PENETRATE OR DAMAGE"
"NO PENETRAR O DANAR ESTA PARED RESISTENTE AL
FUEGO"
c. Penetrations. Penetrations through any fire wall, such as for
pipes and cables, shall be protected with an equivalently rated
firestop.
d. Openings. Any openings in any fire wall, such as doors and
windows, shall have an equivalently fire rated door or window
assembly.
2. Fire Suppression Systems For Single- And Two-Family Dwellings.
The builder of all attached and detached single- and two-family
dwellings shall offer to any purchaser on or before the time of
entering into the purchase contract, the option, at the purchaser's
cost, to install or equip NFPA 13D fire sprinklers in the dwelling.
3. All multi-family dwellings:
a. Option #1: All multi-family dwellings shall have a NFPA 13R
Fire Suppression System installed. In addition to the fire
suppression system draft stopping shall be installed as
described below:
(1) In the attic space above all balconies or on the underside
of the roof truss chord. The intent of the draft stopping is
Section
205.065
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
205.065
AO:110
to prevent flame impingement from the balcony into the
attic.
(2) Draft stopping shall be installed in the attic space above all
breezeways. The intent of the draft stopping is to prevent
flame impingement from the breezeway into the attic.
(3) All draft stopping materials used shall be installed in
compliance with the latest edition of the City's adopted
Building or Fire Code.
b. Option #2: NFPA 13 Fire Suppression System with no draft
stopping.
In the event the design of the building doesn't support the
installation of draft stopping where required in option #1,
the building shall have a NFPA 13 Fire Suppression System
installed.
D. Exterior Finishes. Exterior finishes for all residential structures
containing three (3) or more attached dwelling units in any zoning
district shall be of a non-combustible type as defined by the adopted
edition of the International Residential Building Code.
E. After final inspection and issuance of an occupancy certificate, no
person shall breach the integrity of a firewall without notifying the City
so that an additional inspection can be conducted to determine if the
firewall remains in compliance with City ordinances and/or Fire Code.
Such a breach and/or failure to obtain an inspection shall be a violation
of this Section punishable pursuant to Code Section 100.220 of the City
Code.
Section
205.065
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.065
AO:111

ARTICLE III
Fireworks
Section 205.070. Fireworks. [CC 1999 §11-5; Ord. No. 99-50
§1(11-5), 11-8-1999; Ord. No. 05-24 §1, 5-9-2005]
A. Aerial fireworks displays are allowable by civic and social organizations
during the dates of June thirtieth (30th) to July fourth (4th), inclusive,
between 8:00 P.M. to 12:00 Midnight and on such other dates as may be
specifically approved and permitted by order of the City Council.
B. Civic and social organizations desiring to hold aerial fireworks displays
during the period of June thirtieth (30th) to July fourth (4th), inclusive,
shall first contact the City Fire Department to request a permit. Upon
approval, the City Fire Department shall issue the permit to said
organization. In case of a rain out, said organization must inform the
City Fire Department of the makeup date. Civil and social organizations
desiring to hold aerial fireworks displays on dates other than June
thirtieth (30th) to July fourth (4th), inclusive, shall make application to
the City Council at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date any such
display is desired to be scheduled. Such application shall set forth the
date and times during which such display is desired to be scheduled,
the specific reasons as to why the display is to be held, and such other
information as the Council may require, including the names and
addresses of all persons responsible for conducting such display. If the
City Council, in its discretion, is of the opinion such display would
constitute a legitimate community event, it may issue a special permit
authorizing the requested display. If any such display is authorized by
special permit, nothing herein shall be construed as requiring the City
Council to authorize a special permit to the same organization for
displays desired to be scheduled in successive years. If a request for a
special use permit is made less than fourteen (14) days before the
event, the applicant shall be required to post a cash bond in an amount
sufficient to cover any cost incurred by the City as a result of the
shortened time period. Such cost shall include, but is not limited to,
overtime cost, cost of cleanup, police and fire services, etc., and those
costs shall be deducted from the cash bond and the balance, if any,
returned to the applicant.
C. Organizations holding a fireworks display must provide adequate offstreet
parking for the occasion and provide reasonable care to protect
against health and fire hazard during the occasion.
D. Fireworks used by individuals within the City of Republic will be
permissible only on July fourth (4th) and only between the hours of
10:00 A.M. through 12:00 Midnight.
E. If the user of the fireworks has a complaint submitted against his/her
use of such fireworks, then the user shall be so notified by the Republic
Police Department to cease and desist his/her use of said fireworks. If
the user continues to use the fireworks after said notice from the
Section
205.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.070
AO:113
Section 205.071. Regulation of The Sale of Fireworks. [Ord. No.
05-25 §§1 — 2, 4-25-2005]
Republic Police Department, then he/she shall be in violation of this
Code and be cited for a nuisance and shall be brought before the
Municipal Court with a penalty available as outlined in Section 100.220.
A. Definitions. The following definitions shall be used in the regulation of
the sale of fireworks:
SITE PLAN — Consists of a detailed, hand drawn sketch of the area to
be used. The sketch will include the placement of the seasonal outlet
with dimensions and distances in relation to streets, other structures,
access and available parking.
STRUCTURE — That which is built or constructed of a number of
parts held or put together in a specific way. This may be habitable or
inhabitable.
TENT — A structure, enclosure or shelter constructed of fabric or
pliable material supported by any manner except by air or the contents
that it protects.
VEGETATION — Weeds, grass, vines or other growth that is capable of
being ignited and endangers property shall be cut down and removed
by the owner or occupant of the premises.
B. General Requirements For Sale Of Fireworks.
1. All seasonal retail fireworks tents and stands shall have a City of
Republic business license. Shall have an approved fire inspection
from the Fire Department and temporary structure permit from
theCommunity Development Department. Seasonal retail fireworks
tents and stands shall be located in "C-1", "C-2", "M-1", "M-2"
zoning districts. The fireworks retailer shall have an approved
seasonal fireworks permit from the Missouri Division of Fire Safety
before applying for the City business license and temporary
structure permit. [Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
2. Fireworks shall be offered for sale from June twentieth (20th) until
July fourth (4th) for seasonal retail outlets. Hours of operation shall
be permitted between 8:00 A.M. until 12:00 A.M. (Midnight).
3. Seasonal retail fireworks outlets shall comply with all the
provisions of the City of Republic codes and ordinances relating to
the sale and storage of fireworks.
4. Two (2) copies of a site plan showing the location of the seasonal
retail fireworks tent/stand shall be submitted and approved by the
Fire Department and Community Development Department before
the structure is in place on site or erected. Site plans shall include
location of electrical service, the size of the tent/stand, parking for
Section
205.070
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
205.071
AO:114
customers and temporary living quarters if they are remote from
the tent/stand. [Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
5. Fees for the Fire Department's inspection and site review shall be
eight cents ($0.08) per square foot for structures and tents over
five hundred (500) square feet in size with a minimum charge of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00). For the purpose of determining tent
sizing, support ropes and guy wires shall be considered as part of
the temporary membrane structure, tent or canopy.
6. All tents used for the sale of fireworks shall be constructed of a
flame-retardant material. The operator/owner of the tent shall have
documentation to this effect on file within the tent. The tent shall
also have this documentation stamped on it in an accessible
location for inspection.
7. The operators/owners of the tents and seasonal retail stands shall
have documentation on file within the tents and seasonal retail
stands showing that liability insurance has been purchased and is
current for the specific location that the seasonal retail operation is
located.
8. All vegetation within a one hundred (100) foot perimeter of the tent
or seasonal retailer stand shall be no higher than four (4) inches.
For the purpose of determining required distances, support ropes
and guy wires shall be considered as part of the temporary
membrane structure, tent or canopy.
9. Fireworks shall not be sold, stored or discharged within five
hundred (500) feet of where a volatile, combustible or flammable
liquid or gases is sold, stored, vented or dispensed. For the purpose
of determining required distances, support ropes and guy wires
shall be considered as part of the temporary membrane structure,
tent or canopy.
Exception: Portable generators approved for the intended use and
installed accordingly to NFPA 70, the National Electrical Code,
shall be allowed when used as a primary source of power when no
commercial source is available. The generator shall be a minimum
of fifty (50) feet from the seasonal outlet and fireworks storage.
Minimal fuel shall be stored on site in an approved container not in
proximity of the generator or sales, storage area.
10. Fireworks shall not be sold within permanent structures that have
mixed or multiple occupancies defined by the Fire or Building
Code.
11. Trash, rubbish and empty boxes shall be stored a minimum of
twenty-five (25) feet from the location of the seasonal retail
operation (tent or stand). For the purpose of determining required
distances, support ropes and guy wires shall be considered as part
of the temporary membrane structure, tent or canopy.
Section
205.071
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
205.071
AO:115
12. No open flame cooking equipment shall be allowed within the
seasonal retail location.
13. No open flame or portable space heater shall be located within the
seasonal retail location.
14. "No Smoking" signs shall be posted at all ingress points to the
seasonal retail tent, on the center supporting poles and throughout
the seasonal retail tent as needed.
15. "No Smoking" signs shall be posted at all points of sale to the
seasonal retail stand.
16. "No Smoking" signs shall have letters of no less than six (6) inches
in height and all letters shall be a contrasting color from the
background of the sign and the tent or stand. Signs on the center
supporting poles of the seasonal retail tents shall be posted six (6)
feet above the finished grade to the bottom of the sign. All "No
Smoking" signs shall be readily recognizable.
17. All seasonal retail tents and stands shall be located a minimum of
fifty (50) feet from other structures. For the purpose of determining
required distances, support ropes and guy wires shall be
considered as part of the temporary membrane structure, tent or
canopy.
18. All seasonal retail stands and tents shall be located no closer than
twenty (20) feet from the right-of-way of all roads, streets, alleys
and property lot lines. For the purpose of determining required
distances, support ropes and guy wires shall be considered as part
of the temporary membrane structure, tent or canopy.
C. Violation — Penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this
Section or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or
who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the
approved construction documents or directive of the Fire Code official,
or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code shall be
guilty of misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day per violation for each day the
violation exists or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) day per
violation, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate
offense.
Section
205.071
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
205.071
AO:116
Chapter 207
FALSE ALARMS
Section 207.010. Definitions. [Ord. No. 02-34 §1, 11-12-2002]
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this Chapter shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ALARM — Any signal (audio or visual, recorded or live) transmitted to
or intended to be heard or observed by the Police Department or Fire
Department or any private person or entity, or the public at large indicating
a predetermined or emergency condition. Such alarm may or may not be
part of an overall alarm system.
ALARM SYSTEM — Any device or series of devices, including, but not
limited to, systems interconnected with radio frequency signals which are
designed to discourage crime by emitting or transmitting a remote or
audible, visual or electronic signal indicating an alarm condition. "Alarm
system" includes any telephone alarm system which automatically transmits
by telephone line a recorded electronic or mechanical signal to a telephone
instrument at the Police Department or Fire Department and where such
system is totally automated and requires no relaying or action by a human
being.
BURGLARY ALARM — Any alarm or alarm system designed to indicate a
condition of any unlawful entry, forced entry or attempted forced entry.
DURESS ALARM — Any alarm signal generated by the manual activation of
a device intended to signal a crisis situation requiring a Police response.
FALSE ALARM — The activation of an alarm or an alarm system by any
means which does not represent the designated condition or an illegal
activity or an emergency condition.
FIRE ALARM — Any alarm or alarm system designated to indicate the
presence of fire and/or smoke.
ROBBERY ALARM — Any alarm or alarm system designated to indicate a
robbery (holdup) is in progress or has just occurred.
Section 207.020. Response To Alarms — Corrective Actions —
Reports Required — Illegal Activities — Punishment To Be Imposed.
[Ord. No. 02-34 §1, 11-12-2002]
A. For each response by the Police Department/Fire Department to an
alarm, the Department will cause a report to be filed, classifying the
alarm as one of the following:
1. False alarm (including a false alarm due to faulty maintenance) or a
system test with no notification.
2. Valid alarm for cause designated.
Section
205.071
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
207.020
AO:117
Section 207.030. Automatic Dialing Devices.
Section 207.040. Duties of Alarm Business.
B. Upon the reception of a third (3rd) false alarm within any twelve (12)
month period, the Police Department or Fire Department shall issue a
written warning notice to the owner or lessee of the premises involved.
The owner or lessee shall file a written report with the Police
Department/Fire Department within five (5) working days indicating
any and all measures taken to reduce false alarms.
C. Police or Fire Department responses to false alarms shall subject the
owner or lessee of the premises involved to the following:
1. First (1st) response (none in last twelve (12) months): verbal
warning.
2. Second (2nd) response (within twelve (12) months): verbal
warning.
3. Third (3rd) response (within twelve (12) months): written warning.
4. Fourth (4th) or subsequent response (within twelve (12) months):
Municipal Court citation for permitting more than three (3) false
alarms within a twelve (12) month period.
No warnings or citations shall be issued in connection with any
response to a valid alarm.
D. Anyone convicted under the provisions of this Section with having
permitted at least four (4) Police/Fire responses to false alarms within
any twelve (12) month period shall, in addition to being subjected to any
fines or other punishment imposed in any Municipal Court proceeding,
cause such alarm or alarm system to be disconnected and it shall be
unlawful to reconnect or fail to disconnect, such alarm or alarm system
until and unless corrective action has been taken and reconnection of
the alarm or alarm system is authorized by the Police Chief or Fire Chief
of the City. No disconnection or deactivation shall be ordered or made
as to any premises required by law to have an alarm or alarm system in
operation.
A. No person shall install or use an automatic dialing device which is
programmed to dial the Republic Police or Fire Department's telephone
number or the City's emergency number, "911".
B. Within ninety (90) days from the adoption of this Code, all automatic
dialing devices programmed to dial department's telephone number
shall be reprogrammed to dial any other consenting person who may
relay the emergency message to the Republic Police or Fire Department
by live voice. The alarm user of such device shall be responsible for
having his/her alarm system reprogrammed within the ninety (90) day
period.
Section
207.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
207.040
AO:118
Section 207.050. Duties of Owner or Lessee of Premises —
Maintenance of Equipment. [Ord. No. 02-34 §1, 11-12-2002]
A. The alarm business monitoring an alarm system shall attempt to verify
every alarm signal, except duress or holdup alarm activation, as other
than a false alarm before requesting a Police response to the alarm
signal. This verification attempt shall include, at the minimum, a phone
call to the business or a member of management for that purpose. The
alarm business shall have an affirmative duty to advise the department
of that attempt prior to requesting a Police response. It shall be the duty
of the owner/manager or their representative to respond upon request
of the Police when duress or holdup alarm activations occur.
B. The alarm business monitoring an alarm system shall communicate all
verified cancellations of alarm dispatch requests to the Republic
Emergency Communications Department.
C. If an alarm business, or owner or manager of an apartment complex,
provides an alarm system or systems consisting of more than fifty (50)
alarms for the dwelling units within that complex, the alarm business,
or manager or owner of the complex, shall be responsible for on-site
verification of an alarm as being other than false prior to requesting
Police response. The duty for on-site verification shall not include
duress or holdup alarm activations. The alarm business, or owner or
manager of the apartment complex, shall have an affirmative duty to
advise the department of that verification prior to requesting a Police
response.
A. The owner or lessee of any alarm or alarm system shall provide
response to the alarm location, when requested, in order to rest or
disable the alarm or alarm system within one (1) hour of notification.
The intentional failure to provide such response shall be unlawful, and
shall, upon conviction, result in the imposition of any punishment
authorized by this Code of Ordinances.
B. All alarms or alarm systems having an audible or visual signal at the
premises shall be so equipped so as to automatically shut off the audible
or visual signal after fifteen (15) minutes except those alarms or alarm
systems required by law to have a longer operating period in which
case the system shall be so equipped as to automatically shut off the
audible or visual signal at the conclusion of the longer required
operating time.
C. Each owner or lessee shall, at his/her expense, maintain all components
of his/her alarm or alarm system in good working order at all times to
ensure that the sensory mechanism used in connection with such device
is adjusted to suppress false indications of holdups or intrusions or fire
or smoke conditions so that the device will not be activated by impulses
due to short flashes of light, wind, noises, vehicular noise or other
forces unrelated to genuine alarms.
Section
207.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
207.050
AO:119
Section 207.060. Violations and Penalties.
Section 207.070. Permit and Application Therefor. [Ord. No. 02-34
§1, 11-12-2002]
D. No alarm or alarm system designed to transmit emergency messages
shall be tested or demonstrated without first notifying the Police
Department and Fire Department.
E. Fire alarm systems shall be required to have a maintenance contract for
testing and inspections in accordance with National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA) standards; for example, smoke and/or heat
detectors, manual pull stations and water flow alarms (sprinkler
systems). Copies of the maintenance contract and test results of the fire
alarm system shall be forwarded to the Fire Chief within thirty (30)
days from the date of the test.
A. Any person who violates or causes a violation of any provision of this
Chapter shall be punished, upon conviction, in accordance with Section
100.220.
B. The City Attorney may bring an action in the name of the City to
restrain or prevent a violation of any provision of this Chapter or
continuance of any such violation.
A. No person shall install or operate an alarm or alarm system serving a
premises or a building or portion thereof unless an alarm permit in the
form of a decal has been issued under this Section and is in force
authorizing the use of the alarm or the alarm system.
B. All persons who install or operate an alarm or alarm system without
first obtaining an alarm permit as described in Subsection (A) hereof,
shall not be issued an alarm permit until an administrative fee of thirty
dollars ($30.00) has been paid to reimburse the City for the additional
personnel and material expenses incurred in the process of inspection
and issuance of such delinquent permits. Applications for alarm permits
shall be made on forms provided by the City. The application shall be
signed by the owner or lessee of the alarm or alarm system, and shall
provide the following information:
1. Name, address and telephone number of the owner or lessee of the
alarm or alarm system.
2. Name, address and telephone number of the owner or lessee of the
premises or building to be served by the alarm or alarm system.
3. Name, address and telephone number of the person in charge of
the premises or building served by the alarm or alarm system.
4. Name, address and telephone number of the person or entity
installing the alarm or alarm system.
Section
207.050
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
207.070
AO:120
Chapter 210
ANIMAL REGULATIONS
Cross References — As to nuisances generally, see ch. 220; as to number of
dogs or cats allowed in residential zoned districts, see §210.170.
5. Name, address and telephone number of the person or entity
monitoring the alarm or alarm system.
6. The name, address and telephone number of the person or entity
providing maintenance and repair service to the alarm or alarm
system.
C. An amended application shall be filed within ten (10) days after any
change in the information contained in the original application. Upon
the timely filing of an amended application, a new alarm permit shall be
issued without the imposition of any fee or charge. An amended
application which is not timely filed shall result in the payment of an
administrative fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) to reimburse the City for
additional personnel and material expenses incurred in the process and
issuing of any amended permit.
Section
207.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
207.070
AO:121

ARTICLE I
Dog and Cat Regulations
Section 210.010. Definitions. [CC 1999 §4-19; Ord. No. 99-9 §1,
2-8-1999; Ord. No. 11-07 §1, 4-11-2011]
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section:
ADEQUATE CARE — Normal and prudent attention to the needs of an
animal, including wholesome food, clean water, shelter and health care as
necessary to maintain good health.
ADEQUATE CONTROL — To reasonably restrain or govern an animal so that
the animal does not injure itself, any person, any other animal, or property.
ADOPTER — A person who is legally competent to enter into a contract,
who is of eighteen (18) years of age, who is adopting or buying a dog or cat
from the City Facility.
ANIMAL — Every living vertebrate, both domestic and wild, except a human
being.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Any person or agent employed by the City
to enforce this Chapter.
APPROVED VACCINE — Animal rabies vaccine licensed by the United
States Department of Agriculture and administered by a licensed
veterinarian.
AT LARGE — Any animal shall be deemed to be at large when he/she is off
the property of his/her owner and not restrained by a competent person.
CAT — Member of the feline family over six (6) months of age.
DOG — Member of the canine family over six (6) months of age.
EXPOSED TO RABIES — Shall mean when bitten by, or fought with, or has
come in close contact with an animal showing symptoms of rabies.
HARBOR — To feed or shelter an animal at the same location for three (3)
or more consecutive days.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT — The Department of Public Health and Welfare of
the County.
HUMANE EUTHANASIA — The act or practice of putting an animal to death
in a humane or instantaneous manner under guidelines and procedures
established by rules promulgated by the Director of the Department of
Agriculture of the State of Missouri.
IMPOUND — To apprehend, catch, trap, net or anesthetize by means of a
gun or other mechanical device any animal.
IMPOUNDING FACILITIES — Any premises designated by the City for
the purpose of impounding or harboring animals found in violation of this
Chapter, as well as seized, stray, homeless, abandoned or unwanted
animals.
Section
210.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.010
AO:123
KENNEL — An establishment kept and maintained for the purpose of
breeding, selling or boarding dogs and/or cats, or an establishment kept and
maintained for the purpose of training dogs or cats.
NEUTERED MALE — Any male dog or cat which has undergone surgical
operation to render the animal unable to reproduce.
OWNER — In addition to its ordinary meaning, any person who keeps or
harbors an animal, or professes to be owning, keeping or harboring an
animal. An animal shall be deemed to be kept or harbored if it is fed or
sheltered for three (3) consecutive days or more.
RABIES CONTROL AUTHORITY — The Director of Public Health and
Welfare of the County.
REGISTRATION, VACCINATION — The procedure of vaccinating for rabies
and issuing an identification number and an appropriate certificate. The
above words shall be interchangeable.
RESTRAINT — A dog is under restraint within the meaning of this Chapter
if he/she is controlled by a leash, at heel of a competent person and obedient
to that person's commands, or within a vehicle being driven or parked on
the streets.
SPAYED FEMALE — Any female dog or cat which has undergone surgical
operation to prevent conception.
STERILIZATION — The surgical removal of the reproductive organs in
order to render the animal unable to reproduce.
TAG — Any metal object or badge issued by the City of Republic, regardless
of shape or color, which bears an identification number and year of
issuance.
VETERINARIAN — Any veterinarian in the County holding a current State
license.
Section 210.020. Vaccination and Tag. [Ord. No. 07-46 §1, 7-9-2007]
The owner or keeper of any dog or cat in the City of Republic is hereby
required to have such animals vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian and to procure a certificate of such vaccination from the
veterinarian and to cause to be worn by the dog or cat a badge or tag
provided by the veterinarian showing a current rabies vaccination.
Section 210.030. Facsimile, Etc., Tags Prohibited. [CC 1999 §4-28;
Ord. No. 07-46 §1, 7-9-2007]
No person shall provide a facsimile or deface or change the badge or tag
issued in any manner which shall make or cause the tag to appear valid for
a longer period of time than originally intended.
Section
210.010
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
210.040
AO:124
Section 210.040. Non-Transferability of Tag. [CC 1999 §4-29; Ord.
No. 07-46 §1, 7-9-2007]
A badge or tag shall not be transferred from the dog or cat for which it was
issued to any other dog or cat.
Section 210.050. Badge or Tag Required. [CC 1999 §4-35; Ord. No.
07-46 §1, 7-9-2007]
No person shall own or keep within the City any dog or cat without first
obtaining a badge or tag showing a current rabies vaccination.
Section 210.060. through Section 210.090. (Reserved)13
Section 210.100. Collar With Badge or Tag Required. [CC 1999
§4-41; Ord. No. 07-46 §1, 7-9-2007]
It shall be the duty of the owner or keeper of any dog or cat which has been
vaccinated against rabies, pursuant to this Article, to furnish a collar to be
worn by the dog or cat on which shall be fastened a badge or tag furnished
by the veterinarian showing the rabies treatment and the years therefor.
The absence of any such collar or badge or tag from any dog or cat shall be
prima facie evidence that such dog or cat has not been vaccinated.
Section 210.110. Running At Large Prohibited. [CC 1999 §4-20]
It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow his/her animal to run at large.
Section 210.120. Dogs or Cats of Temporary Residents. [CC 1999
§4-34]
Any dog or cat owned by temporary residents of the City may be deemed
in compliance with this Chapter if the dog or cat holds a valid rabies
vaccination certificate issued by any graduate veterinarian. Dogs or cats not
vaccinated shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter within ten (10)
days of date of arrival within the City.
Section 210.130. Barking Dogs — Howling Cats. [CC 1999 §4-3]
No person shall keep any domestic animal which by frequent howling,
barking, baying or yelping shall disturb the peace of the neighborhood.
Section 210.140. Parent's Liability. [CC 1999 §4-50]
The parent or guardian of any juvenile, sixteen (16) years of age or under,
claiming ownership of any animal shall be deemed to be the owner of such
13.Editor's Note — Ord. no. 07-46 §1, adopted July 9, 2007, repealed sections 210.060
"license fee imposed and replacement fee", 210.070 "effective date of licensing
requirements", 210.080 "receipt to be issued upon payment of license fee" and 210.090
"list of dogs and cats within the city" in their entirety. Former sections 210.060 — 210.090
derived from CC 1999 §§4-36 — 4-38, 4-40. At the editor's discretion, these sections have
been reserved for the city's future use.
Section
210.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.140
AO:125
animal and shall be charged for all penalties and pound fees imposed by this
Article.
Section 210.150. Guard Dogs. [CC 1999 §4-48]
Section 210.160. Kennels. [CC 1999 §4-49]
There shall be no kennel within the City limits of Republic, Missouri, except
in areas authorized by the appropriate zoning classification.
Section 210.170. Number of Dogs or Cats Kept, Maintained or
Harbored in Residentially Zoned Districts. [Ord. No. 99-10 §§1 — 2
(4-50), 2-8-1999]
A. No person shall own, keep, harbor, maintain or allow to be upon any
premises occupied by him/her or under his/her charge or control any
guard dog (for the purposes of this Chapter here defined as a dog not
owned by a governmental unit which dog is professionally trained to
guard public or private property) without such dog being confined
behind a fence from which it cannot escape, or within any part of a
house or structure except when the windows are open or when screen
windows or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the dog from
exiting the structure; and must not be used or maintained in a manner
which, as determined by the Police Department, endangers individuals
on or off the premises guarded.
B. Any guard dog, including law enforcement dogs, used in the City by
virtue of such use is hereby declared to be subject to the license and
rabies vaccination requirements of this Chapter.
C. All guard dogs residing in or used as such in the City of Republic must
be registered annually with the City.
A. It shall be unlawful for the occupant or occupants of any dwelling unit
located in an area zoned "R-1" Single-Family Dwelling or "R-2" Duplex,
or any subclassifications of such zoning districts, to keep, maintain or
harbor more than four (4) dogs or cats over the age of six (6) months on
or about the lot or premises which comprises such dwelling unit.
B. It shall be unlawful for the occupant or occupants of any dwelling unit
located in an area zoned "R-3" Apartments (more than a duplex, multifamily),
or any subclassification thereof, to keep, maintain or harbor
more than two (2) dogs or cats over the age of six (6) months on or
about the premises which comprises such dwelling unit.
Section
210.140
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
210.170
AO:126
ARTICLE II
Impoundment
Section 210.180. Impoundment — Required of Animals At Large.
[CC 1999 §4-30]
Any animal found running at large may be impounded.
Section 210.190. Impoundment — Period — Disposition of Dogs and
Cats Unclaimed Within Impoundment Period. [CC 1999 §4-31; Ord.
No. 03-24 §1, 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 08-24 §1, 3-10-2008; Ord. No.
10-21 §1, 5-24-2010]
A. All dogs and cats impounded shall be kept in the custody of the Animal
Control Officer for a period of not less than one (1) week except that if
the owner can be discovered from the tags on the animal, he/she will be
notified prior to disposing of the animal. Those dogs and cats
impounded, not within the exception aforesaid, shall be fed, watered
and shielded from the elements in a manner acceptable to good
veterinary practice. During the one (1) week period, a dog or cat may be
released by the Animal Control Officer to any person who shall sign an
affidavit swearing such dog or cat is his/her personal property. The
Animal Control Officer shall, in addition, issue a summons to the owner
for a violation of Sections 210.020 or 210.180 and shall impose a
claiming fee of ten dollars ($10.00) and five dollars ($5.00) per day
boarding fee and shall require that the owner of the dog or cat fulfill the
registration-vaccination procedure before release, or that he/she carry
out the registration-vaccination procedure as set forth herein. At the
end of the one (1) week period, if the dog or cat has not been claimed as
provided in this Section, the Animal Control Officer is at liberty to
dispose of the dog or cat in any one (1) of the following ways:
1. Humane destruction by injection of any barbiturate drug.
2. Humane destruction by subjection to a carbon monoxide
environment.
3. Releasing the dog or cat to any person expressing a desire for any
given dog or cat after the animal has been kept in the custody of the
Animal Control Officer for the required period of time and after the
execution of a sterilization agreement regarding any such animal
and after the payment of a seventy dollar ($70.00) fee plus an
additional five dollars ($5.00) for micro-chip identification.
The adoption of any dog or cat by any person pursuant to the
provisions of this Subsection shall not be final until such time
as the animal is sterilized pursuant to the provisions of the
aforementioned sterilization agreement and the requirements of
Section 273.403, RSMo. The failure of any person to comply with
the provisions and requirements of said agreement and/or said
Section
210.180
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.190
AO:127
Section 210.200. Impoundment — Completion of Registration —
Vaccination Procedure Following Release. [CC 1999 §4-32; Ord. No.
07-46 §1, 7-9-2007]
When any dog or cat shall be released to the original or a new owner
which has not completed a valid vaccination procedure at the time or
prior to release, he/she shall within seven (7) days after release complete
the vaccination procedure and submit proof of vaccinations to the Animal
Control Officer of the City.
Section 210.210. Additional Fees Collectible. [CC 1999 §4-45]
In addition to all other fees, fines and costs imposed hereunder, the City is
hereby empowered to charge and collect all veterinary, boarding and other
expenses incurred by the impoundment of a dog or cat and to condition
the release of said animal on payment of said amount, which shall be
determined by the Animal Control Officer and/or Municipal Court. Failure of
the owner of said animal to pay said fees and costs within the one (1) week
period shall authorize the City to proceed with humane destruction of said
animal.
Section 210.220. Interfering With Impounded Animals. [CC 1999
§4-43]
It shall be unlawful for any person to release or attempt to release any
animal which is impounded in the City pound or which is in the custody of
Police or Animal Control Officer.
Statute shall result in custody and possession of such animal
reverting to the City of Republic.
4. Humane destruction in any other manner provided by State law.
5. Transfer to another animal shelter.
B. Any animal impounded pursuant to Section 210.180 or otherwise
coming into the custody of the City may be disposed of as provided for
in Subsection (A) if the animal is injured or ill and treatment of the
animal would be costly or require substantial efforts to achieve a
degree of successful treatment. If it is determined that the animal is
suffering to such a degree that a waiting period would be inhumane, the
animal may be disposed of immediately. If the suffering can be
minimized and responsibly controlled for a period of forty-eight (48)
hours, then the animal shall not be disposed of until forty-eight (48)
hours has passed unless the animal's owner waives the forty-eight (48)
hour waiting period.
Section
210.190
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
210.225
AO:128
Section 210.225. Tampering With Humane Traps, Cages, Animal
Carriers or Otherwise Interfering With The Duties of The Animal
Control Officer.
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, alter or otherwise
damage any trap, cage, animal carrier or other animal control equipment,
or fail to return such equipment after use in undamaged condition, or to
interfere with the Animal Control Officer in the performance of their duties.
Section
210.225
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.225
AO:129

ARTICLE III
Rabies Control
Section 210.230. Authority of Animal Control Officer To Quarantine
Animals. [CC 1999 §4-9]
Whenever the Animal Control Officer shall deem it necessary because of
the prevalence of rabies among the animal population of the City, County
or State, strict quarantine may be placed on all domestic animals in any
designated area of the City. This proclamation shall be construed to mean
that all domestic animals shall be confined in the owner's home, or in a
secure, indoor facility, under the direct physical control of a person at least
seventeen (17) years of age. Any domestic animal found otherwise during
such a quarantine shall be impounded or disposed of in a humane manner.
Section 210.240. Suspected Rabid Animals. [CC 1999 §4-11]
Section 210.250. Animals Exposed To Rabies. [CC 1999 §4-12]
Section 210.260. Report of Rabies. [CC 1999 §4-13]
All veterinarians in the City shall report at once all cases of clinical rabies
to the Animal Control Officer.
A. Any domestic animal which exhibits clinical symptoms suggestive of
rabies may be impounded at a veterinary clinic, licensed by the State,
and located within Greene County, for clinical observation for ten (10)
days. If after the observation period, the animal is alive it may be picked
up by the owner.
B. If such animal shall die during the observation period, regardless of the
location, the head shall be removed and submitted to a qualified official
laboratory for examination.
A. Any dog, cat or domestic animal which has been exposed to rabies
should be immediately destroyed, unless otherwise provided. If the
owner is unwilling to do this, one (1) of the following alternatives shall
be followed:
1. Strict isolation in a kennel or animal hospital for six (6) months and
vaccinate with Animal Rabies Vaccine licensed by the United States
Department of Agriculture and administered by a licensed
veterinarian if no previous vaccination has been given in the past
three (3) years.
2. If the animal exposed to rabies has been vaccinated against the
virus within the last three (3) years, the animal must be revaccinated
at once with Animal Rabies Vaccine licensed by the
United States Department of Agriculture and administered by a
licensed veterinarian, and be isolated and observed for ninety (90)
days.
Section
210.230
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.270
AO:131
Section 210.270. Biting Animals. [CC 1999 §4-14]
Disposition Generally. The owner of any dog or cat which bites any person,
regardless of the circumstances or whether the animal is vaccinated and
registered or not, shall be required to place the animal in a veterinary
hospital maintained by a licensed veterinarian for a period ten (10) days
following the evening of the day of the bite for clinical observation. All
expenses shall be borne by the owner of such animal. If such animal
develops symptoms suggestive of rabies, it shall be allowed to die a natural
death or if the animal should die while in confinement for any reason, the
head of such animal shall be removed by the veterinarian and submitted
to any qualified official laboratory. If at the end of the ten (10) day period
the animal is alive and healthy, it may be released to its owner. Only under
special circumstances to be specified by the Animal Control Officer shall an
animal be confined on the owner's or other premises for the ten (10) day
period.
Section 210.280. Delivery of Dogs or Cats To Animal Control Officer
Required. [CC 1999 §4-16]
No person shall refuse to deliver his/her dog or cat to the Animal Control
Officer when requested to do so under the provisions of this Chapter.
Section 210.290. Right of Entry of Animal Control Officer. [CC 1999
§4-17]
The Animal Control Officer or his/her duly appointed representative shall
have the right of entry to any property or premises for the purpose of
examining and impounding any dog or cat exposed to or exhibiting clinical
symptoms of rabies.
Section
210.270
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
210.290
AO:132
ARTICLE IV
Dangerous Dogs
Section 210.300. Owning, Possessing or Harboring A Dangerous
Dog. [CC 1999 §4-46; Ord. No. 07-73 §1, 11-13-2007; Ord. No. 10-48
§1, 11-8-2010]
A. It is unlawful and a violation of this Code for a person to own, possess or
harbor a dangerous dog, except as may be allowed in this Article. The
following is a non-exclusive enumeration of factors indicating that a dog
is dangerous if it:
1. Has inflicted a severe or fatal injury on a human being on public or
private property. "Severe injury" means any physical injury,
resulting directly from a dog's bite, which results in broken bones,
or lacerations requiring stitches, or in-patient hospitalization. The
victim receiving severe injuries, as defined above, must provide the
Animal Control Officer a signed physician's statement documenting
injury or sign an authorization for release of such statement.
2. Has killed or seriously injured a domestic animal, livestock or
poultry without provocation.
3. Is owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dog
fighting or any dog trained for dog fighting.
4. Has bitten a human being, without provocation, on public or
private property other than the property of the owner.
5. While on the owner's property has bitten, without provocation, a
human being other than the owner or a member of the owner's
family who normally resides at the place where the dog is kept.
6. When unprovoked, chases or approaches a person upon the streets,
sidewalks or any public grounds or private property other than that
property of the owner in a menacing fashion or apparent attitudes
of attack, regardless of whether or not a person is injured by said
dog.
7. Has a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
unprovoked, to cause injury, or to otherwise threaten the safety of
human beings or domestic animals.
8. Has, in the absence of a bite, displayed characteristics such as
habitually snapping, charging, growling or otherwise manifests a
disposition to bite, attack or injure any person or domestic animal
or pet, if afforded the opportunity, or if it causes any person to have
a reasonable fear of immediate serious physical injury.
B. A summons for violation of Subsection (A) may be issued by the Animal
Control Officer or other authorized City employee. During the pendency
of the charge the dog shall be confined as required by Section
Section
210.300
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.300
AO:133
210.300(J) after issuance of a notice to confine the dog. The notice may
be issued at the time of issuance of the summons or any time prior
to trial. Upon conviction, a penalty may be assessed pursuant to Code
Section 100.220 and the judge may enter an order consistent with Code
Section 210.320.
C. Without regard to whether or not a summons for violation of Subsection
(A) has been issued, the Animal Control Officer or such other person as
is authorized by the City Administrator may institute an administrative
hearing procedure by issuing written notice to the owner or possessor
of the dog that a hearing will be held to determine if the dog is a
dangerous dog.
D. The notice and order are to be delivered in person or may be delivered
by first class mail or posted on the property of the owner or possessor of
the dog in a conspicuous location.
E. The notice shall state that a hearing will be held to determine if the dog
should be declared a dangerous dog and the notice shall include a copy
of the requirements to be followed by an owner or possessor of a
dangerous dog as set forth in Section 210.310 and shall state that the
dog is to be confined pursuant to Subsection (J) during the pendency of
the hearing.
F. The notice shall state a date and time for hearing.
G. The notice shall set a hearing date at least five (5) working days from
the date of delivery of the notice. If the delivery is by first class mail or
posting, the delivery shall be presumed to have occurred on the third
(3rd) day after mailing or posting.
H. The hearing officer may continue the hearing for good cause shown.
I. The Municipal Court Judge may be appointed as the hearing officer.
J. Pending the outcome of such a hearing, the dog must be confined in
such a manner so as not to be a threat to any person. The confinement
may be on the owner's premises or with a licensed veterinarian. Failure
to confine the dog as required by this Section is a violation and is
punishable under this Code. Upon failure to confine the dog as
required, an emergency order of confinement may be sought from the
hearing officer or Municipal Court Judge and upon a determination that
the dog is not being confined and that the dog presents a threat to any
person, an order may be issued authorizing the dog to be taken into
custody by the City.
K. The hearing officer shall determine whether to declare the animal a
dangerous dog based upon evidence and testimony presented in any
hearing involving such animal.
L. In determining whether to declare the animal a dangerous dog, the
hearing officer shall consider all evidence presented by the animal's
Section
210.300
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
210.300
AO:134
owner, witnesses to any events described in Subsection (A) of this
Section, Animal Control personnel, Police or any other person
possessing information pertinent to such determination. If a dog is
declared dangerous, the hearing officer shall enter an appropriate
order that may include, but is not limited to, the conditions and
requirements in Code Section 210.310 and Subsections (N) and (O) of
this Section.
M. The hearing officer shall issue written findings within five (5) days after
the hearing. The owner or possessor of the animal found to be
dangerous shall be required to maintain the animal as herein provided
in this Section.
N. Exemptions To Dangerous Dog Classification.
1. With the exception of Subsection (A)(1), no dog may be declared
dangerous if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a
person who at the time was committing a willful trespass or other
tort upon the premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the dog
or was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or has, in
the past, been observed or reported to have teased, tormented,
abused or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to
commit a crime.
2. With the exception of Subsection (A)(1) an Animal Control Officer
may, because of extenuating circumstances, determine from the
investigation of an incident that an animal is not dangerous.
However, the owner or keeper, being responsible for said dog, may
be warned of the animal's tendencies and to take appropriate
action to prevent subsequent incidences. This, however, does not
exempt the owner or keeper from being cited for other animal
control ordinance violations.
3. Dogs owned by governmental or law enforcement agencies when
being used in the services of those agencies are exempt.
O. Actions To Be Taken For Public Safety Or For Dangerous Dogs Causing
Severe Or Fatal Injuries.
1. A dog responsible for an unprovoked severe or fatal attack shall be
humanely destroyed.
2. A dog responsible for a provoked severe or fatal attack should be
maintained as a dangerous dog unless the hearing officer
determines that it is necessary for the public safety and welfare for
the dog to be euthanized and in that event the hearing officer shall
so order and the Animal Control Officer shall execute the order.
P. The order of the hearing officer shall be considered the same as an
order of a Municipal Judge for purpose of enforcement of the order,
except no penalty provided for in Section 100.220 of the City Code shall
be imposed by the hearing officer. If the hearing officer is also a
Section
210.300
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.300
AO:135
Section 210.310. Owner Responsibility. [CC 1999 §4-47; Ord. No.
07-73 §2, 11-13-2007]
Municipal Judge, any charge being prosecuted for dangerous dog may
be consolidated with the administrative hearing. The Municipal Judge
may enter a judgment and sentence in the capacity of Municipal Judge
pursuant to Section 100.220 and may enter an appropriate
administrative order in the capacity of a hearing officer.
Q. The decision of the hearing officer shall be made in writing. Any person
aggrieved by an order of the hearing officer may appeal from the order
pursuant to the procedure set out in Code Section 430.090.
A. The following actions shall be required of owners or keepers of dogs
that have been declared dangerous dogs:
1. Any dangerous dog which bites or scratches a human, domestic
animal, livestock or poultry or any dog whose behavior immediately
prior to or during an incident resulting in a human, domestic
animal, livestock or poultry being bitten or scratched, which is
determined to be dangerous, shall be impounded for a ten (10) day
rabies quarantine at the municipal animal shelter or a veterinarian
clinic.
2. The owner or keeper shall notify the Police Department
immediately if a dangerous dog is loose, unconfined or missing, has
attacked another animal or has attacked a human being.
3. The owner or keeper shall notify the Police Department within
twenty four (24) hours if a dangerous dog has died or has been sold
or given away. If the dog has been sold or given away, the owner or
keeper shall provide the Police Department with the name, address
and telephone number of the new owner, and the new owner, if the
dog is kept within the City limits of Republic, must comply with the
requirements of this Article.
4. While on the owner's or keeper's property, a dangerous dog must
be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked
pen or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and
designed to prevent the animal from escaping. Such pen or
structure must have minimum dimensions of five (5) feet by ten
(10) feet and must have secure sides and a secure top. If it has no
bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded into the
ground no less than twelve (12) inches. The enclosure must also
provide protection from the elements for the dog. The enclosure,
when occupied by a dangerous dog, shall not be occupied by any
other animal. If the dangerous dog is a female with a litter of
puppies under three (3) months of age, the puppies may occupy the
same enclosure as the mother.
Section
210.300
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
210.310
AO:136
Section 210.320. Euthanization of Certain Dogs Under Certain
Conditions. [CC 1999 §4-22; Ord. No. 07-73 §3, 11-13-2007]
5. No dangerous dog may be kept on a porch, patio or in any part of a
house or structure that would allow the dog to exit such building on
its own volition. In addition, no such animal may be kept in a house
or structure when the windows are open or when screen windows
or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the dog from
exiting the structure.
6. The owner or keeper shall display a sign on his/her premises that
there is a dangerous dog on the property. This sign shall be visible
and capable of being read from the public highway or thoroughfare
from which the property is entered. In addition, a similar sign is
required to be posted on the kennel or pen or fenced yard of such
animal.
7. A dangerous dog may be off the owner's or keeper's premises if it is
muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash not
exceeding six (6) feet in length and under the control of a
responsible person. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will
not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration
but must prevent it from biting any person or animal.
8. All owners or keepers of dangerous dogs must within ten (10) days
of such declaration provide the Animal Control Officer two (2) color
photographs, one (1) showing the left profile, the other showing the
right profile of the animal clearly showing the color and
approximate size of the animal.
9. Any dangerous dog shall wear at all times a bright fluorescent
yellow collar with required tags attached so the dog can be
identified as a dangerous dog.
B. It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of a dangerous dog within
the City of Republic to fail to comply with requirements and conditions
set forth in this Article. Anyone found to be in violation of this Article
may be, in addition to other penalties provided by ordinance, subject to
immediate seizure and impoundment of the person's dog for a minimum
of ten (10) days or the time necessary for the owner or keeper to show
compliance with this Article, whichever is shorter.
A. If upon conviction under the terms of this Article the Municipal Court
Judge determines that it is necessary for the public safety and welfare
that the dog concerned be euthanized, the judge shall so order and the
Animal Control Officer shall execute the order of the court. If the judge
determines that the dog should not be euthanized, then the judge may
enter an order consistent with Section 210.310.
B. In addition to those fines and costs that may be imposed upon a
conviction by the Municipal Court Judge or in addition to the order that
Section
210.310
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.320
AO:137
may be entered by the hearing officer under this Article, an order may
be entered as a part of the judgment and sentence or administrative
order requiring the payment of any and all costs incurred by the City
including, but not limited to, the confinement of the dog during the
pendency of the proceedings.
Section
210.320
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
210.320
AO:138
ARTICLE V
Animals and Fowl
Section 210.330. Keeping Livestock Within City. [CC 1999 §16-22;
Ord. No. 4735; Ord. No. 07-40 §1, 6-11-2007; Ord. No. 11-07 §2,
4-11-2011]
Section 210.333. Keeping Service Animals Within City. [Ord. No.
07-40 §1, 6-11-2007]
Notwithstanding Code Section 210.330, a trained service animal as defined
in the Americans with Disabilities Act may be kept in the City so long as
the keeping of animal does not create a nuisance as defined by this Code or
State law.
Section 210.340. (Reserved)14
A. No person shall keep a cow, bull, mule, jack, horse, goat, swine or sheep
on property for which the boundary fence enclosing such animal or
animals is within one hundred (100) feet of a church, a school, a
dwelling house of or a place of business of another person.
B. No person shall keep more than one (1) cow, bull, jack, horse, goat or
sheep or any combination of such animals in an outdoor enclosure or
pasture, unless such enclosure or pasture shall have an area of twentyone
thousand seven hundred eighty (21,780) square feet for each of
such animals (one-half (½) acre); provided, that this area requirement
shall not apply to the keeping of suckling offspring of a cow or mare.
C. All persons having above-mentioned animals on their property at the
date of this Article (October 12, 1970) shall be exempt from its
jurisdiction unless the original number of animals has been increased
or changed.
D. No person shall keep geese, ducks, chickens, turkeys or other fowl on
property for which the boundary fence enclosing such animal or
animals is within eighty (80) feet of a church, a school, a dwelling house
of or a place of business of another person. All persons having fowl on
their property in conflict with this Section as of the date of adoption
shall be exempt therefrom unless the number of fowl is increased or the
activity ceases for a period of sixty (60) calendar days.
E. All animals are prohibited from running at large within the limits of the
City other than on the premises of the owner thereof.
14.Editor's Note — Ord. no. 11-07 §3, adopted April 11, 2011, repealed section 210.340
"domestic animals generally — running at large prohibited" in its entirety. Provisions
concerning running at large other than on the owner's premise are now contained in
section 210.330(E). Former section 210.340 derived from CC 1999 §4-4.
Section
210.330
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.350
AO:139
Section 210.350. Turning Animals Loose For Purpose of
Impoundment Prohibited. [CC 1999 §4-6]
No person shall turn loose or cause to be turned loose from any pen or
enclosure any animal for the purpose of causing the same to be impounded.
Section 210.360. Dangerous Animals — Prohibiting The Keeping or
Harboring Thereof. [CC 1999 §4-51]
Section 210.370. Animal Neglect or Abandonment.
A. The keeping or harboring of dangerous animals, other than dogs, within
the City is hereby prohibited. Other than as provided herein, the Animal
Control Officer shall have the authority and responsibility to declare an
animal dangerous because of past behavior, violations, potential spread
of zoonotic disease or the inherently dangerous nature of the animal to
persons. Such declaration shall be made in writing and shall include the
date and reasons for the declaration. Upon request, the Animal Control
Officer shall provide a copy of the written declaration to the requesting
person. Such declaration shall be grounds for the impoundment and
destruction of any such animal unless, without danger to the public,
such animal can be, and is, removed from the City within forty-eight
(48) hours after being declared dangerous. If such animal is found
again in the City limits, it will be immediately seized and promptly
destroyed or disposed of in some other manner as permitted by law
including, but not limited to, giving such animal to a licensed refuge or
zoo.
B. With the exception of insectivorous animals, it is unlawful to keep or
harbor any carnivorous or omnivorous animal including, but not limited
to, non-human primates; all non-domestic cats, including bobcats and
lynx, ocelots, mountain lions, tigers, panthers, lions or any wild/
domestic cat hybrids; wolves; wolf/dog hybrids with any percent of wolf
percentage; raccoons; skunks; foxes; poisonous snakes; crocodiles;
alligators; caimans; emu; eagles; hawks or other large fowl. This Article
does not apply to domestic livestock, small fowl, domestic dogs,
domestic cats and small rodents of varieties used for laboratory
purposes. Snakes shall be kept in locked escape-proof cages, except
when being handled. It shall be a violation of this Article for an owner,
keeper, harborer or handler to permit a snake or lizard to escape.
C. Notwithstanding any other provision hereof to the contrary, the City
Council may allow special events in which these prohibited animals are
displayed after holding hearings to ensure the safety of such display.
A. A person is guilty of animal neglect when he/she has custody or
ownership or both of an animal and fails to provide adequate care or
adequate control which results in substantial harm to the animal.
Section
210.350
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
210.370
AO:140
Section 210.380. Animal Abuse.15
B. A person is guilty of animal abandonment when he/she has knowingly
abandoned an animal in any place without making provisions for its
adequate care.
C. Animal neglect or animal abandonment are ordinance violations. For a
first (1st) offense of either violation, a term of imprisonment, not to
exceed fifteen (15) days or a fine, not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00), or both such fine and imprisonment may be imposed. For a
second (2nd) or subsequent violation of either offense, a term of
imprisonment, not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days or a fine,
not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or both such fine and
imprisonment may be imposed. All fines and penalties for a first (1st)
conviction of animal neglect or animal abandonment may be waived by
the court provided that the person found guilty of animal neglect or
abandonment shows that adequate, permanent remedies for the
neglect or abandonment have been made. Reasonable costs incurred
for the care and maintenance of neglected or abandoned animals may
not be waived.
D. In addition to any other penalty imposed by this Section, the court may
order a person found guilty of animal neglect or animal abandonment to
pay all reasonable costs and expenses necessary for:
1. The care and maintenance of neglected or abandoned animals
within the person's custody or ownership;
2. The disposal of any dead or diseased animals within the person's
custody or ownership;
3. The reduction of resulting organic debris affecting the immediate
area of the neglect or abandonment; and
4. The avoidance or minimization of any public health risks created by
the neglect or abandonment of the animals.
A. A person is guilty of animal abuse when a person:
1. Intentionally or purposely kills an animal in any manner not
allowed by or expressly exempted from the provisions of Sections
578.005 to 578.023 and 273.030, RSMo.;
2. Purposely or intentionally causes injury or suffering to an animal;
or
3. Having ownership or custody of an animal knowingly fails to
provide adequate care or adequate control.
B. For purposes of this Section, "animal" shall be defined as a mammal.
15.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
210.370
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.390
AO:141
Section 210.390. Fighting, Baiting, Keeping, Using, Etc., Bulls,
Bears, Dogs, Etc., Prohibited. [CC 1999 §16-4; R.O. 1916 §456]
No person shall keep or use or in any way be connected with, or interested
in the management of, or shall receive any money for the admission of any
person to any place kept or used for the purpose of fighting or baiting any
bull, bear, dog, cock or other creature, and no person shall encourage, aid
or assist or be present at such fighting or baiting, or shall permit or suffer
any place belonging to him/her, or under his/her control, to be so kept or
used.
Section
210.390
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
210.390
AO:142
ARTICLE VI
Animal Exhibit or Establishment
Section 210.400. Permit Required.
Section 210.410. License and Permit Issuance and Revocation.
A. No person, partnership, owner or occupier of property inside the City of
Republic shall permit or operate an animal exhibit or establishment
more than seven (7) days per calendar year without first obtaining a
permit in compliance with this Article. Permits must be renewed
annually, and posted in such a location at the physical site of the
establishment or exhibit that it can be clearly viewed.
B. Animal Control shall promulgate regulations for the issuance of permits
relating to animal exhibits or establishments and shall include
requirements for the humane care of all animals and for the compliance
with provisions of this Article and all other applicable State and Federal
laws. Animal Control may amend such regulations from time to time as
deemed desirable for public health and welfare and for the protection of
animals. Requirements for animal exhibits/establishments shall be
provided to all applicants with the permit application packet, and such
requirements will be updated annually in accordance with State and
Federal regulations.
C. When a permit applicant has shown that he/she is in compliance with
the regulations, a permit shall be issued.
D. The permit period shall begin January first (1st) and shall run for one
(1) year. Renewal applications for permits shall be made thirty (30) days
prior to, and up to sixty (60) days after January first (1st). Application to
establish a new animal exhibit or establishment under the provisions of
this Article may be made at any time.
E. If there is a change in ownership of an animal establishment or exhibit,
the new owner must provide within thirty (30) days, updated
information to the City of Republic, and receive an amended permit for
the duration of the remaining year.
F. Every facility regulated by this Article shall be considered a separate
enterprise/location requiring an individual permit.
G. All facilities shall be in compliance with Zoning, Building, Fire, Health
and other current Codes as adopted by the City of Republic.
H. Failure to obtain a permit before opening any facility or exhibit covered
in this Section shall be considered in violation, establishments and/or
exhibits may be ordered to cease activity and remove all live animals
from within the City of Republic until such permit is obtained.
A. After application is filed, Animal Control shall inspect the facility prior
to issuing the permit. The City of Republic may revoke the permit if the
Section
210.400
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
210.410
AO:143
person holding or applying for the permit refuses or fails to comply with
this Article, the regulations promulgated by the City, Animal Control, or
any laws governing the protection and keeping of animals.
B. Any person whose permit is revoked shall, within ten (10) days
thereafter cease activity and remove all live animals from within the
City of Republic, humanely dispose of, or make suitable arrangements
for all animals owned, kept or harbored within the City limits.
C. It shall be a condition of the issuance of any permit that City Officials/
Animal Control shall be permitted to inspect all the premises where
animals are kept at any time, and shall, if permission for such
inspection is refused, revoke the permit of the refusing owner.
D. If the applicant had withheld or falsified any information on the
application, the City of Republic shall refuse to issue or renew a permit,
or will revoke an existing permit.
E. No person who has been convicted of abuse, neglect, cruelty or
abandonment of animals in any City, County or State shall be issued a
permit to operate an animal establishment/exhibit within the City of
Republic.
F. Any person having been denied a permit may not reapply for a period of
thirty (30) days.
Section
210.410
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
210.410
AO:144
Chapter 212
SPECIAL EVENTS
Section 212.001. Permit Required. [Ord. No. 11-08 §1, 4-25-2011]
Any special event held within the City of Republic shall require a special
event permit and is subject to the terms and conditions of the approved
plan. Obtaining a special event permit shall not relieve the applicant of
the need to obtain all permits and authorizations necessary to comply with
Federal, State and local rules and regulations including applicable zoning
requirements. Failure to obtain required authorizations and permits may
result in the denial of or suspension of the permit.
Section 212.003. Definitions. [Ord. No. 11-08 §1, 4-25-2011]
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have these prescribed
meanings:
MUNICIPAL SERVICES — Services typically provided by Police, Fire, EMS,
public works, parks, or other City department related to public health and
safety.
SPECIAL EVENT — Any public or private event held within the corporate
limits of the City whether on public or private property that is reasonably
expected to have more than a minimal impact on municipal services as
determined by the City and that is in the category of events such as
concerts, carnivals, fairs, festivals, or similar events, parades, rallies,
sporting events, or events that by their nature will have significant impact
on municipal services. No special event permit is required for an event
authorized by City Council or by a City department for which the City is
a primary sponsor or a governmental event approved by City Council or
regularly scheduled public school activities or school events.
SPECIAL EVENT COMMITTEE — The committee shall be composed of
a department representative from Police, fire, parks, community
development, public works and the City Clerk office.[Ord. No. 16-23 § 1,
11-28-2016]
Section 212.005. Submission of Special Events Application. [Ord.
No. 11-08 §1, 4-25-2011]
A. An application for a special events permit must be filed with the City at
least thirty (30) days prior to the event. Late applications will be
subjected to a late fee and may be denied due to inadequate time to
prepare City services for the event.
B. The City is to notify the applicant within four (4) business days if it is
determined that the proposed event does not require a special event
permit.
Section
210.410
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
212.007
AO:145
Section 212.007. Plan Review Meeting Notification To Applicant.
[Ord. No. 11-08 §1, 4-25-2011]
Section 212.009. Terms and Conditions. [Ord. No. 11-08 §1,
4-25-2011]
A. A planning meeting is to be held and the applicant may be required to
submit information in addition to that contained in the application,
including a site plan and a tentative schedule of events at least five (5)
days prior to the planning meeting.
B. The Special Events Committee shall adopt such policies as are deemed
necessary to enforce this Chapter so as to assure that public health and
safety needs are met and to ensure the best interests of the City are
met. The policy shall be placed on file with the City Clerk and shall be
used in developing a written plan for the event.
C. The Committee may determine at the planning meeting that a special
event permit is not needed. If, however, a special event permit is
required, a plan will be developed to determine municipal services
needed before issuance of the event permit.
D. The plan for a special event shall address:
1. Public health and safety needs including traffic flow, security,
bathroom facilities, parking, street closure, emergency access,
cleanup, trash service, display or structure integrity, safety
inspections, City staff/event personnel communications.
2. The establishment of reasonable days and hours of operation and a
determination that the City can adequately manage City services
for the event.
3. The impact of and reasonableness of an event that is recurring
throughout the year and any special needs or conditions due to the
recurring nature of the event.
4. Any other City authorizations or permits that must be obtained by
the applicant(s) before the first (1st) day of the event.
5. Event permit fees including late submission fees and the amount of
the security bond or letter of credit required pursuant to Section
212.015 herein.
A. The City may deny a special event permit if it is determined that the
activity will adversely impact neighboring businesses or residents,
impose a safety hazard, create a noise disturbance that is not
appropriate for the location, place the City in a position of contingent
liability, or overextends the City's ability to provide services.
B. The City may initiate safety and/or compliance inspections by the
Building or Fire Departments during the special event.
Section
212.007
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
212.011
AO:146
Section 212.011. Notifications and Appeals. [Ord. No. 11-08 §1,
4-25-2011]
Section 212.013. Special Event Permit — Fee/Issuance. [Ord. No.
11-08 §1, 4-25-2011]
The City will issue a permit upon approval of the Special Event Committee
and conditioned upon applicant(s) compliance with the terms established in
the plan and payment of the permit fee(s).
Section 212.015. Performance Bond — Security For Damage To
Public Property. [Ord. No. 11-08 §1, 4-25-2011]
Security in the form of a performance bond or letter of credit conditioned
to secure restoration of any public property damaged and to assure proper
cleanup of public property may be required. The unused security will be
released upon payment for cleanup and property damage.
Section 212.017. Indemnification/ Insurance. [Ord. No. 11-08 §1,
4-25-2011]
Prior to the issuance of a special event permit the applicant(s) shall execute
an indemnification agreement and provide proof of liability insurance in an
amount acceptable to the City. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to
effect in any way the City's rights, privileges and immunities as set forth in
Missouri law.
Section 212.019. City Services For The Special Event. [Ord. No.
11-08 §1, 4-25-2011; Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
Unless otherwise stated in the plan, Republic Police, Fire, EMS, community
development, and public works staff shall be the sole providers of their
respective services.
A. The special event applicant(s) shall be notified of event approval, or
disapproval and of plan conditions within live (5) business days after
the planning meeting.
B. Non-compliance with the terms and conditions of a permit and/or plan
or unsafe conditions may result in suspension of the event. A verbal
warning may be given followed by a written suspension order if there is
failure to come into compliance.
C. A permit denial will be in writing with the reason(s) for denial stated.
The applicant(s) may, in writing, appeal the decision to the City
Administrator within five (5) days. The City Administrator will render a
final decision in writing within seven (7) business days of receipt of the
appeal.
D. If an event is not approved, the City shall not be responsible or any
costs incurred by the event applicant(s).
Section
212.011
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
212.021
AO:147
Section 212.021. Temporary Signs/ Banners. [Ord. No. 11-08 §1,
4-25-2011]
Temporary advertisement banners may be erected as approved in the plan
for the duration of the special event only. Event parking signs may be placed
at approved parking areas during the duration of the event. The applicant(s)
is responsible for obtaining permission from the property owner for sign
placement.
Section 212.023. Fee Schedule. [Ord. No. 11-08 §1, 4-25-2011]
Application fee: N/C.
Vendor permit fee: N/C.
Late fee (additional): $25.00
The City Council may by ordinance establish such other fees as deemed
appropriate to recover cost for use of City equipment and personnel for a
special event.
Section 212.025. Penalty. [Ord. No. 11-08 §1, 4-25-2011]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter or the plan
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided by the
provisions of Section 100.220.
Chapter 215
OFFENSES
Section
212.021
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
212.025
AO:148
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 215.010. Definitions.
In this Chapter, unless the context requires a different definition, the
following shall apply:
ACCESS — To instruct, communicate with, store data in, retrieve or extract
data from, or otherwise make any use of any resources of, a computer,
computer system, or computer network.
AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE —
BURDEN OF INJECTING THE ISSUE —
COMMERCIAL FILM AND PHOTOGRAPHIC PRINT PROCESSOR — Any
person who develops exposed photographic film into negatives, slides or
prints, or who makes prints from negatives or slides, for compensation. The
term commercial film and photographic print processor shall include all
employees of such persons but shall not include a person who develops film
or makes prints for a public agency.
COMPUTER — The box that houses the central processing unit (CPU), along
with any internal storage devices, such as internal hard drives, and internal
communication devices, such as internal modems capable of sending or
receiving electronic mail or fax cards, along with any other hardware stored
or housed internally. Thus, "computer" refers to hardware, software and
data contained in the main unit. Printers, external modems attached by
cable to the main unit, monitors, and other external attachments will be
referred to collectively as "peripherals" and discussed individually when
appropriate. When the computer and all peripherals are referred to as a
package, the term "computer system" is used. "Information" refers to all the
information on a computer system, including both software applications and
data.
COMPUTER EQUIPMENT — Computers, terminals, data storage devices,
and all other computer hardware associated with a computer system or
network.
COMPUTER HARDWARE — All equipment which can collect, analyze,
create, display, convert, store, conceal or transmit electronic, magnetic,
optical or similar computer impulses or data. "Hardware" includes, but is
The defense referred to is not submitted to the trier of fact unless
supported by evidence; and
1.
If the defense is submitted to the trier of fact the defendant has the
burden of persuasion that the defense is more probably true than not.
2.
The issue referred to is not submitted to the trier of fact unless
supported by evidence; and
1.
If the issue is submitted to the trier of fact any reasonable doubt on the
issue requires a finding for the defendant on that issue.
2.
Section
215.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.010
AO:149
not limited to, any data processing devices, such as central processing
units, memory typewriters and self-contained laptop or notebook
computers; internal and peripheral storage devices, transistor-like binary
devices and other memory storage devices, such as floppy disks, removable
disks, compact disks, digital video disks, magnetic tape, hard drive, optical
disks and digital memory; local area networks, such as two (2) or more
computers connected together to a central computer server via cable or
modem; peripheral input or output devices, such as keyboards, printers,
scanners, plotters, video display monitors and optical readers; and related
communication devices, such as modems, cables and connections,
recording equipment, RAM or ROM units, acoustic couplers, automatic
dialers, speed dialers, programmable telephone dialing or signaling devices
and electronic tone-generating devices; as well as any devices, mechanisms
or parts that can be used to restrict access to computer hardware, such as
physical keys and locks.
COMPUTER NETWORK — Two (2) or more interconnected computers or
computer systems.
COMPUTER PROGRAM — A set of instructions, statements, or related data
that directs or is intended to direct a computer to perform certain functions.
COMPUTER SOFTWARE — Digital information which can be interpreted
by a computer and any of its related components to direct the way they
work. Software is stored in electronic, magnetic, optical or other digital
form. The term commonly includes programs to run operating systems and
applications, such as word processing, graphic, or spreadsheet programs,
utilities, compilers, interpreters and communications programs.
COMPUTER SYSTEM — A set of related, connected or unconnected,
computer equipment, data, or software.
COMPUTER-RELATED DOCUMENTATION — Written, recorded, printed or
electronically stored material which explains or illustrates how to configure
or use computer hardware, software or other related items.
CONFINEMENT —
A person is in confinement when such person is held in a place of
confinement pursuant to arrest or order of a court and remains in
confinement until:
a. A court orders the person's release; or
The person is released on bail, bond or recognizance, personal or
otherwise; or
b.
A public servant having the legal power and duty to confine the
person authorizes his/her release without guard and without
condition that he/she return to confinement.
c.
1.
A person is not in confinement if:
a. The person is on probation or parole, temporary or otherwise; or
2.
Section
215.010
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.010
AO:150
CONSENT — Consent or lack of consent may be expressed or implied.
Assent does not constitute consent if:
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — A drug, substance, or immediate precursor
in Schedules I through V as defined in Chapter 195, RSMo.
CRIMINAL NEGLIGENCE — Failure to be aware of a substantial and
unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or a result will follow, and such
failure constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care which a
reasonable person would exercise in the situation.
CUSTODY — A person is in custody when he/she has been arrested but has
not been delivered to a place of confinement.
DAMAGE — When used in relation to a computer system or network, means
any alteration, deletion, or destruction of any part of the computer system
or network.
DANGEROUS FELONY — The felonies of arson in the first degree, assault in
the first degree, attempted rape in the first degree if physical injury results,
attempted forcible rape if physical injury results, attempted sodomy in the
first degree if physical injury results, attempted forcible sodomy if physical
injury results, rape in the first degree, forcible rape, sodomy in the first
degree, forcible sodomy, assault in the second degree if the victim of such
assault is a special victim as defined in Subdivision (14) of Section 565.002,
RSMo., kidnapping in the first degree, kidnapping, murder in the second
degree, assault of a Law Enforcement Officer in the first degree, domestic
assault in the first degree, elder abuse in the first degree, robbery in the
first degree, statutory rape in the first degree when the victim is a child
less than twelve (12) years of age at the time of the commission of the
act giving rise to the offense, statutory sodomy in the first degree when
the victim is a child less than twelve (12) years of age at the time of the
commission of the act giving rise to the offense, child molestation in the first
or second degree, abuse of a child if the child dies as a result of injuries
sustained from conduct chargeable under Section 568.060, RSMo., child
The person is under sentence to serve a term of confinement which
is not continuous, or is serving a sentence under a work-release
program, and in either such case is not being held in a place of
confinement or is not being held under guard by a person having
the legal power and duty to transport the person to or from a place
of confinement.
b.
It is given by a person who lacks the mental capacity to authorize the
conduct charged to constitute the offense and such mental incapacity is
manifest or known to the actor; or
1.
It is given by a person who by reason of youth, mental disease or defect,
intoxication, a drug-induced state, or any other reason is manifestly
unable or known by the actor to be unable to make a reasonable
judgment as to the nature or harmfulness of the conduct charged to
constitute the offense; or
2.
3. It is induced by force, duress or deception.
Section
215.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.010
AO:151
kidnapping, parental kidnapping committed by detaining or concealing the
whereabouts of the child for not less than one hundred twenty (120) days
under Section 565.153, RSMo., and an "intoxication-related traffic offense"
or "intoxication-related boating offense" if the person is found to be an
"habitual offender" or "habitual boating offender" as such terms are defined
in Section 577.001, RSMo.
DANGEROUS INSTRUMENT — Any instrument, article or substance which,
under the circumstances in which it is used, is readily capable of causing
death or other serious physical injury.
DATA — A representation of information, facts, knowledge, concepts, or
instructions prepared in a formalized or other manner and intended for use
in a computer or computer network. Data may be in any form including,
but not limited to, printouts, microfiche, magnetic storage media, punched
cards and as may be stored in the memory of a computer.
DEADLY WEAPON — Any firearm, loaded or unloaded, or any weapon from
which a shot, readily capable of producing death or serious physical injury,
may be discharged; or a switchblade knife, dagger, billy club, blackjack or
metal knuckles.
DIGITAL CAMERA — A camera that records images in a format which
enables the images to be downloaded into a computer.
DISABILITY — A mental, physical, or developmental impairment that
substantially limits one (1) or more major life activities or the ability to
provide adequately for one's care or protection, whether the impairment
is congenital or acquired by accident, injury or disease, where such
impairment is verified by medical findings.
ELDERLY PERSON — A person sixty (60) years of age or older.
FELONY — An offense so designated or an offense for which persons found
guilty thereof may be sentenced to death or imprisonment for a term of
more than one (1) year.
FORCIBLE COMPULSION — Either:
INCAPACITATED — A temporary or permanent physical or mental condition
in which a person is unconscious, unable to appraise the nature of his/her
conduct, or unable to communicate unwillingness to an act.
INFRACTION — A violation defined by this Code or by any other Statute of
this state if it is so designated or if no sentence other than a fine, or fine and
forfeiture or other civil penalty, is authorized upon conviction.
INHABITABLE STRUCTURE —
1. Physical force that overcomes reasonable resistance; or
A threat, express or implied, that places a person in reasonable fear of
death, serious physical injury, or kidnapping of such person or another
person.
2.
1. A vehicle, vessel or structure:
Section
215.010
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.010
AO:152
KNOWINGLY —
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any public servant having both the
power and duty to make arrests for violations of the laws of this State, and
Federal Law Enforcement Officers authorized to carry firearms and to make
arrests for violations of the laws of the United States.
MISDEMEANOR — An offense so designated or an offense for which
persons found guilty thereof may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term
of which the maximum is one (1) year or less.
OF ANOTHER — Property that any entity, including but not limited to
any natural person, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, governmental subdivision or instrumentality, other than the
actor, has a possessory or proprietary interest therein, except that property
shall not be deemed property of another who has only a security interest
therein, even if legal title is in the creditor pursuant to a conditional sales
contract or other security arrangement.
OFFENSE — Any felony, ordinance violation, misdemeanor or infraction.
PHYSICAL INJURY — Slight impairment of any function of the body or
temporary loss of use of any part of the body.
PLACE OF CONFINEMENT — Any building or facility and the grounds
thereof wherein a court is legally authorized to order that a person charged
with or convicted of a crime be held.
POSSESS or POSSESSED — Having actual or constructive possession of
an object with knowledge of its presence. A person has actual possession
if such person has the object on his/her person or within easy reach and
convenient control. A person has constructive possession if such person
has the power and the intention at a given time to exercise dominion or
control over the object either directly or through another person or persons.
Possession may also be sole or joint. If one (1) person alone has possession
a. Where any person lives or carries on business or other calling; or
Where people assemble for purposes of business, government,
education, religion, entertainment, or public transportation; or
b.
c. Which is used for overnight accommodation of persons.
Any such vehicle, vessel, or structure is inhabitable regardless of
whether a person is actually present.
2.
If a building or structure is divided into separately occupied units, any
unit not occupied by the actor is an inhabitable structure of another.
3.
When used with respect to conduct or attendant circumstances, means
a person is aware of the nature of his or her conduct or that those
circumstances exist; or
1.
When used with respect to a result of conduct, means a person is aware
that his or her conduct is practically certain to cause that result.
2.
Section
215.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.010
AO:153
of an object, possession is sole. If two (2) or more persons share possession
of an object, possession is joint.
PROPERTY — Anything of value, whether real or personal, tangible or
intangible, in possession or in action.
PUBLIC SERVANT — Any person employed in any way by a government
of this State who is compensated by the government by reason of such
person's employment, any person appointed to a position with any
government of this State, or any person elected to a position with any
government of this State. It includes, but is not limited to, legislators,
jurors, members of the judiciary and Law Enforcement Officers. It does not
include witnesses.
PURPOSELY — When used with respect to a person's conduct or to a result
thereof, means when it is his/her conscious object to engage in that conduct
or to cause that result.
RECKLESSLY — Consciously disregarding a substantial and unjustifiable
risk that circumstances exist or that a result will follow, and such disregard
constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care which a reasonable
person would exercise in the situation.
SERIOUS EMOTIONAL INJURY — An injury that creates a substantial risk
of temporary or permanent medical or psychological damage, manifested
by impairment of a behavioral, cognitive or physical condition. Serious
emotional injury shall be established by testimony of qualified experts upon
the reasonable expectation of probable harm to a reasonable degree of
medical or psychological certainty.
SERIOUS PHYSICAL INJURY — Physical injury that creates a substantial
risk of death or that causes serious disfigurement or protracted loss or
impairment of the function of any part of the body.
SERVICES — When used in relation to a computer system or network,
means use of a computer, computer system, or computer network and
includes, but is not limited to, computer time, data processing, and storage
or retrieval functions.
SEXUAL ORIENTATION — Male or female heterosexuality, homosexuality
or bisexuality by inclination, practice, identity or expression, or having a
self-image or identity not traditionally associated with one's gender.
SPECIAL VICTIM — Any of the following:
A Law Enforcement Officer assaulted in the performance of his or her
official duties or as a direct result of such official duties;
1.
Emergency personnel, any paid or volunteer firefighter, emergency
room or trauma center personnel, or emergency medical technician,
assaulted in the performance of his or her official duties or as a direct
result of such official duties;
2.
A probation and parole officer assaulted in the performance of his/her
official duties or as a direct result of such official duties;
3.
Section
215.010
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.010
AO:154
VEHICLE — A self-propelled mechanical device designed to carry a person
or persons, excluding vessels or aircraft.
VESSEL — Any boat or craft propelled by a motor or by machinery, whether
or not such motor or machinery is a principal source of propulsion used or
capable of being used as a means of transportation on water, or any boat or
craft more than twelve (12) feet in length which is powered by sail alone or
by a combination of sail and machinery, and used or capable of being used
as a means of transportation on water, but not any boat or craft having, as
the only means of propulsion, a paddle or oars.
VOLUNTARY ACT —
4. An elderly person;
5. A person with a disability;
6. A vulnerable person;
Any jailer or corrections officer of the State or one (1) of its political
subdivisions assaulted in the performance of his/her official duties or as
a direct result of such official duties;
7.
A highway worker in a construction or work zone as the terms "highway
worker," "construction zone" and "work zone" are defined under Section
304.580, RSMo.;
8.
Any utility worker, meaning any employee of a utility that provides gas,
heat, electricity, water, steam, telecommunications services, or sewer
services, whether privately, municipally, or cooperatively owned, while
in the performance of his/her job duties, including any person employed
under a contract;
9.
Any cable worker, meaning any employee of a cable operator, as such
term is defined in Section 67.2677, RSMo., including any person
employed under contract, while in the performance of his/her job
duties; and
10.
Any employee of a mass transit system, including any employee of
public bus or light rail companies, while in the performance of his/her
job duties.
11.
A bodily movement performed while conscious as a result of effort or
determination. Possession is a voluntary act if the possessor knowingly
procures or receives the thing possessed, or having acquired control of
it was aware of his/her control for a sufficient time to have enabled him
or her to dispose of it or terminate his/her control; or
1.
An omission to perform an act of which the actor is physically capable.
A person is not guilty of an offense based solely upon an omission
to perform an act unless the law defining the offense expressly so
provides, or a duty to perform the omitted act is otherwise imposed by
law.
2.
Section
215.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.010
AO:155
VULNERABLE PERSON — Any person in the custody, care, or control of the
Department of Mental Health who is receiving services from an operated,
funded, licensed, or certified program.
Section 215.020. Attempt.
Section 215.030. Conspiracy.16
A. Guilt for an offense may be based upon an attempt to commit an offense
if, with the purpose of committing the offense, a person performs any
act which is a substantial step towards the commission of the offense. A
"substantial step" is conduct which is strongly corroborative of the
firmness of the actor's purpose to complete the commission of the
offense.
B. It is no defense to a prosecution under this Section that the offense
attempted was, under the actual attendant circumstances, factually or
legally impossible of commission, if such offense could have been
committed had the attendant circumstances been as the actor believed
them to be.
A. Guilt for an offense may be based upon a conspiracy to commit an
offense when a person, with the purpose of promoting or facilitating the
commission of an offense, agrees with another person or persons that
they or one or more of them will engage in conduct which constitutes
such offense.
B. It is no defense to a prosecution for conspiring to commit an offense
that a person, who knows that a person with whom he or she conspires
to commit an offense has conspired with another person or persons to
commit the same offense, does not know the identity of such other
person or persons.
C. If a person conspires to commit a number of offenses, he or she can be
found guilty of only one offense so long as such multiple offenses are
the object of the same agreement.
D. No person may be convicted of an offense based upon a conspiracy to
commit an offense unless an overt act in pursuance of such conspiracy
is alleged and proved to have been done by him or her or by a person
with whom he or she conspired.
E. Exceptions.
1. No person shall be convicted of an offense based upon a conspiracy
to commit an offense if, after conspiring to commit the offense, he/
she prevented the accomplishment of the objectives of the
conspiracy under circumstances manifesting a renunciation of his/
her criminal purpose.
16.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.010
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.030
AO:156
Section 215.040. through Section 215.110. (Reserved)
2. The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of
renunciation of criminal purpose under Subsection (E)(1).
F. For the purpose of time limitations on prosecutions:
1. A conspiracy to commit an offense is a continuing course of conduct
which terminates when the offense or offenses which are its object
are committed or the agreement that they be committed is
abandoned by the defendant and by those with whom he or she
conspired;
2. If an individual abandons the agreement, the conspiracy is
terminated as to him/her only if he/she advises those with whom he/
she has conspired of his/her abandonment or he/she informs the
law enforcement authorities of the existence of the conspiracy and
of his/her participation in it.
G. A person shall not be charged, convicted or sentenced on the basis of
the same course of conduct of both the actual commission of an offense
and a conspiracy to commit that offense.
Section
215.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.040
AO:157

ARTICLE II
Offenses Against the Person
Section 215.120. Assault.17
Section 215.130. Domestic Assault.18
A. A person commits the offense of assault if:
1. The person attempts to cause or recklessly causes physical injury,
physical pain or illness to another person;
2. With criminal negligence the person causes physical injury to
another person by means of a firearm;
3. The person purposely places another person in apprehension of
immediate physical injury;
4. The person recklessly engages in conduct which creates a
substantial risk of death or serious physical injury to another
person;
5. The person knowingly causes or attempts to cause physical contact
with a person with a disability, which a reasonable person, who
does not have a disability, would consider offensive or provocative;
or
6. The person knowingly causes physical contact with another person
knowing the other person will regard the contact as offensive or
provocative.
A. A person commits the offense of domestic assault if the act involves a
domestic victim, as the term "domestic victim" is defined under Section
565.002, RSMo., and:
1. The person attempts to cause or recklessly causes physical injury,
physical pain, or illness to such domestic victim;
2. With criminal negligence the person causes physical injury to such
domestic victim by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous
instrument;
3. The person purposely places such domestic victim in apprehension
of immediate physical injury by any means;
4. The person recklessly engages in conduct which creates a
substantial risk of death or serious physical injury to such domestic
victim;
17.Editor's Note: As to assault of certain other persons, see the definition of "special victim"
as set out in Section 215.010 of this Chapter.
18.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.130
AO:159
Section 215.140. (Reserved)19
Section 215.150. Harassment.
A person commits the offense of harassment if he/she, without good cause,
engages in any act with the purpose to cause emotional distress to another
person.
Section 215.160. Stalking — Definitions.20
Section 215.170. Kidnapping.21
A person commits the offense of kidnapping if he or she knowingly restrains
another unlawfully and without consent so as to interfere substantially with
his or her liberty.
Section 215.180. Endangering the Welfare of a Child.22
5. The person knowingly causes physical contact with such domestic
victim knowing he or she will regard the contact as offensive; or
6. The person knowingly attempts to cause or causes the isolation of
such domestic victim by unreasonably and substantially restricting
or limiting his or her access to other persons, telecommunication
devices or transportation for the purpose of isolation.
A. Definitions. As used in this Section:
DISTURBS — Shall mean to engage in a course of conduct directed
at a specific person that serves no legitimate purpose and that would
cause a reasonable person under the circumstances to be frightened,
intimidated, or emotionally distressed.
B. A person commits the offense of stalking if he or she purposely, through
his or her course of conduct, disturbs, or follows with the intent to
disturb another person.
C. This Section shall not apply to activities of Federal, State, County, or
Municipal Law Enforcement Officers conducting investigations of any
violation of Federal, State, County, or Municipal Law.
D. Any Law Enforcement Officer may arrest, without a warrant, any
person he or she has probable cause to believe has violated the
provisions of this Section.
19.Editor's Note: This Section previously pertained to assault of a law enforcement officer,
corrections officer, emergency personnel, highway worker in a construction zone or work
zone, utility worker, cable worker, or probation and parole officer. However, the
authorizing statute, former RSMo. §565.083, was repealed without replacement by SB 491
in the 2014 Legislative Session, effective 1-1-2017. See Section 215.120, Assault, as it
relates to a "special victim."
20.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
21.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.130
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.180
AO:160
Section 215.190. Leaving a Child Unattended in a Motor Vehicle —
Definitions.23
A. A person commits the offense of endangering the welfare of a child if
he/she:
1. With criminal negligence acts in a manner that creates a
substantial risk to the life, body or health of a child less than
seventeen (17) years old; or
2. Knowingly encourages, aids or causes a child less than seventeen
(17) years of age to engage in any conduct which causes or tends to
cause the child to come within the provisions of Paragraph (d) of
Subdivision (2) of Subsection (1) or Subdivision (3) of Subsection
(1) of Section 211.031, RSMo.; or
3. Being a parent, guardian or other person legally charged with the
care or custody of a child less than seventeen (17) years of age,
recklessly fails or refuses to exercise reasonable diligence in the
care or control of such child to prevent him/her from coming within
the provisions of Paragraph (c) of Subdivision (1) of Subsection (1)
or Paragraph (d) of Subdivision (2) of Subsection (1) or Subdivision
(3) of Subsection (1) of Section 211.031, RSMo.; or
4. Knowingly encourages, aids or causes a child less than seventeen
(17) years of age to enter into any room, building or other structure
which is a public nuisance as defined in Section 579.105, RSMo.
B. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to mean the welfare of a child
is endangered for the sole reason that he/she is being provided nonmedical
remedial treatment recognized and permitted under the laws
of this State.
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms mean:
COLLISION — The act of a motor vehicle coming into contact with an
object or a person.
INJURES — To cause physical harm to the body of a person.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any automobile, truck, truck-tractor, or any motor
bus or motor-propelled vehicle not exclusively operated or driven on
fixed rails or tracks.
UNATTENDED — Not accompanied by an individual fourteen (14) years
of age or older.
B. A person commits the offense of leaving a child unattended in a motor
vehicle if such person knowingly leaves a child less than eleven (11)
years of age unattended in a motor vehicle and such child injures
22.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
23.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.180
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.190
AO:161
Section 215.200. through Section 215.290. (Reserved)
another person by causing a motor vehicle collision or by causing the
motor vehicle to injure a pedestrian.
C. The offense of leaving a child unattended in a motor vehicle is an
ordinance violation.
Section
215.190
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.200
AO:162
ARTICLE III
Offenses Concerning Administration of Justice
Section 215.300. Concealing an Offense.24
Section 215.310. Hindering Prosecution.25
Section 215.315. Failure To Appear. [Ord. No. 06-64 §1, 8-28-2006]
A. A person commits the offense of concealing an offense if he or she:
1. Confers or agrees to confer any pecuniary benefit or other
consideration to any person in consideration of that person's
concealing of any offense, refraining from initiating or aiding in the
prosecution of an offense, or withholding any evidence thereof; or
2. Accepts or agrees to accept any pecuniary benefit or other
consideration in consideration of his/her concealing any offense,
refraining from initiating or aiding in the prosecution of an offense,
or withholding any evidence thereof.
A. A person commits the offense of hindering prosecution if, for the
purpose of preventing the apprehension, prosecution, conviction or
punishment of another person for conduct constituting an offense, he or
she:
1. Harbors or conceals such person; or
2. Warns such person of impending discovery or apprehension, except
this does not apply to a warning given in connection with an effort
to bring another into compliance with the law; or
3. Provides such person with money, transportation, weapon, disguise
or other means to aid him/her in avoiding discovery or
apprehension; or
4. Prevents or obstructs, by means of force, deception or intimidation,
anyone from performing an act that might aid in the discovery or
apprehension of such person.
A. With the exception of minor traffic violations, it shall be unlawful for a
person to fail to appear before the Judge of the Municipal Court after
having been ordered to appear by the judge or after having been issued
a summons.
B. It is presumed that notice to appear was given to the person if a written
notice was issued by the Municipal Court Clerk's office pursuant to
State or local court rule or upon a docket entry showing that the person
appeared personally before a judge of the court and was ordered to
24.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
25.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.300
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.315
AO:163
Section 215.320. Refusal To Identify as a Witness.
A person commits the offense of refusal to identify as a witness if, knowing
he or she has witnessed any portion of an offense, or of any other incident
resulting in physical injury or substantial property damage, he or she
refuses to report or gives a false report of his or her name and present
address to a Law Enforcement Officer engaged in the performance of his or
her duties.
Section 215.325. Refusal To Offer Identification Upon Request By A
Police Officer.
When a Police Officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person has
violated this Code and to believe that the person suspected is still present,
such officer may request the suspect to identify himself/herself. It shall
be unlawful for anyone to refuse to properly identify himself/herself when
asked to do so by an officer in accordance with this Section.
Section 215.330. Disturbing a Judicial Proceeding.
A person commits the offense of disturbing a judicial proceeding if, with the
purpose to intimidate a judge, attorney, juror, party or witness and thereby
influence a judicial proceeding, he or she disrupts or disturbs a judicial
proceeding by participating in an assembly and calling aloud, shouting,
or holding or displaying a placard or sign containing written or printed
matter, concerning the conduct of the judicial proceeding, or the character
of a judge, attorney, juror, party or witness engaged in such proceeding,
or calling for or demanding any specified action or determination by such
judge, attorney, juror, party, or witness in connection with such proceeding.
appear on a date recorded on the docket or that the person signed a
notice to appear in the presence of staff of the Municipal Court Clerk.
C. With the exception of minor traffic violations, it shall be unlawful for
any person to fail to appear before the judge of the Municipal Court if
the person has been released upon a recognizance or bond or pursuant
to any other provision of law and at the time of release the person
received notice of the date and time the person is required to appear in
court.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to obey a lawful
subpoena, summons or order to appear issued by the Municipal Court
of the City with the exception of orders or summons for minor traffic
violations.
E. Nothing in this Section shall prevent the exercise by the judge of the
Municipal Court of the judge's power to punish for contempt.
F. Any person found guilty of violating this Section shall be penalized in
accordance with Section 100.220 of the Republic City Code.
Section
215.315
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.340
AO:164
Section 215.340. Tampering With a Witness or Victim.26
Section 215.350. Tampering With Physical Evidence.27
Section 215.360. Improper Communication.
A person commits the offense of improper communication if he/she
communicates, directly or indirectly, with any juror, special master, referee
A. A person commits the offense of tampering with a witness or victim if:
1. With the purpose to induce a witness or a prospective witness to
disobey a subpoena or other legal process, absent himself or
herself, avoid subpoena or other legal process, withhold evidence,
information, or documents, or testify falsely, he or she:
a. Threatens or causes harm to any person or property; or
b. Uses force, threats or deception; or
c. Offers, confers or agrees to confer any benefit, direct or
indirect, upon such witness; or
d. Conveys any of the foregoing to another in furtherance of a
conspiracy; or
2. He or she purposely prevents or dissuades or attempts to prevent
or dissuade any person who has been a victim of any crime or a
person who is acting on behalf of any such victim from:
a. Making any report of such victimization to any peace officer,
State, Local or Federal Law Enforcement Officer, prosecuting
agency, or judge;
b. Causing a complaint, indictment or information to be sought
and prosecuted or assisting in the prosecution thereof;
c. Arresting or causing or seeking the arrest of any person in
connection with such victimization.
A. A person commits the offense of tampering with physical evidence if he/
she:
1. Alters, destroys, suppresses or conceals any record, document or
thing with the purpose to impair its verity, legibility or availability
in any official proceeding or investigation; or
2. Makes, presents or uses any record, document or thing knowing it
to be false with the purpose to mislead a public servant who is or
may be engaged in any official proceeding or investigation.
26.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
27.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.340
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.360
AO:165
or arbitrator in a judicial proceeding, other than as part of the proceedings
in a case, for the purpose of influencing the official action of such person.
Section 215.370. False Impersonation.
A. A person commits the offense of false impersonation if such person:
1. Falsely represents himself/herself to be a public servant with the
purpose to induce another to submit to his/her pretended official
authority or to rely upon his/her pretended official acts, and
a. Performs an act in that pretended capacity; or
b. Causes another to act in reliance upon his/her pretended
official authority.
2. Falsely represents himself/herself to be a person licensed to
practice or engage in any profession for which a license is required
by the laws of this State with purpose to induce another to rely
upon such representation, and
a. Performs an act in that pretended capacity; or
b. Causes another to act in reliance upon such representation; or
3. Upon being arrested, falsely represents himself/herself, to a Law
Enforcement Officer, with the first and last name, date of birth or
social security number, or a substantial number of identifying
factors or characteristics as that of another person that results in
the filing of a report or record of arrest or conviction for an
infraction or offense that contains the first and last name, date of
birth and social security number, or a substantial number of
identifying factors or characteristics to that of such other person as
to cause such other person to be identified as the actual person
arrested or convicted.
B. If a violation of Subsection (A)(3) hereof is discovered prior to any
conviction of the person actually arrested for an underlying charge,
then the prosecuting attorney bringing any action on the underlying
charge shall notify the court thereof, and the court shall order the falseidentifying
factors ascribed to the person actually arrested as are
contained in the arrest and court records amended to correctly and
accurately identify the defendant and shall expunge the incorrect and
inaccurate identifying factors from the arrest and court records.
C. Any person who is the victim of a false impersonation and whose
identity has been falsely reported in arrest or conviction records may
move for expungement and correction of said records under the
procedures set forth in Section 610.123, RSMo. Upon a showing that a
substantial number of identifying factors of the victim was falsely
ascribed to the person actually arrested or convicted, the court shall
order the false-identifying factors ascribed to the person actually
Section
215.360
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.370
AO:166
Section 215.380. False Reports.
Section 215.390. Resisting or Interfering With Arrest, Detention or
Stop.28
arrested as are contained in the arrest and court records amended to
correctly and accurately identify the defendant and shall expunge the
incorrect and inaccurate factors from the arrest and court records.
A. A person commits the offense of making a false report if he/she
knowingly:
1. Gives false information to any person for the purpose of implicating
another person in an offense; or
2. Makes a false report to a Law Enforcement Officer that an offense
has occurred or is about to occur; or
3. Makes a false report or causes a false report to be made to a Law
Enforcement Officer, security officer, Fire Department or other
organization, official or volunteer which deals with emergencies
involving danger to life or property that a fire or other incident
calling for an emergency response has occurred or is about to
occur.
B. It is a defense to a prosecution under Subsection (A) of this Section that
the person retracted the false statement or report before the Law
Enforcement Officer or any other person took substantial action in
reliance thereon.
C. The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of retraction
under Subsection (B) of this Section.
A. A person commits the offense of resisting or interfering with arrest,
detention, or stop if he or she knows or reasonably should know that a
Law Enforcement Officer is making an arrest or attempting to lawfully
detain or stop an individual or vehicle, and for the purpose of
preventing the Officer from effecting the arrest, stop or detention, he or
she:
1. Resists the arrest, stop or detention of such person by using or
threatening the use of violence or physical force or by fleeing from
such officer; or
2. Interferes with the arrest, stop or detention of another person by
using or threatening the use of violence, physical force or physical
interference.
B. This Section applies to:
1. Arrests, stops or detentions with or without warrants;
28.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.370
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.390
AO:167
Section 215.400. Escape or Attempted Escape From Custody.29
A person commits the offense of escape from custody or attempted escape
from custody if, while being held in custody after arrest for any offense, he/
she escapes or attempts to escape from custody.
Section 215.410. Interference With Legal Process.
Section 215.420. Duty To Assist Police. [CC 1999 §16-17; R.O. 1916
§403]
No person shall refuse or neglect to give aid or assistance to the Chief of
Police or other Police Officer of this City, after being called upon for such
aid or assistance while such officer is discharging his/her official duties.
Section 215.430. Obstructing A Police Officer or Emergency
Personnel. [CC 1999 §16-33; Ord. No. 05-95 §1, 12-27-2005]
2. Arrests, stops or detentions for any offense, infraction or ordinance
violation; and
3. Arrests for warrants issued by a court or a probation and parole
officer.
C. A person is presumed to be fleeing a vehicle stop if he or she continues
to operate a motor vehicle after he or she has seen or should have seen
clearly visible emergency lights or has heard or should have heard an
audible signal emanating from the law enforcement vehicle pursuing
him or her.
D. It is no defense to a prosecution under Subsection (A) of this Section
that the Law Enforcement Officer was acting unlawfully in making the
arrest. However, nothing in this Section shall be construed to bar civil
suits for unlawful arrest.
A. A person commits the offense of interference with legal process if,
knowing another person is authorized by law to serve process, he or she
interferes with or obstructs such person for the purpose of preventing
such person from effecting the service of any process.
B. "Process" includes any writ, summons, subpoena, warrant other than an
arrest warrant, or other process or order of a court.
A. No person shall:
1. Interfere with a Police Officer or emergency personnel by entering
or remaining at a police, fire or emergency scene, which is
restricted to authorized personnel after having received notice of
the restriction either by verbal notice from police or emergency
29.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.390
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.430
AO:168
Section 215.440. Perjury — Penalties.
personnel, a physical barrier to entry or by signage restricting
entry;
2. Refuse to comply with a lawful order of a Police Officer or other
emergency service worker, when a person knows or should know
such refusal prevents the officer from completing an investigation
or performing any other lawful duty;
3. Engage in conduct which a person knows or should know would
prevent a Police Officer or other emergency service worker from
completing an investigation or performing any other lawful duty;
4. Identify him/herself to a City Police Officer by using a name or date
of birth other than his/her own when the officer is entering the
information into an official document or when the officer is using
the information in the conduct of an investigation of a crime or
ordinance violation. This would also include intentionally supplying
false, unfounded or misleading information.
B. Upon conviction of a violation of this Section, a person shall be
punished as provided by Section 100.220 of this Code.
A. A person commits the offense of perjury if, with the purpose to deceive,
he or she knowingly testifies falsely to any material fact upon oath or
affirmation legally administered, in any official proceeding before any
court, public body, notary public or other officer authorized to
administer oaths.
B. A fact is material, regardless of its admissibility under rules of
evidence, if it could substantially affect, or did substantially affect, the
course or outcome of the cause, matter or proceeding.
C. Knowledge of the materiality of the statement is not an element of this
offense, and it is no defense that:
1. The person mistakenly believed the fact to be immaterial; or
2. The person was not competent, for reasons other than mental
disability or immaturity, to make the statement.
D. It is a defense to a prosecution under Subsection (A) of this Section that
the person retracted the false statement in the course of the official
proceeding in which it was made provided he or she did so before the
falsity of the statement was exposed. Statements made in separate
hearings at separate stages of the same proceeding, including but not
limited to statements made before a grand jury, at a preliminary
hearing, at a deposition or at previous trial, are made in the course of
the same proceeding.
E. The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of retraction
under Subsection (D) of this Section.
Section
215.430
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.450
AO:169
Section 215.450. through Section 215.510. (Reserved)
Section
215.450
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.450
AO:170
ARTICLE IV
Offenses Concerning Public Safety
Section 215.520. Abandonment of Airtight or Semi-Airtight
Containers.
Section 215.530. Littering.
A person commits the offense of littering if he or she places, deposits,
or causes to be placed or deposited, any glass, glass bottles, wire, nails,
tacks, hedge, cans, garbage, trash, refuse, or rubbish of any kind, nature
or description on the right-of-way of any public road or State highway or
on or in any of the waters in this City or on the banks of any stream, or
on any land or water owned, operated or leased by the State, any board,
department, agency or commission thereof or on any land or water owned,
operated or leased by the Federal Government or the City, or on any private
real property owned by another without the owner's consent.
Section 215.540. Littering Via Carcasses.
A. A person commits the offense of abandonment of an airtight or semiairtight
container if he or she knowingly abandons, discards, or permits
to remain on premises under his or her control, in a place accessible to
children, any abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator, or other
airtight or semi-airtight container which has a capacity of one and onehalf
(1 1/2) cubic feet or more and an opening of fifty (50) square inches
or more and which has a door or lid equipped with hinge, latch or other
fastening device capable of securing such door or lid, without rendering
such equipment harmless to human life by removing such hinges,
latches or other hardware which may cause a person to be confined
therein.
B. Subsection (A) of this Section does not apply to an icebox, refrigerator
or other airtight or semi-airtight container located in that part of a
building occupied by a dealer, warehouse operator or repair person.
C. The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue under
Subsection (B) of this Section.
D. The offense of abandonment of an airtight or semi-airtight container is
an ordinance violation.
A. A person commits the offense of unlawful disposition of a dead animal if
he or she knowingly places or causes to be placed the carcass or offal of
any dead animal:
1. Into any well, spring, brook, branch, creek, pond, or lake; or
2. On any public road or highway, river, stream, or watercourse or
upon premises not his or her own for the purpose of annoying
another or others.
Section
215.520
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.550
AO:171
Section 215.550. Tampering With a Water Supply.
Section 215.560. Burning, Dumping or Burying of Trade Waste
Within City Limits Prohibited. [Ord. No. 99-21 §§1 — 2, 4-26-1999]
Section 215.570. Assault on a Police Animal.30
A person commits the offense of assault on a police animal if he or she
knowingly attempts to kill or disable or knowingly causes or attempts to
cause serious physical injury to a police animal when that animal is involved
in law enforcement investigation, apprehension, tracking, or search, or the
animal is in the custody of or under the control of a Law Enforcement
Officer, Department of Corrections Officer, Municipal Police Department or
Fire Department or a rescue unit or agency.
Section 215.580. Teasing, Striking or Tampering With Police
Canines Prohibited. [CC 1999 §16-67]
A. A person commits the offense of tampering with a water supply if he or
she purposely:
1. Poisons, defiles or in any way corrupts the water of a well, spring,
brook or reservoir used for domestic or municipal purposes; or
2. Diverts, dams up and holds back from its natural course and flow
any spring, brook or other water supply for domestic or municipal
purposes, after said water supply shall have once been taken for
use by any person or persons, corporation, town or city for his/her,
their or its use.
B. The offense of tampering with a water supply is an ordinance violation.
A. The open burning, dumping or burying of any trade waste is prohibited
at all times within the City limits of Republic, Missouri.
B. As used herein "trade waste" shall mean any solid, liquid or gaseous
material resulting from any construction or demolition project, or which
results from the operation of any business, trade or industry, such
material to include, but not be limited to, plastics, cardboard materials,
grease, oil, cinders or chemicals of any nature.
C. Contractors/developers may burn trade waste, with the exception of the
items listed in Subsection (B) above, within the City of Republic by
obtaining a permit from the Department of Natural Resources.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and maliciously taunt,
torment, tease, beat, strike or administer or subject any desensitizing
drugs, chemicals or substance to any canine used by a Law
Enforcement Officer in the performance of his/her functions or duties,
or when placed in a kennel off duty; or to interfere or meddle with any
30.Note: Under certain circumstances, this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.550
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.580
AO:172
Section 215.590. through Section 215.650. (Reserved)
such canine used by the Police Department or handler thereof while in
the performance of their functions or duties.
B. Any person found guilty of this Section shall be held responsible for any
cost incurred due to their actions in which the Police canine requires
medical treatment, or if the canine is injured in any way in which the
Police canine can no longer function as a Police canine.
Section
215.580
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.590
AO:173

ARTICLE V
Offenses Concerning Public Peace
Section 215.660. Peace Disturbance Definitions. [Ord. No. 17-15
§ 1, 4-18-2017]
For the purposes of Sections 215.670 and 215.680 the following words shall
have the meanings set out herein:
LOUD NOISE — Is a plainly audible sound as herein described:
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any place which at the time is not open to the
public. It includes property which is owned publicly or privately.
PROPERTY OF ANOTHER — Any property in which the actor does not have
a possessory interest.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place which at the time is open to the public. It
includes property which is owned publicly or privately. If a building or
structure is divided into separately occupied units, such units are separate
premises.
UNREASONABLY — As it applies to loud noise it is a sound that is clearly
inappropriate, excessive, or harmful in degree or kind with regard to the
time, place and manner of emitting the sound.
Section 215.670. Peace Disturbance.
A sound emitting from another property that is heard inside a residence
and which can be heard above normal interior sounds such as speaking
or the normal volume of entertainment devices such as a radio or TV or
similar device; or
A.
A sound emitting from another property that is felt inside a residence
to such extent that windows, furnishings or items such as dishes are
vibrating; or
B.
A sound emitting from another property that is heard outside of the
residence but on the residence property that is of such volume as to
interfere with normal conversation by requiring raised voice level to be
heard; or
C.
A sound emitting from another property in a non-residential area that
is of such volume that it can be heard above normal interior sounds or
causes vibrations of windows or furnishings or requires raised voices
while outside to be heard above the emitting sound.
D.
A. A person commits the offense of peace disturbance if he or she:
1. Unreasonably and knowingly disturbs or alarms another person or
persons by:
a. Loud noise; or
Section
215.660
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.670
AO:175
Section 215.680. Private Peace Disturbance.
Section 215.690. Unlawful Assembly.
A person commits the offense of unlawful assembly if he/she knowingly
assembles with six (6) or more other persons and agrees with such persons
to violate any of the criminal laws of this State or of the United States with
force or violence.
Section 215.700. Rioting.
A person commits the offense of rioting if he/she knowingly assembles with
six (6) or more other persons and agrees with such persons to violate any of
the criminal laws of this State or of the United States with force or violence
and thereafter, while still so assembled, does violate any of said laws with
force or violence.
Section 215.710. Refusal To Disperse.
A person commits the offense of refusal to disperse if, being present at the
scene of an unlawful assembly or at the scene of a riot, he/she knowingly
b. Offensive language addressed in a face-to-face manner to a
specific individual and uttered under circumstances which are
likely to produce an immediate violent response from a
reasonable recipient; or
c. Threatening to commit a felonious act against any person
under circumstances which are likely to cause a reasonable
person to fear that such threat may be carried out; or
d. Fighting; or
e. Creating a noxious and offensive odor.
2. Is in a public place or on private property of another without
consent and purposely causes inconvenience to another person or
persons by unreasonably and physically obstructing:
a. Vehicular or pedestrian traffic; or
b. The free ingress or egress to or from a public or private place.
A. A person commits the offense of private peace disturbance if he/she is
on private property and unreasonably and purposely causes alarm to
another person or persons on the same premises by:
1. Threatening to commit an offense against any person; or
2. Fighting.
B. For purposes of this Section, if a building or structure is divided into
separately occupied units, such units are separate premises.
Section
215.670
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.710
AO:176
fails or refuses to obey the lawful command of a Law Enforcement Officer
to depart from the scene of such unlawful assembly or riot.
Section 215.720. Disorderly Conduct. [CC 1999 §16-47]
Section 215.730. Disrupting a House of Worship.31
Section 215.740. Unlawful Funeral Protests Prohibited —
Definitions.
A. Any person who commits the offense of disorderly conduct shall, upon
conviction, be punished as provided by ordinance.
B. A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct if he/she appears in
a public place or within view of the public in such manner as to cause a
disturbance to nearby persons by conducting himself/herself in a
disorderly, loud, wanton, lewd, lascivious or profane manner.
A. For purposes of this Section, "house of worship" means any church,
synagogue, mosque, other building or structure, or public or private
place used for religious worship, religious instruction, or other religious
purpose.
B. A person commits the offense of disrupting a house of worship if such
person:
1. Intentionally and unreasonably disturbs, interrupts, or disquiets
any house of worship by using profane discourse, rude or indecent
behavior, or making noise either within the house of worship or so
near it as to disturb the order and solemnity of the worship
services; or
2. Intentionally injures, intimidates, or interferes with or attempts to
injure, intimidate, or interfere with any person lawfully exercising
the right of religious freedom in or outside of a house of worship or
seeking access to a house of worship, whether by force, threat, or
physical obstruction.
A. A person commits the offense of unlawful funeral protest if he or she
pickets or engages in other protest activities within three hundred
(300) feet of any residence, cemetery, funeral home, church, synagogue
or other establishment during or within one (1) hour before or one (1)
hour after the conducting of any actual funeral or burial service at that
place.
B. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms mean:
FUNERAL and BURIAL SERVICE — The ceremonies and memorial
services held in conjunction with the burial or cremation of the dead,
but this Section does not apply to processions while they are in transit
31.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.710
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.740
AO:177
Section 215.750. Affray. [CC 1999 §16-53]
Section 215.760. Disturbance, Etc., At Religious Gatherings,
School, Etc., Meeting Prohibited. [CC 1999 §16-12; R.O. 1916 §449]
No person shall willfully, maliciously or contemptuously disquiet or disturb
any congregation or other assembly met for religious worship, or when
meeting at the place of worship, or dispersing therefrom, or any school or
other meeting or assembly of people met together for any lawful purpose
whatever by making a noise, or by rude or indecent behavior or profane
discourse within the place of assembly, or so near the same as to interrupt
or disturb the order of solemnity thereof, nor shall any person willfully
menace, threaten or assault any person who is present at such meeting.
Section 215.770. Loitering On School Property. [CC 1999 §16-21;
Ord. No. 4689]
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter on the grounds of or within the
buildings of any public or private kindergarten, grade, middle, high school
or other school designation when such school is in session, and it shall be
unlawful for any person so loitering to refuse to leave immediately such
buildings or grounds upon request of the principal or other person in charge
thereof. This Section shall not apply in the case of any particular school
employee or school-approved volunteer, aides or students of such particular
school.
Section 215.780. Loitering.
beyond any three-hundred-foot zone that is established under
Subsection (A) above.
OTHER PROTEST ACTIVITIES — Any action that is disruptive or
undertaken to disrupt or disturb a funeral or burial service.
C. The offense of unlawful funeral protest shall be an ordinance violation.
A. Any person who commits the offense of affray shall, upon conviction, be
punished as provided by ordinance.
B. A person commits the crime of affray if he/she together with one (1) or
more persons shall, in any public place, voluntarily or by agreement
engage in any fight, or use any blows or violence toward each other in
any angry or quarrelsome manner, or do each other willful mischief, or
if any person shall assault another and strike him/her in any public
place to the terror or disturbance of others.
A. Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for persons to intentionally congregate
upon the grounds or within the buildings of a commercial
establishment, or upon public ways immediately adjacent thereto so as
to block the aisles, doorways or other passageways into, out of or
through the grounds or buildings of such commercial establishment. No
person shall sit on the top, roof, hood, fender or windows of a motor
Section
215.740
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.780
AO:178
Section 215.790. through Section 215.820. (Reserved)
vehicle; and no persons shall congregate in crowds of three (3) or
more outside vehicles on business premises when such persons are not
transacting business on the premises.
B. Presumption Of Intent To Congregate Unlawfully. If any group of
persons shall be congregated so as to block the aisles, doorways or
other passageways into, out of or through such grounds or buildings
and they shall be ordered by the manager or other person in charge of
such commercial establishment to move on and they shall fail or refuse
to do so, it shall be prima facie proof of their intent to unlawfully
congregate under the provisions of this Section.
1. "Private parking lot" defined. The term "private parking lot" shall,
in addition to its customary meaning, include lots or areas devoted
to the storage or display of new or used motor vehicles by dealers
therein.
2. Prohibited. No person, except the owner, tenant or other person in
possession, or their invitees, shall loiter upon or about any public or
private parking lot, nor upon any parking lot provided for the
customers, business invitees or employees of any commercial or
industrial establishment at any time any such public or private
parking lot shall be closed to use by the public or any such
commercial or industrial lot shall be closed to use by customers,
business invitees and employees.
3. Presumption of violation. Any such person found loitering upon any
such lot or facility at any time that signs have been previously
erected giving notice that the lot is closed to use shall be
presumptively upon the lot in violation of this Section, which
presumption shall be rebuttable.
Section
215.780
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.790
AO:179

ARTICLE VI
Offenses Concerning Weapons and Firearms
Section 215.830. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings set
out herein:
ANTIQUE, CURIO OR RELIC FIREARM — Any firearm so defined by the
National Gun Control Act, 18 U.S.C. Title 26, §5845, and the United States
Treasury/Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, 27 CFR 178.11:
BLACKJACK — Any instrument that is designed or adapted for the purpose
of stunning or inflicting physical injury by striking a person, and which is
readily capable of lethal use.
BLASTING AGENT — Any material or mixture, consisting of fuel and
oxidizer that is intended for blasting, but not otherwise defined as an
explosive under this Section, provided that the finished product, as mixed
for use of shipment, cannot be detonated by means of a numbered 8 test
blasting cap when unconfined.
CONCEALABLE FIREARM — Any firearm with a barrel less than sixteen
(16) inches in length, measured from the face of the bolt or standing breech.
DEFACE — To alter or destroy the manufacturer's or importer's serial
number or any other distinguishing number or identification mark.
DETONATOR — Any device containing a detonating charge that is used for
initiating detonation in an explosive, including but not limited to, electric
blasting caps of instantaneous and delay types, non-electric blasting caps
for use with safety fuse or shock tube and detonating cord delay connectors.
EXPLOSIVE WEAPON — Any explosive, incendiary, or poison gas bomb
or similar device designed or adapted for the purpose of inflicting death,
serious physical injury or substantial property damage; or any device
designed or adapted for delivering or shooting such a weapon. For the
purposes of this Article, the term "explosive" shall mean any chemical
compound mixture or device, the primary or common purpose of which is to
function by explosion, including but not limited to, dynamite and other high
explosives, pellet powder, initiating explosives, detonators, safety fuses,
squibs, detonating cords, igniter cords, and igniters or blasting agents.
"Antique firearm" is any firearm not designed or redesigned for using
rim fire or conventional center fire ignition with fixed ammunition
and manufactured in or before 1898, said ammunition not being
manufactured any longer; this includes any matchlock, wheel lock,
flintlock, percussion cap or similar type ignition system, or replica
thereof;
1.
Curio or relic firearm is any firearm deriving value as a collectible
weapon due to its unique design, ignition system, operation or at least
fifty (50) years old, associated with a historical event, renown
personage or major war.
2.
Section
215.830
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.830
AO:181
FIREARM — Any weapon that is designed or adapted to expel a projectile
by the action of an explosive.
FIREARM SILENCER — Any instrument, attachment or appliance that is
designed or adapted to muffle the noise made by the firing of any firearm.
GAS GUN — Any gas ejection device, weapon, cartridge, container or
contrivance, other than a gas bomb, that is designed or adapted for the
purpose of ejecting any poison gas that will cause death or serious physical
injury, but not any device that ejects a repellent or temporary incapacitating
substance.
INTOXICATED — Substantially impaired mental or physical capacity
resulting from introduction of any substance into the body.
KNIFE — Any dagger, dirk, stiletto, or bladed hand instrument that is
readily capable of inflicting serious physical injury or death by cutting or
stabbing a person. For purposes of this Article, "knife" does not include any
ordinary pocketknife with no blade more than four (4) inches in length.
KNUCKLES — Any instrument that consists of finger rings or guards made
of a hard substance that is designed or adapted for the purpose of inflicting
serious physical injury or death by striking a person with a fist enclosed in
the knuckles.
MACHINE GUN — Any firearm that is capable of firing more than one (1)
shot automatically, without manual reloading, by a single function of the
trigger.
PROJECTILE WEAPON — Any bow, crossbow, pellet gun, slingshot or other
weapon that is not a firearm, which is capable of expelling a projectile that
could inflict serious physical injury or death by striking or piercing a person.
RIFLE — Any firearm designed or adapted to be fired from the shoulder
and to use the energy of the explosive in a fixed metallic cartridge to fire a
projectile through a rifled bore by a single function of the trigger.
SHORT BARREL — A barrel length of less than sixteen (16) inches for a rifle
and eighteen (18) inches for a shotgun, both measured from the face of the
bolt or standing breech, or an overall rifle or shotgun length of less than
twenty-six (26) inches.
SHOTGUN — Any firearm designed or adapted to be fired from the shoulder
and to use the energy of the explosive in a fixed shotgun shell to fire a
number of shot or a single projectile through a smooth bore barrel by a
single function of the trigger.
SPRING GUN — Any fused, timed or non-manually controlled trap or device
designed or adapted to set off an explosion for the purpose of inflicting
serious physical injury or death.
SWITCHBLADE KNIFE — Any knife which has a blade that folds or closes
into the handle or sheath, and
That opens automatically by pressure applied to a button or other
device located on the handle; or
1.
Section
215.830
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.830
AO:182
Section 215.840. Weapons — Carrying Concealed — Other Unlawful
Use.32
That opens or releases from the handle or sheath by the force of gravity
or by the application of centrifugal force.
2.
A. A person commits the offense of unlawful use of weapons, except as
otherwise provided by Sections 571.101 to 571.121, RSMo., if he/she
knowingly:
1. Carries concealed upon or about his/her person a knife, a firearm, a
blackjack or any other weapon readily capable of lethal use into any
area where firearms are restricted under Section 571.107, RSMo.;
or
2. (Reserved)
3. Discharges or shoots a firearm within the City limits;33 or
4. (Reserved)
5. Has a firearm or projectile weapon readily capable of lethal use on
his/her person, while he/she is intoxicated, and handles or
otherwise uses such firearm or projectile weapon in either a
negligent or unlawful manner or discharges such firearm or
projectile weapon unless acting in self defense; or
6. Carries a firearm or any other weapon readily capable of lethal use
into any church or place where people have assembled for worship,
or into any election precinct on any election day, or into any
building owned or occupied by any agency of the Federal
Government, State Government or political subdivision thereof, or
into any public assemblage of persons meeting for any lawful
purpose; or
7. Carries a firearm, whether loaded or unloaded, or any other
weapon readily capable of lethal use into any school, onto any
school bus, or onto the premises of any function or activity
sponsored or sanctioned by school officials or the district school
board.
8. Possesses a firearm while also knowingly in possession of a
controlled substance that is sufficient for a felony violation of
Section 579.015, RSMo.
B. Subsections (A)(1), (6) and (7) of this Section shall not apply to the
persons described in this Subsection, regardless of whether such uses
are reasonably associated with or are necessary to the fulfillment of
such person's official duties except as otherwise provided in this
32.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
33.State Law Reference: §252.243.3, RSMo., limits the discharge of firearms in certain areas
known as "Hunting Heritage Protection Areas," which are defined therein.
Section
215.830
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.840
AO:183
Subsection. Subsections (A)(3) and (4) of this Section shall not apply to
or affect any of the following persons, when such uses are reasonably
associated with or are necessary to the fulfillment of such person's
official duties, except as otherwise provided in this Subsection:
1. All State, County and Municipal Peace Officers who have completed
the training required by the Police Officer Standards and Training
Commission pursuant to Sections 590.030 to 590.050, RSMo., and
who possess the duty and power of arrest for violation of the
general criminal laws of the State or for violation of ordinances of
Counties or Municipalities of the State, whether such officers are
on or off duty, and whether such officers are within or outside of the
law enforcement agency's jurisdiction, or all qualified retired Peace
Officers, as defined in and who carry the identification defined in
Subsections (12) and (13) of Section 571.030, RSMo., or any person
summoned by such officers to assist in making arrests or
preserving the peace while actually engaged in assisting such
officer;
2. Wardens, superintendents and keepers of prisons, penitentiaries,
jails and other institutions for the detention of persons accused or
convicted of crime;
3. Members of the Armed Forces or National Guard while performing
their official duty;
4. Those persons vested by Article V, Section 1, of the Constitution of
Missouri with the judicial power of the State and those persons
vested by Article III of the Constitution of the United States with
the judicial power of the United States, the members of the Federal
judiciary;
5. Any person whose bona fide duty is to execute process, civil or
criminal;
6. Any Federal Probation Officer or Federal Flight Deck Officer as
defined under the Federal Flight Deck Officer Program, 49 U.S.C.
§44921, regardless of whether such officers are on duty, or within
the law enforcement agency's jurisdiction;
7. Any State Probation or Parole Officer, including supervisors and
members of the Board of Probation and Parole;
8. Any corporate security advisor meeting the definition and fulfilling
the requirements of the regulations established by the Department
of Public Safety under Section 590.750, RSMo.;
9. Any coroner, deputy coroner, medical examiner or assistant
medical examiner;
10. Any municipal or county prosecuting attorney or assistant
prosecuting attorney, circuit attorney or assistant circuit attorney,
Section
215.840
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.840
AO:184
municipal, associate or circuit judge; or any person appointed by
a court to be a special prosecutor who has completed the firearms
safety training course required under Subsection (2) of Section
571.111, RSMo.;
11. Any member of a Fire Department or Fire Protection District who is
employed on a full-time basis as a fire investigator and who has a
valid concealed carry endorsement issued prior to August 28, 2013,
or valid concealed carry permit under Section 571.111, RSMo.,
when such uses are reasonably associated with or are necessary to
the fulfillment of such person's official duties; and
12. Upon the written approval of the Governing Body of a Fire
Department or Fire Protection District, any paid Fire Department
or Fire Protection District member who is employed on a full-time
basis and who has a valid concealed carry endorsement issued
prior to August 28, 2013, or a valid concealed carry permit, when
such uses are reasonably associated with or are necessary to the
fulfillment of such person's official duties.
13. Any person discharging a firearm inside the City limits in
connection with any turkey shoot or other charitable event
authorized by the City Council.
C. Subsections (A)(1), (5) and (7) of this Section do not apply when the
actor is transporting such weapons in a non-functioning state or in an
unloaded state when ammunition is not readily accessible or when such
weapons are not readily accessible. Subsection (A)(1) of this Section
does not apply to any person nineteen (19) years of age or older or
eighteen (18) years of age or older and a member of the United States
Armed Forces, or honorably discharged from the United States Armed
Forces, transporting a concealable firearm in the passenger
compartment of a motor vehicle, so long as such concealable firearm is
otherwise lawfully possessed, nor when the actor is also in possession
of an exposed firearm or projectile weapon for the lawful pursuit of
game, or is in his/her dwelling unit or upon premises over which the
actor has possession, authority or control, or is traveling in a
continuous journey peaceably through this State. Subsection (A)(7) of
this Section does not apply if the firearm is otherwise lawfully
possessed by a person while traversing school premises for the
purposes of transporting a student to or from school, or possessed by an
adult for the purposes of facilitation of a school-sanctioned firearmrelated
event or club event.
D. Subsections (A)(1) and (7) of this Section shall not apply to any person
who has a valid concealed carry permit issued pursuant to Sections
571.101 to 571.121, RSMo., a valid concealed carry endorsement
issued before August 28, 2013, or a valid permit or endorsement to
carry concealed firearms issued by another State or political
subdivision of another State.
Section
215.840
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.840
AO:185
E. Subsections (A)(3), (4), (5) and (7) of this Section and Section
215.940(B) of this Article shall not apply to persons who are engaged in
a lawful act of defense pursuant to Section 563.031, RSMo.
F. Nothing in this Section shall make it unlawful for a student to actually
participate in school-sanctioned gun safety courses, student military or
ROTC courses, or other school-sponsored or club-sponsored firearmrelated
events, provided the student does not carry a firearm or other
weapon readily capable of lethal use into any school, onto any school
bus, or onto the premises of any other function or activity sponsored or
sanctioned by school officials or the district school board.
G. The prohibition on discharge of a firearm contained in Subparagraph
(3) of Subsection (A) of this Section shall not apply to those engaged in
the lawful pursuit of game so long as the discharge of the handgun or
shotgun takes place in a rural, agriculturally zoned area of the City and
so long as the fired projectile does not enter onto or pass through
property within two hundred (200) feet of a residence or commercial
structure at a height lower than the top of the roofline of the residence
or commercial structure. [Ord. No. 16-24 § 1, 11-28-2016; Ord. No.
18-45, 12-11-2018]
1. For purposes of this Section, the phrase "rural, agriculturally zoned
area" shall be described as properties of the City within an area
commonly referred to as the "former Village of Brookline" and
generally referenced as Farm Road 97 to the west, Farm Road 140
to the north, Farm Road 115 to the east and Farm Road 168/State
Highway MM/State Route 60 to the south including the four
contiguous forty-acre parcels adjacent to Farm Road 115 and south
of Farm Road 146;
2. This exception shall only apply to the discharge of handguns or
shotguns within the area described above.
3. This exception shall sunset on the 31st day of December, 2020, and
shall no longer be in force and effect unless extended or renewed
by the City Council.
H. The prohibition on discharge of a firearm contained in Subparagraph
(3) of Subsection (A) of this Section shall not apply to discharge of a
firearm when authorized by State law with regard to defense of
livestock or other animals specifically identified by Statute and when
such discharge takes place in the area and under the conditions as
authorized in Subsection (G).
I. The prohibition on discharge of a firearm contained in Subparagraph
(3) of Subsection (A) of this Section shall not apply to firing ranges
operated by a duly recognized law enforcement agency at a location
approved by the City.
J. Nothing in Subsections (G), (H) and (I) is intended to allow what is
prohibited by Section 571.030, RSMo.
Section
215.840
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.850
AO:186
Section 215.850. Possession, Manufacture, Transport, Repair, Sale
of Certain Weapons.34
A. A person commits an offense if such person knowingly possesses,
manufactures, transports, repairs, or sells:
1. An explosive weapon;
2. An explosive, incendiary or poison substance or material with the
purpose to possess, manufacture or sell an explosive weapon;
3. A gas gun;
4. A bullet or projectile which explodes or detonates upon impact
because of an independent explosive charge after having been shot
from a firearm;
5. Knuckles; or
6. Any of the following in violation of Federal law:
a. A machine gun;
b. A short-barreled rifle or shotgun;
c. A firearm silencer; or
d. A switchblade knife.
B. A person does not commit an offense pursuant to this Section if his/her
conduct involved any of the items in Subsections (A)(1) through (5), the
item was possessed in conformity with any applicable Federal law, and
the conduct:
1. Was incident to the performance of official duty by the Armed
Forces, National Guard, a governmental law enforcement agency
or a penal institution; or
2. Was incident to engaging in a lawful commercial or business
transaction with an organization enumerated in Subparagraph (1)
of this Subsection; or
3. Was incident to using an explosive weapon in a manner reasonably
related to a lawful industrial or commercial enterprise; or
4. Was incident to displaying the weapon in a public museum or
exhibition; or
5. Was incident to using the weapon in a manner reasonably related to
a lawful dramatic performance.
34.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.850
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.860
AO:187
Section 215.860. Defacing Firearm.
A person commits the offense of defacing a firearm if he/she knowingly
defaces any firearm.
Section 215.870. Purchase in Another State by Missouri Residents,
Permitted When.
Residents of the State of Missouri may purchase firearms in any State,
provided that such residents conform to the applicable provisions of the
Federal Gun Control Act of 1968, 18 U.S.C. §921 et seq., and regulations
thereunder, and provided further that such residents conform to the
provisions of law applicable to such purchase in the State of Missouri and
in the State in which the purchase is made.
Section 215.880. Purchase in Missouri by Non-Resident, Permitted
When.
Residents of any State may purchase firearms in the State of Missouri,
provided that such residents conform to the applicable provisions of the
Federal Gun Control Act of 1968, 18 U.S.C. §921 et seq., and regulations
thereunder, and provided further that such residents conform to the
provisions of law applicable to such purchase in the State of Missouri and
in the State in which such persons reside.
Section 215.890. Unlawful Transfer of Weapons.35
Section 215.900. Carrying Concealed Firearms Prohibited —
Penalty for Violation.
A. A person commits the offense of unlawful transfer of weapons if he/she:
1. Knowingly sells, leases, loans, gives away or delivers a blackjack to
a person less than eighteen (18) years old without the consent of
the child's custodial parent or guardian or recklessly, as defined in
Section 562.016, RSMo., sells, leases, loans, gives away or delivers
any firearm to a person less than eighteen (18) years old without
the consent of the child's custodial parent or guardian; provided
that this does not prohibit the delivery of such weapons to any
Peace Officer or member of the Armed Forces or National Guard
while performing his/her official duty; or
2. Recklessly, as defined in Section 562.016, RSMo., sells, leases,
loans, gives away or delivers a firearm or ammunition for a firearm
to a person who is intoxicated.
A. It shall be a violation of this Section, punishable as hereinafter
provided, for any person to carry any concealed firearm into:
35.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.860
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.900
AO:188
1. Any Police, Sheriff or Highway Patrol office or station without the
consent of the Chief Law Enforcement Officer in charge of that
office or station. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the
premises of the office or station shall not be a criminal offense so
long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished
while the vehicle is on the premises;
2. Within twenty-five (25) feet of any polling place on any election day.
Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises of the polling
place shall not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is not
removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the
premises;
3. The facility of any adult or juvenile detention or correctional
institution, prison or jail. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the
premises of any adult, juvenile detention or correctional institution,
prison or jail shall not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is
not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on
the premises;
4. Any courthouse solely occupied by the Circuit, Appellate or
Supreme Court, or any courtrooms, administrative offices, libraries
or other rooms of any such court whether or not such court solely
occupies the building in question. This Subsection shall also
include, but not be limited to, any juvenile, family, drug or other
court offices, any room or office wherein any of the courts or offices
listed in this Subsection are temporarily conducting any business
within the jurisdiction of such courts or offices, and such other
locations in such manner as may be specified by Supreme Court
Rule pursuant to Subdivision (6) of Subsection (1) of Section
571.107, RSMo. Nothing in this Subsection shall preclude those
persons listed in Subsection (B)(1) of Section 215.840 while within
their jurisdiction and on duty, those persons listed in Subsections
(B)(2), (4) and (10) of Section 215.840, or such other persons who
serve in a law enforcement capacity for a court as may be specified
by Supreme Court Rule pursuant to Subdivision (6) of Subsection
(1) of Section 571.107, RSMo., from carrying a concealed firearm
within any of the areas described in this Subsection. Possession of a
firearm in a vehicle on the premises of any of the areas listed in this
Subsection shall not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is
not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on
the premises;
5. Any meeting of the Republic City Council, except that nothing in
this Subsection shall preclude a member of the City Council
holding a valid concealed carry permit or endorsement from
carrying a concealed firearm at a meeting of the City Council of
which he or she is a member. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on
the premises shall not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is
not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on
the premises;
Section
215.900
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.900
AO:189
6. Any building owned, leased or controlled by the City of Republic
identified by signs posted at the entrance to the building. This
Subsection shall not apply to any building used for public housing
by private persons, highways or rest areas, firing ranges, and
private dwellings owned, leased, or controlled by the City of
Republic. Persons violating this Subsection may be denied entrance
to the building, ordered to leave the building and, if employees of
the City, be subjected to disciplinary measures for violation;
7. Any establishment licensed to dispense intoxicating liquor for
consumption on the premises, which portion is primarily devoted to
that purpose, without the consent of the owner or manager. The
provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to the licensee of said
establishment. The provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to
any bona fide restaurant open to the general public having dining
facilities for not less than fifty (50) persons and that receives at
least fifty-one percent (51%) of its gross annual income from the
dining facilities by the sale of food. This Subsection does not
prohibit the possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises of
the establishment and shall not be a criminal offense so long as the
firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the
vehicle is on the premises. Nothing in this Subsection authorizes
any individual who has been issued a concealed carry permit or
endorsement to possess any firearm while intoxicated;
8. Any area of an airport to which access is controlled by the
inspection of persons and property. Possession of a firearm in a
vehicle on the premises of the airport shall not be a violation so
long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished
while the vehicle is on the premises;
9. Any place where the carrying of a firearm is prohibited by Federal
law;
10. Any higher education institution or elementary or secondary school
facility without the consent of the Governing Body of the higher
education institution or a school official or the district school board,
unless the person with the concealed carry endorsement or permit
is a teacher or administrator of an elementary or secondary school
who has been designated by his or her school district as a school
protection officer and is carrying a firearm in a school within that
district, in which case no consent is required. Possession of a
firearm in a vehicle on the premises of any higher education
institution or elementary or secondary school facility shall not be a
criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the
vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises;
11. Any portion of a building used as a child care facility without the
consent of the manager. Nothing in this Subsection shall prevent
the operator of a child care facility in a family home from owning or
possessing a firearm or a concealed carry permit or endorsement;
Section
215.900
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.900
AO:190
12. Any riverboat gambling operation accessible by the public without
the consent of the owner or manager pursuant to rules
promulgated by the Gaming Commission. Possession of a firearm in
a vehicle on the premises of a riverboat gambling operation shall
not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from
the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises;
13. Any gated area of an amusement park. Possession of a firearm in a
vehicle on the premises of the amusement park shall not be a
criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the
vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises;
14. Any church or other place of religious worship without the consent
of the minister or person or persons representing the religious
organization that exercises control over the place of religious
worship. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises shall
not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from
the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises;
15. Any private property whose owner has posted the premises as
being off-limits to concealed firearms by means of one (1) or more
signs displayed in a conspicuous place of a minimum size of eleven
(11) inches by fourteen (14) inches with the writing thereon in
letters of not less than one (1) inch. The owner, business or
commercial lessee, manager of a private business enterprise, or
any other organization, entity or person may prohibit persons
holding a concealed carry permit or endorsement from carrying
concealed firearms on the premises and may prohibit employees,
not authorized by the employer, holding a concealed carry permit
or endorsement from carrying concealed firearms on the property
of the employer. If the building or the premises are open to the
public, the employer of the business enterprise shall post signs on
or about the premises if carrying a concealed firearm is prohibited.
Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises shall not be a
criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the
vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises. An
employer may prohibit employees or other persons holding a
concealed carry permit or endorsement from carrying a concealed
firearm in vehicles owned by the employer;
16. Any sports arena or stadium with a seating capacity of five
thousand (5,000) or more. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on
the premises shall not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is
not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on
the premises;
17. Any hospital accessible by the public. Possession of a firearm in a
vehicle on the premises of a hospital shall not be a criminal offense
so long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or
brandished while the vehicle is on the premises.
Section
215.900
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.900
AO:191
Section 215.910. Open Display of Firearm Permitted, When.
Any person who has a valid concealed carry endorsement issued prior to
August 28, 2013, or a valid concealed carry permit, and who is lawfully
carrying a firearm in a concealed manner, may briefly and openly display
the firearm to the ordinary sight of another person, unless the firearm is
intentionally displayed in an angry or threatening manner, not in necessary
self-defense.
Section 215.920. Unlawful Use of Projectile Weapon. [Ord. No.
09-41 §1, 11-23-2009; Ord. No. 14-24 §1, 9-22-2014]
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of Subsection (A) of this
Section shall be punished as follows:
1. If the violator holds a concealed carry permit or endorsement
issued pursuant to State law, the violator may be subject to denial
to the premises or removal from the premises. If such person
refuses to leave the premises and a Peace Officer is summoned,
such person may be issued a citation for an amount not to exceed
one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense. If a second
citation for a similar violation occurs within a six-month period,
such person shall be fined an amount not to exceed two hundred
dollars ($200.00). If a third citation for a similar violation is issued
within one (1) year of the first citation, such person shall be fined
an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Upon
conviction of charges arising from a citation issued pursuant to this
Section, the court shall notify the Sheriff of the County which
issued the concealed carry permit, or, if the person is a holder of a
concealed carry endorsement issued prior to August 28, 2013, the
court shall notify the Sheriff of the County which issued the
certificate of qualification for a concealed carry permit or
endorsement and the Department of Revenue.
2. If the violator does not hold a current valid concealed carry permit
or endorsement issued pursuant to State law, upon conviction of a
charge of violating this Section the defendant shall be punished as
provided in Section 100.220 of this Code of Ordinances.
3. Employees of the City of Republic may, in addition to any other
punishment hereby, be subject to disciplinary action.
C. It shall be a violation of this Section, punishable by a citation for an
amount not to exceed thirty-five dollars ($35.00), for any person issued
a concealed carry permit or endorsement pursuant to State law to fail
to carry the concealed carry permit or endorsement at all times the
person is carrying a concealed firearm, or to fail to display the
concealed carry permit or endorsement upon the request of any Peace
Officer.
A. Discharge Of A Projectile Weapon.
Section
215.900
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.920
AO:192
1. It is unlawful for any person to shoot, fire or discharge a projectile
weapon within the City limits of the City of Republic, or on any
premises owned or controlled by the City, except a person may
shoot, fire or discharge a projectile weapon on private property
with the permission of the owner or occupant of such property, and
under circumstances when such projectile weapon can be fired,
discharged or operated in such manner as not to endanger any
person or property, and in which the projectile's momentum is
incapable of traversing any grounds or space outside the limits of
such private property. This exception shall not apply to any
property which is less than three (3) acres in size.
2. This Section shall not apply to the City Police or other Peace
Officers of the United States or the State of Missouri in the
discharge of their duty or when done in the lawful use of force in
the defense of the person, property or family. Nor shall this Section
apply to activities by the City or school.
B. Carrying Any Projectile Weapon.
1. No person shall wear, bear or otherwise carry into any publicly
owned or leased building, park or school located in the city limits of
the City of Republic any projectile weapon.
2. Subsection (B)(1) shall not apply to:
a. City Police or other Peace Officers of the United States or the
State of Missouri in the discharge of their duty;
b. When done by persons in the lawful use of force in the defense
of the person, property or family;
c. When done by persons participating or displaying projectile
weapons at shows authorized by the City or school;
d. When done by persons participating in hunter or firearm safety
courses sanctioned by the State of Missouri and/or authorized
by the City or school; or
e. When done by persons specifically authorized by the City or
school to carry projectile weapons.
C. City- Or School-Authorized Activity. [Ord. No. 14-24 §1, 9-22-2014]
1. Civic, non-profit, commercial and social organizations desiring to
hold activities related to the use or display of projectile weapons
shall make application to the City Council at least fourteen (14)
days prior to the date any such activity is desired to be scheduled.
Such application shall set forth the date and times during which
such activity is desired to be scheduled, the specific reasons as to
why the activity is to be held, and such other information as the
Council may require, including the names and addresses of all
persons responsible for conducting the activity. If the City Council,
Section
215.920
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.920
AO:193
Section 215.930. Possession and Use of Paintball Guns. [Ord. No.
09-41 §2, 11-23-2009]
Section 215.940. Displaying A Deadly Weapon. [CC 1999 §16-45;
Ord. No. 03-68 §1, 10-13-2003]
in its discretion, is of the opinion such activity would constitute a
legitimate community event, it may issue a special activity permit
authorizing the requested activity subject to approval of plans
for the activity through the special event planning process, if
applicable. If any such activity is authorized by special activity
permit, nothing herein shall be construed as requiring the City
Council to authorize a special activity permit to the same
organization for activities desired to be scheduled in successive
years. If a request for a special activity permit is made less than
fourteen (14) days before the event, the applicant shall be required
to post a cash bond in an amount sufficient to cover any cost
incurred by the City as a result of the shortened time period.
Such cost shall include, but is not limited to, overtime cost, cost
of cleanup, police and fire services, etc., and those costs shall be
deducted from the cash bond and the balance, if any, returned to
the applicant.
2. The school district may authorize activities related to the use or
display of projectile weapons on school property and which are
sponsored by the school.
A. The possession of a loaded paintball gun or use of a paintball gun
against persons, property or animals on municipal land including
municipal trails within the City is prohibited.
B. The use of a paintball gun against persons, property or animals in a
quasi-public place that is open to the general public within the City is
prohibited.
C. A person shall not discharge or fire a paintball gun in, toward or from
any motor vehicle.
D. A person shall not discharge or fire a paintball gun within, from, into or
across the right-of-way of any traveled portion of a City, County, State or
Federal roadway.
E. The discharge of a paintball gun in or about private property including,
but not limited to, any private picnic grounds, roads, parking lots or
other private property within the City shall be performed only with
consent of the property owner or person in charge of said property. Any
and all paintball gun discharges allowed by this Subsection shall be
performed in a manner that ensures that the trajectory endpoint of all
paintballs and their associated paint splatter are confined within the
limits of the boundary of the private property wherein discharged.
Section
215.920
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.940
AO:194
Section 215.950. Firearms in City Buildings. [Ord. No. 10-16 §1,
5-10-2010]
Section 215.960. through Section 215.1010. (Reserved)
A. Any person who commits the offense of displaying a deadly weapon
shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided by ordinance.
B. A person commits the offense of displaying a deadly weapon if such
person exhibits, in the presence of one (1) or more persons, any weapon
readily capable of lethal use in an angry or threatening manner.
A. No person who has been issued a concealed carry endorsement by the
Missouri Director of Revenue under Section 571.107, RSMo., or who
has been issued a valid permit or endorsement to carry concealed
firearms issued by another State or political subdivision of another
State shall, by authority of that endorsement or permit, be allowed to
carry a concealed firearm or to openly carry a firearm in any building or
portion of a building owned, leased or controlled by the City.
B. Signs shall be posted at each entrance of a building entirely owned,
leased or controlled by the City stating that carrying of firearms is
prohibited. If the City owns, leases or controls only a portion of a
building, the signs shall be posted at each entrance to that portion of
the building stating that carrying of firearms is prohibited.
C. This Section shall not apply to buildings used for public housing by
private persons, highways or rest areas, firing ranges, or private
dwellings owned, leased or controlled by the City.
D. In addition to the statutory exemptions for elected officials and Law
Enforcement Officers contained in Chapter 571, RSMo., those officers
appointed by Mayor and Council pursuant to Charter Section 4.4(g)
shall be exempt from application of this Section.
E. Any person violating this Section may be denied entrance to the
building or ordered to leave the building. Any City employee violating
this Section may be disciplined. No other penalty shall be imposed for a
violation of this Section.
Section
215.940
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.960
AO:195

ARTICLE VII
Offenses Concerning Property
Section 215.1020. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms mean:
ENTER UNLAWFULLY or REMAIN UNLAWFULLY — A person enters or
remains in or upon premises when he or she is not licensed or privileged
to do so. A person who, regardless of his or her purpose, enters or remains
in or upon premises which are at the time open to the public does so with
license and privilege unless he or she defies a lawful order not to enter
or remain, personally communicated to him or her by the owner of such
premises or by other authorized person. A license or privilege to enter or
remain in a building which is only partly open to the public is not a license
or privilege to enter or remain in that part of the building which is not open
to the public.
TO TAMPER — To interfere with something improperly, to meddle with it,
displace it, make unwarranted alterations in its existing condition, or to
deprive, temporarily, the owner or possessor of that thing.
UTILITY — An enterprise which provides gas, electric, steam, water, sewage
disposal, or communication, video, internet, or voice over internet protocol
services, and any common carrier. It may be either publicly or privately
owned or operated.
Section 215.1030. Tampering.36
A. A person commits the offense of tampering if he/she:
1. Tampers with property of another for the purpose of causing
substantial inconvenience to that person or to another; or
2. Unlawfully rides in or upon another's automobile, airplane,
motorcycle, motorboat or other motor-propelled vehicle; or
3. Tampers or makes connection with property of a utility; or
4. Tampers with, or causes to be tampered with, any meter or other
property of an electric, gas, steam or water utility, the effect of
which tampering is either:
a. To prevent the proper measuring of electric, gas, steam or
water service; or
b. To permit the diversion of any electric, gas, steam or water
service.
B. In any prosecution under Subsection (A)(4), proof that a meter or any
other property of a utility has been tampered with, and the person or
persons accused received the use or direct benefit of the electric, gas,
36.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.1020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1030
AO:197
Section 215.1035. Tampering With Locks — Duplication of Keys.
Section 215.1040. Property Damage.37
Section 215.1050. Claim of Right.
Section 215.1060. Trespass in the First Degree.
steam or water service with one (1) or more of the effects described in
Subsection (A)(4), shall be sufficient to support an inference which the
trial court may submit to the trier of fact from which the trier of fact
may conclude that there has been a violation of such Subsection by the
person or persons who use or receive the direct benefit of the electric,
gas, steam or water service.
A. No person except a Police Officer, Fireman or other public official
engaged in the performance of his/her duty shall commit the following
acts:
1. Destroy the security of a lock by alteration, removal of any part or
otherwise, without the authorization of the person owning or
controlling the lock.
2. Duplicate any key stamped "Do not duplicate," "It is unlawful to
duplicate this key," or similar words unless the owner of the area
which the lock secures provides identification and authorization.
A. A person commits the offense of property damage if he/she:
1. Knowingly damages property of another; or
2. Damages property for the purpose of defrauding an insurer.
A. A person does not commit an offense by damaging, tampering with,
operating, riding in or upon or making connection with property of
another if he/she does so under a claim of right and has reasonable
grounds to believe he/she has such a right.
B. The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of claim of
right.
C. No person who, as a tenant, willfully or wantonly destroys, defaces,
damages, impairs or removes any part of a leased structure or dwelling
unit, or the facilities, equipment or appurtenances thereof, may inject
the issue of claim of right.
A. A person commits the offense of trespass in the first degree if he/she
knowingly enters unlawfully or knowingly remains unlawfully in a
building or inhabitable structure or upon real property.
37.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.1030
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.1060
AO:198
Section 215.1070. Trespass in the Second Degree.
Section 215.1080. Trespass of a School Bus.
Section 215.1090. Reckless Burning or Exploding.
A person commits the offense of reckless burning or exploding if he/she
recklessly starts a fire or causes an explosion and thereby damages or
destroys the property of another.
Section 215.1100. Negligent Burning or Exploding.
B. A person does not commit the offense of trespass by entering or
remaining upon real property unless the real property is fenced or
otherwise enclosed in a manner designed to exclude intruders or as to
which notice against trespass is given by:
1. Actual communication to the actor; or
2. Posting in a manner reasonably likely to come to the attention of
intruders.
A. A person commits trespass in the second degree if he/she enters
unlawfully upon real property of another. This is an offense of absolute
liability.
B. Trespass in the second degree is an infraction.
A. A person commits the offense of trespass of a school bus if he or she
knowingly and unlawfully enters any part of or unlawfully operates any
school bus.
B. For the purposes of this Section, the terms "unlawfully enters" and
"unlawfully operates" refer to any entry or operation of a school bus
which is not:
1. Approved of and established in a school district's written policy on
access to school buses; or
2. Authorized by specific written approval of the school board.
C. In order to preserve the public order, any district which adopts the
policies described in Subsection (B) of this Section shall establish and
enforce a student behavior policy for students on school buses.
A. A person commits the offense of negligent burning or exploding if he/
she with criminal negligence causes damage to property or to the
woodlands, cropland, grassland, prairie, or marsh of another by:
1. Starting a fire or causing an explosion; or
2. Allowing a fire burning on lands in his or her possession or control
onto the property of another.
Section
215.1060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1110
AO:199
Section 215.1110. Stealing.38
Section 215.1120. Theft of Motor Fuel.
Section 215.1130. (Reserved)39
Section 215.1140. Financial Exploitation of an Elderly Person or
Person With a Disability — Certain Defense Prohibited.40
A. A person commits the offense of stealing if he or she:
1. Appropriates property or services of another with the purpose to
deprive him or her thereof, either without his or her consent or by
means of deceit or coercion;
2. Attempts to appropriate anhydrous ammonia or liquid nitrogen of
another with the purpose to deprive him or her thereof, either
without his or her consent or by means of deceit or coercion; or
3. For the purpose of depriving the owner of a lawful interest therein,
receives, retains or disposes of property of another knowing that it
has been stolen, or believing that it has been stolen.
A. No person shall drive a motor vehicle so as to cause it to leave the
premises of an establishment at which motor fuel offered for retail sale
was dispensed into the fuel tank of such motor vehicle unless payment
or authorized charge for motor fuel dispensed has been made.
B. A person found guilty or pleading guilty to stealing pursuant to Section
215.1110 for the theft of motor fuel as described in Subsection (A) shall
have his/her driver's license suspended by the court beginning on the
date of the court's order of conviction. The person shall submit all of
his/her operator's and chauffeur's licenses to the court upon conviction
and the court shall forward all such driver's licenses and the order of
suspension of driving privileges to the Department of Revenue for
administration of such order.
A. A person commits the offense of financial exploitation of an elderly
person or a person with a disability if such person knowingly obtains
control over the property of the elderly person or person with a
disability with the intent to permanently deprive the person of the use,
benefit or possession of his or her property thereby benefitting the
offender or detrimentally affecting the elderly person or person with a
disability by:
1. Deceit;
38.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
39.Editor's Note: This Section previously pertained to receiving stolen property. However, the
authorizing statute, former RSMo. §570.080, was repealed without replacement by SB 491
in the 2014 Legislative Session, effective 1-1-2017.
40.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.1110
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.1140
AO:200
2. Coercion;
3. Creating or confirming another person's impression which is false
and which the offender does not believe to be true;
4. Failing to correct a false impression which the offender previously
has created or confirmed;
5. Preventing another person from acquiring information pertinent to
the disposition of the property involved;
6. Selling or otherwise transferring or encumbering property, failing
to disclose a lien, adverse claim or other legal impediment to the
enjoyment of the property, whether such impediment is or is not
valid, or is or is not a matter of official record;
7. Promising performance which the offender does not intend to
perform or knows will not be performed. Failure to perform
standing alone is not sufficient evidence to prove that the offender
did not intend to perform; or
8. Undue influence, which means the use of influence by someone
who exercises authority over an elderly person or person with a
disability in order to take unfair advantage of that person's
vulnerable state of mind, neediness, pain, or agony. "Undue
influence" includes, but is not limited to, the improper or
fraudulent use of a power of attorney, guardianship,
conservatorship, or other fiduciary authority.
B. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to limit the remedies
available to the victim pursuant to any State law relating to domestic
violence.
C. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to impose criminal liability on
a person who has made a good-faith effort to assist the elderly person or
person with a disability in the management of his or her property, but
through no fault of his or her own has been unable to provide such
assistance.
D. Nothing in this Section shall limit the ability to engage in bona fide
estate planning, to transfer property and to otherwise seek to reduce
estate and inheritance taxes; provided that such actions do not
adversely impact the standard of living to which the elderly person or
person with a disability has become accustomed at the time of such
actions.
E. It shall not be a defense to financial exploitation of an elderly person or
person with a disability that the accused reasonably believed that the
victim was not an elderly person or person with a disability.
F. Medicaid Funds. It shall be unlawful in violation of this Section for any
person receiving or in the possession of funds of a Medicaid-eligible
elderly person or person with a disability residing in a facility licensed
Section
215.1140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1140
AO:201
Section 215.1150. Fraudulent Use of a Credit or Debit Device.41
Section 215.1160. Deceptive Business Practice.
under Chapter 198, RSMo., to fail to remit to the facility in which the
Medicaid-eligible person resides all money owing the facility resident
from any source, including, but not limited to, social security, railroad
retirement, or payments from any other source disclosed as resident
income contained in the records of the Department of Social Services,
Family Support Division, or its successor. The Department of Social
Services, Family Support Division, or its successor is authorized to
release information from its records containing the resident's income
or assets to any prosecuting or circuit attorney in the State of Missouri
for purposes of investigating or prosecuting any suspected violation of
this Section.
G. The offense of financial exploitation of an elderly person or person with
a disability is an ordinance violation.
A. A person commits the offense of fraudulent use of a credit device or
debit device if he or she uses a credit device or debit device for the
purpose of obtaining services or property, knowing that:
1. The device is stolen, fictitious or forged; or
2. The device has been revoked or canceled; or
3. For any other reason his or her use of the device is unauthorized;
or
B. A person commits the offense of fraudulent use of a credit device or
debit device if he or she uses a credit device or debit device for the
purpose of paying property taxes and knowingly cancels such charges
or payment without just cause. It shall be prima facie evidence of a
violation of this Section if a person cancels such charges or payment
after obtaining a property tax receipt to obtain license tags from the
Missouri Department of Revenue.
A. A person commits the offense of deceptive business practice if in the
course of engaging in a business, occupation or profession, he or she
recklessly:
1. Uses or possesses for use a false weight or measure, or any other
device for falsely determining or recording any quality or quantity;
2. Sells, offers, displays for sale, or delivers less than the represented
quantity of any commodity or service;
41.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.1140
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.1160
AO:202
Section 215.1170. Alteration or Removal of Item Numbers With
Intent To Deprive Lawful Owner.42
Section 215.1180. Stealing Leased or Rented Personal Property —
Enforcement Procedure — Penalty — Venue.43
3. Takes or attempts to take more than the represented quantity of
any commodity or service when as buyer he or she furnishes the
weight or measure;
4. Sells, offers, or exposes for sale adulterated or mislabeled
commodities;
5. Makes a false or misleading written statement for the purpose of
obtaining property or credit;
6. Promotes the sale of property or services by a false or misleading
statement in any advertisement; or
7. Advertises in any manner the sale of property or services with the
purpose not to sell or provide the property or services:
a. At the price which he or she offered them;
b. In a quantity sufficient to meet the reasonably expected public
demand, unless the quantity is specifically stated in the
advertisement; or
c. At all.
A. A person commits the offense of alteration or removal of item numbers
if he/she with the purpose of depriving the owner of a lawful interest
therein:
1. Destroys, removes, covers, conceals, alters, defaces or causes to be
destroyed, removed, covered, concealed, altered or defaced the
manufacturer's original serial number or other distinguishing
owner-applied number or mark on any item which bears a serial
number attached by the manufacturer or distinguishing number or
mark applied by the owner of the item for any reason whatsoever;
2. Sells, offers for sale, pawns or uses as security for a loan any item
on which the manufacturer's original serial number or other
distinguishing owner-applied number or mark has been destroyed,
removed, covered, concealed, altered or defaced; or
3. Buys, receives as security for a loan or in pawn, or in any manner
receives or has in his/her possession any item on which the
manufacturer's original serial number or other distinguishing
owner-applied number or mark has been destroyed, removed,
covered, concealed, altered or defaced.
42.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.1160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1180
AO:203
A. A person commits the offense of stealing leased or rented property if,
with the intent to deprive the owner thereof, such person:
1. Purposefully fails to return leased or rented personal property to
the place and within the time specified in an agreement in writing
providing for the leasing or renting of such personal property;
2. Conceals or aids or abets the concealment of the property from the
owner;
3. Sells, encumbers, conveys, pawns, loans, abandons or gives away
the leased or rented property or any part thereof, without the
written consent of the lessor, or without informing the person to
whom the property is transferred to, that the property is subject to
a lease;
4. Returns the property to the lessor at the end of the lease term, plus
any agreed upon extensions, but does not pay the lease charges
agreed upon in the written instrument, with the intent to
wrongfully deprive the lessor of the agreed upon charges.
B. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all forms of leasing and
rental agreements including, but not limited to, contracts which
provide the consumer options to buy the leased or rented personal
property, lease-purchase agreements and rent-to-own contracts. For the
purpose of determining if a violation of this Section has occurred,
leasing contracts which provide options to buy the merchandise are
owned by the owner of the property until such time as the owner
endorses the sale and transfer of ownership of the leased property to
the lessee.
C. Evidence that a lessee used a false, fictitious, or not current name,
address, or place of employment in obtaining the property or that a
lessee fails or refuses to return the property or pay the lease charges to
the lessor within seven (7) days after written demand for the return has
been sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address the
person set forth in the lease agreement, or in the absence of the
address, to the person's last known place of residence, shall be
evidence of intent to violate the provisions of this Section, except that if
a motor vehicle has not been returned within seventy-two (72) hours
after the expiration of the lease or rental agreement, such failure to
return the motor vehicle shall be prima facie evidence of the intent of
the offense of stealing leased or rented property. Where the leased or
rented property is a motor vehicle, if the motor vehicle has not been
returned within seventy-two (72) hours after the expiration of the lease
or rental agreement, the lessor may notify the local law enforcement
agency of the failure of the lessee to return such motor vehicle, and the
local law enforcement agency shall cause such motor vehicle to be put
into any appropriate State and local computer system listing stolen
43.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.1180
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.1180
AO:204
Section 215.1190. Passing Bad Checks.44
motor vehicles. Any Law Enforcement Officer which stops such a motor
vehicle may seize the motor vehicle and notify the lessor that he/she
may recover such motor vehicle after it is photographed and its vehicle
identification number is recorded for evidentiary purposes. Where the
leased or rented property is not a motor vehicle, if such property
has not been returned within the seven-day period prescribed in this
Subsection, the owner of the property shall report the failure to return
the property to the local law enforcement agency, and such law
enforcement agency may within five (5) days notify the person who
leased or rented the property that such person is in violation of this
Section, and that failure to immediately return the property may
subject such person to arrest for the violation.
D. This Section shall not apply if such personal property is a vehicle and
such return is made more difficult or expensive by a defect in such
vehicle which renders such vehicle inoperable if the lessee shall notify
the lessor of the location of such vehicle and such defect before the
expiration of the lease or rental agreement or within ten (10) days after
proper notice.
E. Any person who has leased or rented personal property of another who
destroys such property so as to avoid returning it to the owner commits
the offense of property damage pursuant to Section 569.100, RSMo., or
Section 215.1040 of this Code in addition to being in violation of this
Section.
F. Venue shall lie in the County where the personal property was originally
rented or leased.
A. A person commits the offense of passing a bad check when he/she:
1. With the purpose to defraud, makes, issues or passes a check or
other similar sight order or any other form of presentment
involving the transmission of account information for the payment
of money knowing that it will not be paid by the drawee or that
there is no such drawee; or
2. Makes, issues or passes a check or other similar sight order or any
other form of presentment involving the transmission of account
information for the payment of money, knowing that there are
insufficient funds in or on deposit with that account for the
payment of such check, sight order or other form of presentment
involving the transmission of account information in full and all
other checks, sight orders or other forms of presentment involving
the transmission of account information upon such funds then
outstanding, or that there is no such account or no drawee and fails
to pay the check or sight order or other form of presentment
44.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.1180
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1190
AO:205
Section 215.1200. Shoplifting — Detention of Suspect by Merchant
— Liability Presumption.
involving the transmission of account information within ten (10)
days after receiving actual notice in writing that it has not been
paid because of insufficient funds or credit with the drawee or
because there is no such drawee.
B. As used in Subsection (A)(2) of this Section, "actual notice in writing"
means notice of the non-payment which is actually received by the
defendant. Such notice may include the service of summons or warrant
upon the defendant for the initiation of the prosecution of the check or
checks which are the subject matter of the prosecution if the summons
or warrant contains information of the ten-day period during which the
instrument may be paid and that payment of the instrument within such
ten-day period will result in dismissal of the charges. The requirement
of notice shall also be satisfied for written communications which are
tendered to the defendant and which the defendant refuses to accept.
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following definitions shall apply:
MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT — Any mercantile place of business
in, at or from which goods, wares and merchandise are sold, offered for
sale or delivered from and sold at retail or wholesale.
MERCHANDISE — All goods, wares and merchandise offered for sale
or displayed by a merchant.
MERCHANT — Any corporation, partnership, association or person
who is engaged in the business of selling goods, wares and merchandise
in a mercantile establishment.
WRONGFUL TAKING — Includes stealing of merchandise or money and
any other wrongful appropriation of merchandise or money.
B. Any merchant, his/her agent or employee, who has reasonable grounds
or probable cause to believe that a person has committed or is
committing a wrongful taking of merchandise or money from a
mercantile establishment, may detain such person in a reasonable
manner and for a reasonable length of time for the purpose of
investigating whether there has been a wrongful taking of such
merchandise or money. Any such reasonable detention shall not
constitute an unlawful arrest or detention, nor shall it render the
merchant, his/her agent or employee criminally or civilly liable to the
person so detained.
C. Any person willfully concealing unpurchased merchandise of any
mercantile establishment, either on the premises or outside the
premises of such establishment, shall be presumed to have so
concealed such merchandise with the intention of committing a
wrongful taking of such merchandise within the meaning of Subsection
(A), and the finding of such unpurchased merchandise concealed upon
the person or among the belongings of such person shall be evidence of
Section
215.1190
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.1200
AO:206
Section 215.1210. Copper Wire or Cable, Catalytic Converters,
Collectors and Dealers To Keep Register, Information Required —
Penalty — Exempt Transactions.
reasonable grounds and probable cause for the detention in a
reasonable manner and for a reasonable length of time of such person
by a merchant, his/her agent or employee in order that recovery of such
merchandise may be effected, and any such reasonable detention shall
not be deemed to be unlawful nor render such merchant, his/her agent
or employee criminally or civilly liable.
A. Every purchaser or collector of, or dealer in, junk, scrap metal or any
secondhand property shall keep a register containing a written or
electronic record for each purchase or trade in which each type of
metal subject to the provisions of this Section is obtained for value.
There shall be a separate record for each transaction involving any:
1. Copper, brass or bronze;
2. Aluminum wire, cable, pipe, tubing, bar, ingot, rod, fitting or
fastener;
3. Material containing copper or aluminum that is knowingly used for
farming purposes as farming is defined in Section 350.010, RSMo.;
whatever may be the condition or length of such metal; or
4. Catalytic converter.
B. The record required by this Section shall contain the following data:
1. A copy of the driver's license or photo identification issued by the
State or by the United States Government or agency thereof to the
person from whom the material is obtained;
2. The current address, gender, birth date, and a photograph of the
person from whom the material is obtained if not included or are
different from the identification required in Subsection (B)(1) of
this Subsection;
3. The date, time and place of the transaction;
4. The license plate number of the vehicle used by the seller during
the transaction;
5. A full description of the metal, including the weight and purchase
price.
C. The records required under this Section shall be maintained for a
minimum of twenty-four (24) months from when such material is
obtained and shall be available for inspection by any Law Enforcement
Officer.
Section
215.1200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1210
AO:207
Section 215.1220. Metal Beer Keg, Prohibition on Purchase or
Possession by Scrap Metal Dealer — Violation, Penalty.
Section 215.1230. Metal Belonging to Various Entities — Scrap
Yard Not To Purchase — Violation, Penalty.
D. Anyone convicted of violating this Section shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation.
E. This Section shall not apply to any of the following transactions:
1. Any transaction for which the total amount paid for all regulated
scrap metal purchased or sold does not exceed fifty dollars
($50.00), unless the scrap metal is a catalytic converter;
2. Any transaction for which the seller, including a farm or farmer, has
an existing business relationship with the scrap metal dealer and is
known to the scrap metal dealer making the purchase to be an
established business or political subdivision that operates a
business with a fixed location that can be reasonably expected to
generate regulated scrap metal and can be reasonably identified as
such a business; or
3. Any transaction for which the type of metal subject to Subsection
(A) of this Section is a minor part of a larger item, except for
equipment used in the generation and transmission of electrical
power or telecommunications.
A. No scrap metal dealer shall knowingly purchase or possess a metal beer
keg, whether damaged or undamaged, or any reasonably recognizable
part thereof, on any premises that the dealer uses to buy, sell, store,
shred, melt, cut or otherwise alter scrap metal except when the
purchase is from the brewer or its authorized representative. For
purposes of this Section, "keg" shall have the same meaning as in
Section 311.082, RSMo.
B. Anyone who is found guilty of, or pleads guilty to, violating this Section
shall be guilty of an ordinance violation punishable only by fine.
Nothing in this Section shall be construed to preclude a person
violating this Section from also being prosecuted for any applicable
criminal offense.
A. No scrap yard shall purchase any metal that can be identified as
belonging to a public or private cemetery, political subdivision,
telecommunications provider, cable provider, wireless service or other
communications-related provider, electrical cooperative, water utility,
municipal utility or utility regulated under Chapters 386 or 393, RSMo.,
including bleachers, guardrails, signs, street and traffic lights or
signals, and manhole cover or covers, whether broken or unbroken,
from anyone other than the cemetery or monument owner, political
subdivision, telecommunications provider, cable provider, wireless
Section
215.1210
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.1230
AO:208
Section 215.1240. Scrap Metal Dealers — Payments in Excess of
$500.00 To Be Made by Check — Exceptions.
Section 215.1250. Prohibition Against Obstructing A Fire Hydrant.
[CC 1999 §15-16]
No person shall obstruct or hinder in any manner the use and operation of
any fire hydrant within this City or allow at any time any object to obstruct
or hinder the possible use and operation of any fire hydrant within this City.
Section 215.1260. Creation of Graffiti Prohibited. [CC 1999 §15-19]
service or other communications-related provider, electrical
cooperative, water utility, municipal utility, utility regulated under
Chapter 386 or 393, RSMo., or manufacturer of the metal or item
described in this Section unless such person is authorized in writing
by the cemetery or monument owner, political subdivision,
telecommunications provider, cable provider, wireless service or other
communications-related provider, electrical cooperative, water utility,
municipal utility, utility regulated under Chapter 386 or 393, RSMo., or
manufacturer to sell the metal.
B. Anyone convicted of violating this Section shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation.
A. Any scrap metal dealer paying out an amount that is five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or more shall make such payment by issuing a
prenumbered check drawn on a regular bank account in the name of
the licensed scrap metal dealer and with such check made payable to
the person documented as the seller in accordance with this Section, or
by using a system for automated cash or electronic payment
distribution which photographs or videotapes the payment recipient
and identifies the payment with a distinct transaction in the register
maintained in accordance with Chapter 407, RSMo.
B. Any scrap metal dealer that purchases scrap metal from a seller and
pays in the form of cash is required to obtain a copy of the seller's
driver's license or non-driver's license if the metal is copper or a
catalytic converter. This Section shall not apply to any transaction for
which the seller has an existing business relationship with the scrap
metal dealer and is known to the scrap metal dealer making the
purchase to be an established business or political subdivision that
operates a business with a fixed location that can be reasonably
expected to generate regulated scrap metal and can be reasonably
identified as such a business.
C. Any person in violation of Sections 210.1210 to 210.1240 by selling
stolen scrap metal shall be responsible for consequential damages
related to obtaining the scrap metal.
Section
215.1230
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1260
AO:209
Section 215.1270. through Section 215.1340. (Reserved)
A. The presence of "graffiti", term which shall mean inscription, word,
figure, design, symbol or insignia which is determined to be related to
gang activity and is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, painted or
otherwise affixed to or placed upon public or private property within
the City of Republic, is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance.
No person shall affix graffiti to private or public property within the City
of Republic. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the City of Republic
from pursuing any other remedy available for redress of any damage or
injury caused by the actions of any such person.
B. Whenever any authorized City Official is informed and believes that a
public nuisance by reason of the presence of graffiti exists on any
private or public property with the City, he/she shall give written notice
to the owner, possessor or occupant of such property of the graffiti and
the duty to abate the graffiti within ten (10) days from the date the
notice is given, using any of the means of notice set forth in the City
Code. The notice to abate shall also include the notice of a date, time
and place for a hearing to determine whether the City shall be entitled
to enter onto the property to abate the graffiti in the event the graffiti is
not fully abated in a timely manner.
1. Duty of owner, possessor or occupant of private property to abate
graffiti. Upon receipt of notice to abate graffiti, it shall be the duty
of the owner, possessor or occupant of private property or public
property upon which graffiti has been affixed to remove, obliterate
or otherwise abate the graffiti existing on the property within the
time specified in the notice. The owner, possessor or occupant may
satisfy the duty to abate the graffiti by permitting authorized
agents of the City or authorized community volunteers to enter
onto the property in order to remove, obliterate or otherwise abate
the graffiti.
2. Procedure upon failure to abate graffiti. Upon failure of the owner,
possessor or occupant of private property or public property to
abate or permit the abatement of graffiti within the time specified
in the notice to abate, a hearing officer appointed by the City
Administrator shall, at the time, date, and place specified in the
notice to abate, conduct an informal hearing to determine whether
there is probable cause to believe that graffiti is present on the
property and that proper notice to abate has been given, the
hearing officer shall forthwith enter an order authorizing the City
to enter onto the property in order to abate the graffiti. Any person
aggrieved by an order of the hearing officer may appeal from the
order in accordance with the provisions of Section 536.150, RSMo.
Section
215.1260
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.1270
AO:210
ARTICLE VIII
Offenses Concerning Prostitution
Section 215.1350. Article Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms mean:
DEVIATE SEXUAL INTERCOURSE — Any sexual act involving the genitals
of one (1) person and the mouth, hand, tongue, or anus of another person;
or any act involving the penetration, however slight, of the penis, the female
genitalia, or the anus by a finger, instrument, or object done for the purpose
of arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of any person or for the purpose
of terrorizing the victim.
PERSISTENT PROSTITUTION OFFENDER — A person who has been found
guilty of two (2) or more prostitution-related offenses.
PROSTITUTION-RELATED OFFENSE — Any violation of State law for
prostitution, patronizing prostitution, or promoting prostitution.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Sexual intercourse, deviate sexual intercourse, or
sexual contact.
SEXUAL CONTACT — Any touching of another person with the genitals or
any touching of the genitals or anus of another person or the breast of a
female person, or such touching through the clothing, for the purpose of
arousing or gratifying sexual desire of any person or for the purpose of
terrorizing the victim.
SEXUAL INTERCOURSE — Any penetration, however slight, of the female
genitalia by the penis.
SOMETHING OF VALUE — Any money or property, or any token, object or
article exchangeable for money or property.
Section 215.1360. Prostitution.45
A person commits the offense of prostitution if he or she engages in or offers
or agrees to engage in sexual conduct with another person in return for
something of value to be received by any person.
Section 215.1370. Patronizing Prostitution.46
A. A person commits the offense of patronizing prostitution if he or she:
1. Pursuant to a prior understanding, gives something of value to
another person as compensation for having engaged in sexual
conduct with any person; or
2. Gives or agrees to give something of value to another person with
the understanding that such person or another person will engage
in sexual conduct with any person; or
45.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
46.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.1350
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1370
AO:211
Section 215.1380. (Reserved)47
Section 215.1390. Prostitution Houses Deemed Public Nuisances.
Section 215.1400. through Section 215.1490. (Reserved)
3. Solicits or requests another person to engage in sexual conduct
with any person in return for something of value.
B. It shall not be a defense that the person believed that the individual he
or she patronized for prostitution was eighteen (18) years of age or
older.
A. Any room, building or other structure regularly used for any
prostitution activity prohibited by this Article is a public nuisance.
B. The City Prosecuting Attorney may, in addition to all criminal sanctions,
prosecute a suit in equity to enjoin the nuisance. If the court finds that
the owner of the room, building or structure knew or had reason to
believe that the premises were being used regularly for prostitution
activity, the court may order that the premises shall not be occupied or
used for such period as the court may determine, not to exceed one (1)
year.
C. All persons, including owners, lessees, officers, agents, inmates or
employees, aiding or facilitating such a nuisance may be made
defendants in any suit to enjoin the nuisance, and they may be enjoined
from engaging in any prostitution activity anywhere within the
jurisdiction of the court.
D. Appeals shall be allowed from the judgment of the court as in other civil
actions.
47.Editor's Note: This Section previously noted that in prosecutions of prostitution and
patronizing prostitution, the sex (gender) of the parties was no defense. However, the
authorizing statute, former RSMo. §567.040, was repealed without replacement by SB 491
in the 2014 Legislative Session, effective 1-1-2017.
Section
215.1370
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.1400
AO:212
ARTICLE IX
Sexual Offenses
Section 215.1500. Article Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth
herein:
DEVIATE SEXUAL INTERCOURSE — Any act involving the genitals of one
person and the hand, mouth, tongue or anus of another person or a sexual
act involving the penetration, however slight, of the penis, female genitalia,
or the anus by a finger, instrument or object done for the purpose of
arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of any person or for the purpose of
terrorizing the victim.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Sexual intercourse, deviate sexual intercourse or
sexual contact.
SEXUAL CONTACT — Any touching of another person with the genitals or
any touching of the genitals or anus of another person, or the breast of a
female person, or such touching through the clothing, for the purpose of
arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of any person or for the purpose of
terrorizing the victim.
SEXUAL INTERCOURSE — Any penetration, however slight, of the female
genitalia by the penis.
Section 215.1510. Sexual Misconduct.
Section 215.1520. Sexual Abuse.48
A person commits the offense of sexual abuse in the second degree if he/she
purposely subjects another person to sexual contact without that person's
consent.
Section 215.1530. Certain Offenders Not To Physically Be Present
or Loiter Within 500 Feet of a Child Care Facility — Violation —
Penalty.
A. A person commits the offense of sexual misconduct in the first degree if
such person:
1. Exposes his/her genitals under circumstances in which he/she
knows that his/her conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm;
2. Has sexual contact in the presence of a third person or persons
under circumstances in which he/she knows that such conduct is
likely to cause affront or alarm; or
3. Has sexual intercourse or deviate sexual intercourse in a public
place in the presence of a third person.
48.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.1500
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1530
AO:213
Section 215.1540. Certain Offenders Not To Be Present Within 500
Feet of School Property, Exception — Permission Required for
Parents or Guardians Who Are Offenders, Procedure.
A. Any person who has been found guilty of:
1. Violating any of the provisions of Chapter 566, RSMo., or the
provisions of Section 568.020, RSMo., Incest; Section 568.045,
RSMo., Endangering The Welfare Of A Child In The First Degree;
Section 573.200, RSMo., Use Of A Child In A Sexual Performance;
Section 573.205, RSMo., Promoting A Sexual Performance By A
Child; Section 573.023, RSMo., Sexual Exploitation Of A Minor;
Section 573.025, RSMo., Promoting Child Pornography In The First
Degree; Section 573.035, RSMo., Promoting Child Pornography In
The Second Degree; Section 573.037, RSMo., Possession Of Child
Pornography; or Section 573.040, RSMo., Furnishing Pornographic
Material To Minors; or
2. Any offense in any other jurisdiction which, if committed in this
State, would be a violation listed in this Section;
shall not knowingly be physically present in or loiter within five
hundred (500) feet of or to approach, contact, or communicate
with any child under eighteen (18) years of age in any child-care
facility building, on the real property comprising any child care
facility when persons under the age of eighteen (18) are present
in the building, on the grounds, or in the conveyance, unless the
offender is a parent, legal guardian, or custodian of a student
present in the building or on the grounds.
B. For purposes of this Section, "child care facility" shall include any child
care facility licensed under Chapter 210, RSMo., or any child care
facility that is exempt from State licensure but subject to State
regulation under Section 215.252, RSMo., and holds itself out to be a
child care facility.
C. Violation of the provisions of this Section is an ordinance violation.
A. Any person who has been found guilty of:
1. Violating any of the provisions of Chapter 566, RSMo., or the
provisions of Section 568.020, RSMo., Incest; Section 568.045,
RSMo., Endangering The Welfare Of A Child In The First Degree;
Section 573.200, RSMo., Use Of A Child In A Sexual Performance;
Section 573.205, RSMo., Promoting A Sexual Performance By A
Child; Section 573.023, RSMo., Sexual Exploitation Of A Minor;
Section 573.025, RSMo., Promoting Child Pornography; or Section
573.040, RSMo., Furnishing Pornographic Material To Minors; or
2. Any offense in any other jurisdiction which, if committed in this
State, would be a violation listed in this Section;
Section
215.1530
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.1540
AO:214
Section 215.1550. Halloween, Restrictions on Conduct —
Violations.
shall not be present in or loiter within five hundred (500) feet
of any school building, on real property comprising any school,
or in any conveyance owned, leased or contracted by a school to
transport students to or from school or a school-related activity
when persons under the age of eighteen (18) are present in the
building, on the grounds, or in the conveyance, unless the offender
is a parent, legal guardian, or custodian of a student present in the
building and has met the conditions set forth in Subsection (B) of
this Section.
B. No parent, legal guardian or custodian who has pleaded guilty or nolo
contendere to, or been convicted of, or been found guilty of violating
any of the offenses listed in Subsection (A) of this Section shall be
present in any school building, on real property comprising any school,
or in any conveyance owned, leased or contracted by a school to
transport students to or from school or a school-related activity when
persons under the age of eighteen (18) are present in the building, on
the grounds, or in the conveyance, unless the parent, legal guardian, or
custodian has permission to be present from the Superintendent or
School Board or in the case of a private school from the Principal. In the
case of a public school, if permission is granted, the Superintendent or
School Board President must inform the Principal of the school where
the sex offender will be present. Permission may be granted by the
Superintendent, School Board, or in the case of a private school from
the Principal for more than one (1) event at a time, such as a series of
events, however, the parent, legal guardian or custodian must obtain
permission for any other event he/she wishes to attend for which he/she
has not yet had permission granted.
C. Regardless of the person's knowledge of his or her proximity to school
property or a school-related activity, violation of the provisions of this
Section is an ordinance violation.
A. Any person required to register as a sexual offender under Sections
589.400 to 589.425, RSMo., shall be required on October 31st of each
year to:
1. Avoid all Halloween-related contact with children;
2. Remain inside his or her residence between the hours of 5:00 P.M.
and 10:30 P.M. unless required to be elsewhere for just cause
including, but not limited to, employment or medical emergencies;
3. Post a sign at his or her residence stating "No candy or treats at
this residence"; and
4. Leave all outside residential lighting off during the evening hours
after 5:00 P.M.
Section
215.1540
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1550
AO:215
Section 215.1560. Invasion of Privacy.49
Section 215.1570. through Section 215.1660. (Reserved)
B. Any person required to register as a sexual offender under Sections
589.400 to 589.425, RSMo., who violates the provisions of Subsection
(A) of this Section shall be guilty of an ordinance violation.
A. A person commits the offense of invasion of privacy if he/she knowingly
views, photographs or films another person, without that person's
knowledge and consent, while the person being viewed, photographed
or filmed is in a state of full or partial nudity and is in a place where he/
she would have a reasonable expectation of privacy.
B. Such person knowingly uses a concealed camcorder or photographic
camera of any type to secretly videotape, photograph or record by
electronic means another person under or through the clothing worn by
that other person for the purpose of viewing the body of or the
undergarments worn by that other person without that person's
consent.
49.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.1550
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.1570
AO:216
ARTICLE X
Offenses Concerning Pornography
Section 215.1670. Definitions.
When used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings set
out herein:
FURNISH — To issue, sell, give, provide, lend, mail, deliver, transfer,
circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit or otherwise provide.
MATERIAL — Anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing,
photograph, motion-picture film, videotape or videotape production, or
pictorial representation, or any recording or transcription, or any
mechanical, chemical or electrical reproduction, or stored computer data,
or anything which is or may be used as a means of communication.
"Material" includes undeveloped photographs, molds, printing plates,
stored computer data, and other latent representational objects.
MINOR — Any person less than eighteen (18) years of age.
NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY — The showing of the human genitals, pubic
area, vulva, anus, anal cleft, or the female breast with less than a fully
opaque covering of any part of the nipple or areola.
OBSCENE — Any material or performance if, taken as a whole:
PERFORMANCE — Any play, motion-picture film, videotape, dance or
exhibition performed before an audience of one (1) or more.
PORNOGRAPHIC FOR MINORS — Any material or performance if the
following apply:
Applying contemporary community standards, its predominant appeal
is to prurient interest in sex; and
1.
The average person, applying contemporary community standards,
would find the material depicts or describes sexual conduct in a
patently offensive way; and
2.
A reasonable person would find the material lacks serious literary,
artistic, political or scientific value.
3.
The average person, applying contemporary community standards,
would find that the material or performance, taken as a whole, has a
tendency to cater or appeal to a prurient interest of minors; and
1.
The material or performance depicts or describes nudity, sexual
conduct, the condition of human genitals when in a state of sexual
stimulation or arousal or sadomasochistic abuse in a way which is
patently offensive to the average person applying contemporary adult
community standards with respect to what is suitable for minors; and
2.
The material or performance, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary,
artistic, political or scientific value for minors.
3.
Section
215.1670
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1670
AO:217
PROMOTE — To manufacture, issue, sell, provide, mail, deliver, transfer,
transmute, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit or
advertise, or to offer or agree to do the same, by any means including a
computer.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE — Flagellation or torture by or upon a person
as an act of sexual stimulation or gratification.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Actual or simulated, normal or perverted acts of
human masturbation; deviate sexual intercourse; sexual intercourse; or
physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area,
buttocks, or the breast of a female in an act of apparent sexual stimulation
or gratification; or any sadomasochistic abuse or acts including animals or
any latent objects in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT — The condition of human male or female genitals
when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
Section 215.1680. Promoting Pornography for Minors or
Obscenity.50
Section 215.1690. Furnishing Pornographic Materials to Minors.51
A. A person commits the offense of promoting pornography for minors or
obscenity if, knowing of its content and character, he/she:
1. Promotes or possesses with the purpose to promote any obscene
materials for pecuniary gain; or
2. Produces, presents, directs or participates in any obscene
performance for pecuniary gain; or
3. Promotes or possesses with the purpose to promote any material
pornographic for minors for pecuniary gain; or
4. Produces, presents, directs or participates in any performance
pornographic for minors for pecuniary gain; or
5. Promotes, possesses with the purpose to promote, produces,
presents, directs or participates in any performance that is
pornographic for minors via computer, electronic transfer, Internet
or computer network if the person made the matter available to a
specific individual known by the defendant to be a minor.
A. A person commits the offense of furnishing pornographic material to
minors if, knowing of its content and character, he/she:
1. Furnishes any material pornographic for minors knowing that the
person to whom it is furnished is a minor or acting in reckless
disregard of the likelihood that such person is a minor; or
50.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
51.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.1670
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.1690
AO:218
Section 215.1700. through Section 215.1790. (Reserved)
2. Produces, presents, directs or participates in any performance
pornographic for minors that is furnished to a minor knowing that
any person viewing such performance is a minor or acting in
reckless disregard of the likelihood that a minor is viewing the
performance; or
3. Furnishes, produces, presents, directs, participates in any
performance or otherwise makes available material that is
pornographic for minors via computer, electronic transfer, Internet
or computer network if the person made the matter available to a
specific individual known by the defendant to be a minor.
B. It is not a defense to a prosecution for a violation of this Section that the
person being furnished the pornographic material is a Peace Officer
masquerading as a minor.
C. The offense of furnishing pornographic material to minors or
attempting to furnish pornographic material to minors is an ordinance
violation.
Section
215.1690
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1700
AO:219

ARTICLE XI
Offenses Concerning Drugs and Alcohol
Section 215.1800. Possession of Marijuana or Synthetic
Cannabinoid.52
A person commits the offense of possession of marijuana or any synthetic
cannabinoid, as both terms are defined in Section 195.010, RSMo., if he or
she knowingly possesses marijuana or any synthetic cannabinoid, except as
authorized by Chapter 579 or Chapter 195, RSMo.53
Section 215.1805. Cultivating Marijuana.
Any person who commits the offense of cultivating marijuana shall, upon
conviction be punished as provided by ordinance.
Section 215.1810. Possession of a Controlled Substance.54
A person commits the offense of possession of a controlled substance,
as defined in Section 195.010, RSMo., if he or she knowingly possesses
a controlled substance, except as authorized by Chapter 579, RSMo., or
Chapter 195, RSMo.55
Section 215.1815. Simulated Drugs or Simulated Controlled
Substances.
Section 215.1820. Limitations on the Retail Sale of
Methamphetamine Precursor Drugs.
A. No persons shall sell, offer for sale, deliver or give away any simulated
drug or simulated controlled substance to another person.
B. For purposes of this Section, "simulated drugs" or "simulated controlled
substances" means:
1. Any product which is identified or identifies itself by using a
common name or slang term, similar name, similar term or similar
mark, imprint, brand, stamp or impression associated with a
controlled substance which is not, in fact, that controlled
substance;
2. Any product which is promoted or advertised or which indicates on
its label or accompanying promotional material that the product
simulates the effect of a controlled substance, except that
information which is provided by the manufacturer.
52.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
53.State Law Reference: For similar statutory provisions and the elements setting the levels
of this offense, see §§195.010, 195.017 and 579.015, RSMo.
54.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
55.State Law Reference: For similar statutory provisions and the elements setting the levels
of this offense, see §§195.010, 195.017 and 579.015, RSMo.
Section
215.1800
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1820
AO:221
Section 215.1830. Unlawful Possession of Drug Paraphernalia.56
A person commits the offense of unlawful possession of drug paraphernalia
if he or she knowingly uses, or possesses with intent to use, drug
paraphernalia, to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the
human body, a controlled substance or an imitation controlled substance in
violation of Chapter 579, RSMo., or Chapter 195, RSMo.
Section 215.1840. Inhalation or Inducing Others To Inhale Solvent
Fumes to Cause Certain Reactions, Prohibited — Exceptions.
No person shall intentionally smell or inhale the fumes of any solvent,
particularly toluol, amyl nitrite, butyl nitrite, cyclohexyl nitrite, ethyl nitrite,
pentyl nitrite and propyl nitrite and their iso-analogues or induce any other
person to do so for the purpose of causing a condition of, or inducing
symptoms of, intoxication, elation, euphoria, dizziness, excitement,
irrational behavior, exhilaration, paralysis, stupefaction, or dulling of senses
or nervous system, or for the purpose of, in any manner, changing,
distorting or disturbing the audio, visual or mental processes; except that
this Section shall not apply to the inhalation of any anesthesia for medical
or dental purposes.
Section 215.1850. Inducing, or Possession With Intent To Induce,
Symptoms by Use of Solvents and Other Substances, Prohibited.
A. The retail sale of methamphetamine precursor drugs shall be limited to:
1. Sales in packages containing not more than a total of three (3)
grams of one (1) or more methamphetamine precursor drugs
calculated in terms of ephedrine base, pseudoephedrine base and
phenylpropanolamine base; and
2. For non-liquid products, sales in blister packs, each blister
containing not more than two (2) dosage units, or where the use of
blister packs is technically infeasible, sales in unit dose packets or
pouches.
B. The penalty for a knowing violation of Subsection (A) of this Section is
found in Section 569.060, RSMo.
A. As used in this Section, "alcohol beverage vaporizer" means any device
which, by means of heat, a vibrating element, or any method, is capable
of producing a breathable mixture containing one (1) or more alcoholic
beverages to be dispensed for inhalation into the lungs via the nose or
mouth or both.
56.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.1820
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.1850
AO:222
Section 215.1860. Possession or Purchase of Solvents To Aid Others
in Violations, Prohibited — Violations of Sections 210.1840 to
210.1850 — Penalty.57
B. No person shall intentionally or willfully induce the symptoms of
intoxication, elation, euphoria, dizziness, excitement, irrational
behavior, exhilaration, paralysis, stupefaction, or dulling of the senses
or nervous system, distortion of audio, visual or mental processes by
the use or abuse of any of the following substances:
1. Solvents, particularly toluol;
2. Ethyl alcohol;
3. Amyl nitrite and its iso-analogues;
4. Butyl nitrite and its iso-analogues;
5. Cyclohexyl nitrite and its iso-analogues;
6. Ethyl nitrite and its iso-analogues;
7. Pentyl nitrite and its iso-analogues; and
8. Propyl nitrite and its iso-analogues.
C. This Section shall not apply to substances that have been approved by
the United States Food and Drug Administration as therapeutic drug
products or are contained in approved over-the-counter drug products
or administered lawfully pursuant to the order of an authorized medical
practitioner.
D. No person shall intentionally possess any solvent, particularly toluol,
amyl nitrite, butyl nitrite, cyclohexyl nitrite, ethyl nitrite, pentyl nitrite
and propyl nitrite and their iso-analogues for the purpose of using it in
the manner prohibited by Section 215.1840 and this Section.
E. No person shall possess or use an alcoholic beverage vaporizer.
F. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit the legal
consumption of intoxicating liquor.
A. No person shall intentionally possess or buy any solvent, particularly
toluol, amyl nitrite, butyl nitrite, cyclohexyl nitrite, ethyl nitrite, pentyl
nitrite and propyl nitrite and their iso-analogues for the purpose of
inducing or aiding any other person to violate the provisions of Sections
210.1840 and 210.1850 hereof.
B. Any person who violates any provision of Sections 210.1840 through
210.1860 is guilty of an ordinance violation for the first violation.
57.Note: Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.1850
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1870
AO:223
Section 215.1870. Possession of Alcoholic Beverage in Public Area
Prohibited. [CC 1999 §3-53]
It shall be unlawful for any person to be in possession of an alcoholic
beverage in an open container when upon or in a public highway, street,
alley, public park, public place or public square.
Section 215.1880. through Section 215.1960. (Reserved)
Section
215.1870
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.1880
AO:224
ARTICLE XII
Offenses Concerning Minors58
Section 215.1970. Article Definitions.
For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases are defined
as follows:
GUARDIAN — Guardian appointed by court of competent jurisdiction.
MINOR — Any person under the age of seventeen (17).
PARENT — The natural or adoptive father or mother, legal guardian or any
other person having the care or custody of a minor child.
PARENTAL NEGLECT — Any act or omission by which a parent fails to
exercise customary and effective control over a minor so as to contribute to,
cause or tend to cause a minor to commit any offense.
Section 215.1980. Curfew For Persons Under Seventeen.
Section 215.1990. Parental Responsibility.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of seventeen (17)
years to be in or upon any public place or way within the City of
Republic between the hours of 12:01 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. The provisions
of this Section shall not apply to any such persons accompanied by a
parent or guardian, to any such person upon an errand or other
legitimate business directed by such person's parent or guardian, to
any such person who is engaged in gainful, lawful employment during
said time period, or who is returning or in route to said employment, or
to any such person who is attending or in route to or from any organized
religious or school activity.
B. Responsibility Of Parent. The parent, guardian or other adult person
having the care and custody of a person under the age of seventeen (17)
years shall not knowingly permit such person to violate this Section.
C. Notice To Parent. Any Police Officer finding any person under the age of
seventeen (17) years violating the provisions of this Section shall warn
such person to desist immediately from such violation and shall
promptly report the violation to that person's parent or guardian. Any
parent, guardian or person in charge of such person who shall
knowingly permit such person to violate the provisions of this Section,
after receiving notice of the first (1st) violation, shall be guilty of an
offense.
A. Whenever a minor shall be arrested or detained for the commission of
any criminal act within the City, the Police Department shall, as soon as
possible thereafter, deliver written notice to the minor's parent of the
arrest or detention, and such notice shall advise the parent of his/her
58.Cross Reference: As to alcohol-related offenses involving minors, §600.060.
Section
215.1970
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.1990
AO:225
Section 215.2000. Use of Alcoholic Beverages and/or Controlled
Substances By Minors At Open Parties Prohibited — Penalties —
Person in Control of Premises Liable. [Ord. No. 03-25 §§1 — 3,
4-14-2003]
responsibility under this Section. The notice shall be in such a form
as to be signed by the notified parent signifying receipt thereof. If the
parent refuses to sign said notice, the notifying Police Officer shall
indicate such refusal on the notice.
B. No parent shall fail to exercise customary and effective control over a
minor so as to contribute to, cause or tend to cause a minor to commit
any criminal act. Written parental notice as defined in Subsection (A) of
this Section shall be prima facie evidence of parental neglect if the
minor commits a second (2nd) or successive violation of any criminal
act.
C. Each violation of the provisions of this Section shall constitute a
separate offense. Any person who shall violate this Section shall be
subject to imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days and/or a fine
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first (1st)
violation, not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second
(2nd) violation, and not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for any
successive violation. In addition, the court may, as a condition of any
probation granted to any parent found guilty of violating Subsection (B)
of this Section, order the defendant to make restitution to any person
who has been damaged by the misconduct of the minor in an amount
not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
A. As used in this Section the hereinafter terms are defined as follows:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Any beverage containing alcohol, the
consumption, purchase or possession of which by a person under the
age of twenty-one (21) years is prohibited by the laws of the State of
Missouri.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — Any substance, the possession or
distribution of which is prohibited by the provisions of Chapter 195 of
the Revised Statutes of the State of Missouri.
MINOR — A person under the age of twenty-one (21) years.
OPEN PARTY — A gathering of any number of people on the premises
of a person in control thereof, with the exception of persons of the
immediate household of such person in control, where alcoholic
beverages are made available for consumption.
PERSON IN CONTROL — One who has a possessory right to any
premises, whether individual or joint, and regardless of whether such
possessory right is the result of ownership, oral or written lease, rental
agreement, license agreement, or authority from one who otherwise
exercises control over such premises.
Section
215.1990
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.2000
AO:226
Section 215.2010. through Section 215.2090. (Reserved)
PREMISES — Any realty, with or without improvements thereon,
occupied or unoccupied, located within the corporate limits of the
City, including residences, open fields, vacant lots, apartments,
condominiums, motel rooms, hotel rooms, business structures, meeting
rooms, dwelling units of any kind or any place of assembly or structure
which may be used as a gathering place for social or business functions.
B. No person in control of any premises shall allow an open party to take
place on or about such premises if any such person in control knows, or
should know, that alcoholic beverages or controlled substances will be
consumed, used, ingested or possessed by a minor attending such open
party.
C. Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this Section shall be
sentenced to a term of imprisonment for up to one hundred eighty (180)
days or a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or both such
imprisonment and fine.
Section
215.2000
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.2010
AO:227

ARTICLE XIII
Offenses Concerning Tobacco, Alternative Nicotine Products or
Vapor Products
Section 215.2100. Definitions.
For purposes of this Article, the following definitions shall apply:
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT — Any non-combustible product
containing nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether
chewed, absorbed, dissolved or ingested by any other means. "Alternative
nicotine product" does not include any vapor product, tobacco product or
any product regulated as a drug or device by the United States Food and
Drug Administration under Chapter V of the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act.59
CENTER OF YOUTH ACTIVITIES — Any playground, school or other facility,
when such facility is being used primarily by persons under the age of
eighteen (18) for recreational, educational or other purposes.
DISTRIBUTE — A conveyance to the public by sale, barter, gift or sample.
MINOR — A person under the age of eighteen (18).
PROOF OF AGE — A driver's license or other generally accepted means of
identification that contains a picture of the individual and appears on its
face to be valid.
ROLLING PAPERS — Paper designed, manufactured, marketed or sold for
use primarily as a wrapping or enclosure for tobacco which enables a
person to roll loose tobacco into a smokeable cigarette.
SAMPLE — A tobacco product, alternative nicotine product or vapor
product distributed to members of the general public at no cost or at
nominal cost for product promotional purposes.
SAMPLING — The distribution to members of the general public of tobacco
product, alternative nicotine product or vapor product samples.
TOBACCO PRODUCTS — Any substance containing tobacco leaf including,
but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco
or dipping tobacco, but does not include alternative nicotine products or
vapor products.
VAPOR PRODUCT — Any non-combustible product containing nicotine that
employs a heating element, power source, electronic circuit or other
electronic, chemical or mechanical means, regardless of shape or size,
that can be used to produce vapor from nicotine in a solution or other
form. "Vapor product" includes any electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe or similar product or device and any
vapor cartridge or other container of nicotine in a solution or other form
that is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic
cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe or similar product or device.
59.Editor's Note: See 21 U.S.C. § 351 et seq.
Section
215.2100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.2100
AO:229
"Vapor product" does not include any alternative nicotine product or
tobacco product.
VENDING MACHINE — Any mechanical, electric or electronic self-service
device which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment,
dispenses tobacco products, alternative nicotine products or vapor
products.
Section 215.2105. No Tobacco Sales to Minors — Alternative
Nicotine Products, Vapor Products and Nicotine Liquid Containers
— Sale to Minors Prohibited.
A. Any person or entity who sells tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or vapor products shall deny the sale of such tobacco
products to any person who is less than eighteen (18) years of age.
B. Any person or entity who sells or distributes tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or vapor products by mail or through the
Internet in this State in violation of Subsection (A) of this Section shall
be assessed a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first
violation and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each subsequent
violation.
C. Alternative nicotine products and vapor products shall only be sold to
persons eighteen (18) years of age or older, shall be subject to local and
State sales tax, but shall not be otherwise taxed or regulated as tobacco
products.
D. Nicotine Liquid Containers — Regulations.
1. Any nicotine liquid container that is sold at retail in this State shall
satisfy the child-resistant effectiveness standards set forth in 16
CFR 1700.15(b) as in effect on the effective date of this Section
when tested in accordance with the method described in 16 CFR
1700.20 as in effect on the effective date of this Section.
2. For the purposes of this Subsection, “nicotine liquid container”
shall mean a bottle or other container of liquid or other substance
containing nicotine if the liquid or substance is sold, marketed, or
intended for use in a vapor product. A “nicotine liquid container”
shall not include a liquid or other substance containing nicotine in a
cartridge that is sold, marketed, or intended for use in a vapor
product, provided that such cartridge is prefilled and sealed by the
manufacturer and not intended to be opened by the consumer.
3. Any person who engages in retail sales of liquid nicotine containers
in this State in violation of this Subsection shall be assessed a fine
of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first violation and five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each subsequent violation.
4. The Department of Health and Senior Services may adopt rules
necessary to carry out the provisions of this Subsection. Any rule or
Section
215.2100
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.2105
AO:230
Section 215.2110. Unlawful To Sell or Distribute Tobacco Products,
Alternative Nicotine Products or Vapor Products to Minors —
Vending Machine Requirements.
portion of a rule, as that term is defined in Section 536.010, RSMo.,
that is created under the authority delegated in that Section shall
become effective only if it complies with and is subject to all of
the provisions of Chapter 536, RSMo., and, if applicable, Section
536.028, RSMo. This Section and Chapter 536, RSMo., are nonseverable,
and if any of the powers vested with the General
Assembly under Chapter 536, RSMo., to review, to delay the
effective date, or to disapprove and annul a rule are subsequently
held unconstitutional, then the grant of rulemaking authority and
any rule proposed or adopted after August 28, 2015, shall be
invalid and void.
5. The provisions of this Subsection and any rules adopted hereunder
shall be null, void, and of no force and effect upon the effective date
of the final regulations issued by the Federal Food and Drug
Administration or from any other Federal agency if such
regulations mandate child-resistant effectiveness standards for
nicotine liquid containers.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, provide or distribute tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products or vapor products to persons
under eighteen (18) years of age.
B. All vending machines that dispense tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products or vapor products shall be located within the
unobstructed line of sight and under the direct supervision of an adult
responsible for preventing persons less than eighteen (18) years of age
from purchasing any tobacco product, alternative nicotine product or
vapor product from such machine or shall be equipped with a lock-out
device to prevent the machines from being operated until the person
responsible for monitoring sales from the machines disables the lock.
Such locking device shall be of a design that prevents it from being left
in an unlocked condition and which will allow only a single sale when
activated. A locking device shall not be required on machines that are
located in areas where persons less than eighteen (18) years of age are
not permitted or prohibited by law. An owner of an establishment whose
vending machine is not in compliance with the provisions of this
Subsection shall be subject to the penalties contained in Subsection (D)
of this Section. A determination of non-compliance may be made by a
local law enforcement agency or the Division of Alcohol and Tobacco
Control. Nothing in this Section shall apply to a vending machine if
located in a factory, private club or other location not generally
accessible to the general public.
C. No person or entity shall sell, provide or distribute any tobacco product,
alternative nicotine product or vapor product or rolling papers to any
minor or sell any individual cigarettes to any person in this State. This
Section
215.2105
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.2110
AO:231
Subsection shall not apply to the distribution by family members on
property that is not open to the public.
D. Any person, including, but not limited to, a sales clerk, owner or
operator, who violates Subsection (A), (B) or (C) of this Section or
Section 215.2140 of this Article shall be penalized as follows:
1. For the first offense, twenty-five dollars ($25.00);
2. For the second offense, one hundred dollars ($100.00); and
3. For a third and subsequent offense, two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00).
E. Any owner of the establishment where tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products or vapor products are available for sale who violates
Subsection (C) of this Section shall not be penalized pursuant to this
Section if such person documents the following:
1. An in-house or other tobacco compliance employee training
program was in place to provide the employee with information on
the State and Federal regulations regarding sales of tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products or vapor products to
minors. Such training program must be attended by all employees
who sell tobacco products, alternative nicotine products or vapor
products to the general public;
2. A signed statement by the employee stating that the employee has
been trained and understands the State laws and Federal
regulations regarding the sale of tobacco to minors products,
alternative nicotine products or vapor products; and
3. Such in-house or other tobacco compliance training meets the
minimum training criteria, which shall not exceed a total of ninety
(90) minutes in length, established by the Division of Alcohol and
Tobacco Control.
F. The exemption in Subsection (E) of this Section shall not apply to any
person who is considered the general owner or operator of the outlet
where tobacco products, alternative nicotine products or vapor
products are available for sale if:
1. Four (4) or more violations per location of Subsection (C) of this
Section occur within a one-year period; or
2. Such person knowingly violates or knowingly allows his/her
employees to violate Subsection (C) of this Section.
G. If a sale is made by an employee of the owner of an establishment in
violation of this Article, the employee shall be guilty of an offense
established in Subsections (A), (B) and (C) of this Section. If a vending
machine is in violation of Section 215.2140, the owner of the
establishment shall be guilty of an offense established in Subsections
Section
215.2110
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.2110
AO:232
Section 215.2120. Minors Prohibited From Purchase or Possession
of Tobacco Products, Alternative Nicotine Products or Vapor
Products — Misrepresentation of Age.
(C) and (D) of this Section. If a sample is distributed by an employee of
a company conducting the sampling, such employee shall be guilty of
an offense established in Subsections (C) and (D) of this Section.
H. A person cited for selling, providing or distributing any tobacco
product, alternative nicotine product or vapor product to any individual
less than eighteen (18) years of age in violation of Subsection (A), (B) or
(C) of this Section shall conclusively be presumed to have reasonably
relied on proof of age of the purchaser or recipient, and such person
shall not be found guilty of such violation if such person raises and
proves as an affirmative defense that such individual presented a
driver's license or other government-issued photo identification
purporting to establish that such individual was eighteen (18) years of
age or older.
I. Any person adversely affected by this Section may file an appeal with
the Administrative Hearing Commission which shall be adjudicated
pursuant to the procedures established in Chapter 621, RSMo.
A. No person less than eighteen (18) years of age shall purchase, attempt
to purchase or possess cigarettes, tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products or vapor products unless such person is an employee
of a seller of cigarettes, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products
or vapor products and is in such possession to effect a sale in the course
of employment or an employee of the Division of Alcohol and Tobacco
Control for enforcement purposes pursuant to Subsection (5) of Section
407.934, RSMo.
B. Any person less than eighteen (18) years of age shall not misrepresent
his/her age to purchase cigarettes, tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products or vapor products.
C. Any person who violates the provisions of this Section shall be
penalized as follows:
1. For the first violation, the person is guilty of an infraction and shall
have any cigarettes, tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products or vapor products confiscated;
2. For a second violation and any subsequent violations, the person is
guilty of an infraction, shall have any cigarettes, tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products or vapor products confiscated and
shall complete a tobacco education or smoking cessation program,
if available.
Section
215.2110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.2130
AO:233
Section 215.2130. Retail Sales Tax License Required for Sale of
Tobacco Products, Alternative Nicotine Products or Vapor Products.
No person shall sell cigarettes, tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products or vapor products unless the person has a retail sales tax license.
Section 215.2140. Required Sign Stating Violation of State Law To
Sell Tobacco Products, Alternative Nicotine Products or Vapor
Products to Minors Under Age 18 — Display of Sign Required,
Where.
Section 215.2150. Restrictions on Sales of Individual Packs of
Cigarettes.
Section 215.2160. Proof of Age Required, When Defense to Action
for Violation Is Reasonable Reliance on Proof — Liability.
A. The owner of an establishment at which tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products, vapor products or rolling papers are sold at retail or
through vending machines shall cause to be prominently displayed in a
conspicuous place at every display from which tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, vapor products are sold and on every
vending machine where tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, vapor products are purchased a sign that shall:
1. Contain in red lettering at least one-half (1/2) inch high on a white
background the following:
IT IS A VIOLATION OF STATE LAW FOR CIGARETTES, OTHER
TOBACCO PRODUCTS, ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS OR
VAPOR PRODUCTS TO BE SOLD OR OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO
ANY PERSON UNDER THE AGE OF EIGHTEEN OR FOR SUCH
PERSON TO PURCHASE, ATTEMPT TO PURCHASE OR POSSESS
CIGARETTES, OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS, ALTERNATIVE
NICOTINE PRODUCTS OR VAPOR PRODUCTS; and
2. Include a depiction of a pack of cigarettes at least two (2) inches
high defaced by a red diagonal diameter of a surrounding red circle
and the words "Under 18."
A. No person or entity shall sell individual packs of cigarettes or smokeless
tobacco products unless such packs satisfy one (1) of the following
conditions prior to the time of sale:
1. It is sold through a vending machine; or
2. It is displayed behind the checkout counter or it is within the
unobstructed line of sight of the sales clerk or store attendant from
the checkout counter.
A. A person or entity selling tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products or vapor products or rolling papers or distributing tobacco
Section
215.2130
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.2160
AO:234
Section 215.2170. through Section 215.2200. (Reserved)
product, alternative nicotine product or vapor product samples shall
require proof of age from a prospective purchaser or recipient if an
ordinary person would conclude on the basis of appearance that such
prospective purchaser or recipient may be under the age of eighteen
(18).
B. The operator's or chauffeur's license issued pursuant to the provisions
of Section 302.177, RSMo., or the operator's or chauffeur's license
issued pursuant to the laws of any State or possession of the United
States to residents of those States or possessions, or an identification
card as provided for in Section 302.181, RSMo., or the identification
card issued by any uniformed service of the United States, or a valid
passport shall be presented by the holder thereof upon request of any
agent of the Division of Alcohol and Tobacco Control or any owner or
employee of an establishment that sells tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products or vapor products for the purpose of aiding the
registrant, agent or employee to determine whether or not the person is
at least eighteen (18) years of age when such person desires to
purchase or possess tobacco products, alternative nicotine products or
vapor products procured from a registrant. Upon such presentation, the
owner or employee of the establishment shall compare the photograph
and physical characteristics noted on the license, identification card or
passport with the physical characteristics of the person presenting the
license, identification card or passport.
C. Any person who shall, without authorization from the Department of
Revenue, reproduce, alter, modify or misrepresent any chauffeur's
license, motor vehicle operator's license or identification card shall be
deemed guilty of an ordinance violation.
D. Reasonable reliance on proof of age or on the appearance of the
purchaser or recipient shall be a defense to any action for a violation of
Subsections (A), (B) and (C) of Section 215.2110 of this Article. No
person shall be liable for more than one (1) violation of Subsections (B)
and (C) of Section 215.2110 on any single day.
Section
215.2160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.2170
AO:235

ARTICLE XIV
Offenses Concerning Parks, Fairgrounds
Section 215.2210. Private Parks, Fairgrounds, Etc. — Entry
Prohibited Without Consent of Owner. [CC 1999 §16-18; R.O. 1916
§467]
No person shall enter upon the enclosed grounds of any private park, fair
association, agricultural or horticultural society, or into any building, house
or outhouse, or property of any such park or association at any time without
the consent of the owner or occupier thereof; and no person shall climb
upon or over the fences, enclosures, buildings or property of such park or
association, nor shall any person in any way injure or damage any fence,
house or outhouse, or any property of any such park or association.
Section 215.2220. Conduct in City Parks. [CC 1999 §16-23; Ord. No.
04-65 §1, 10-11-2004; Ord. No. 11-14 §1, 7-11-2011]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person while on property or in buildings
under the operation and control of the Parks and Recreation
Department to:
1. Consume or have in his/her possession any alcoholic beverage.
2. Conduct himself/herself in an unusually loud or disturbing manner;
use threatening, abusive, insulting, indecent, obscene or profane
language; harass, annoy, curse at, or intentionally jostle any patron
of any public park.
3. In any way interfere by the use of physical force or by the threat of
such force with any person peacefully moving in and about the
grounds and buildings, except for a Law Enforcement Officer or
employee of the parks in the performance of his/her duty.
4. Throw stones, rocks, sticks, bottles, or other similar things by hand
or otherwise.
5. Mark upon, tear up, injure, deface, cut, dig, or in any other way
intentionally injure or impair the usefulness of structures, grass,
trees, shrubs or plants, pavement, sidewalk or roadway.
6. Attach wires, ropes, placards, notices or other contrivances to any
structure, tree, shrub, plant or utility lines without prior written
permission of the Parks and Recreation Department.
7. Remove property of the parks without permission of the Parks and
Recreation Department or Parks and Recreation Director.
8. Erect, place or maintain any tent, building, booth, stand or other
structures temporary or otherwise without the written permission
of the Parks and Recreation Director.
Section
215.2210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.2220
AO:237
9. Drop, throw, place or discard any wastepaper, dirt, weeds, trash,
refuse or other rubbish of any sort except in a receptacle provided
therefor.
10. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause or permit to be
placed or discharged into any fountain, pool, pond, lake, stream or
other body of water any substance, matter or thing which might
cause said water to be harmful to persons or things or to give forth
objectionable odors or to appear unsightly or otherwise pollute the
waters.
11. Fish or remove fish or aquatic life from any stream, pond, lake or
other body of water unless fishing shall be expressly permitted in
the area.
12. Carry, possess or discharge any firearms, pellet gun or pistol, BB
gun, or other similar device, bow and arrow, crossbow, or any other
device capable of projecting a missile able to inflict harm to
persons or animals or to injure property, except Law Enforcement
Officers in performance of their duty or employees of the Parks and
Recreation Department, and except in such places and under such
special regulations as the Parks and Recreation Department may
have adopted for practicing the use of any such devices or giving
exhibitions or holding competitions in the use thereof.
13. Tell fortunes.
14. Engage in any athletic contest or event in any public area except in
areas set aside therefor, nor shall any person in any event engage
in any athletic contest or event or throw any ball or engage in any
game singly or with others in such a fashion as to unreasonably
endanger the safety of others thereabout.
15. Use a loud speaker or amplifier without prior permission of the
Parks and Recreation Director.
16. Play a musical instrument between the hours of 9:00 P.M. of any
day and 10:30 A.M. of the next day without a prior written permit of
the Parks and Recreation Director.
17. Conduct any religious service without a permit issued by the Parks
and Recreation Director.
18. Participate in or enter upon the grounds of any activity where
charges are made without first being registered at the place
provided therefor and paying the established fee, except for
persons provided with exemptions by action of the Parks and
Recreation Department.
19. Camp or picnic other than in an area expressly designated for
camping or picnicking, nor shall any person attempt to move or
relocate any benches, chairs or tables unless the same shall not be
Section
215.2220
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.2220
AO:238
Section 215.2230. through Section 215.2400. (Reserved)
secured in any way whatsoever to the ground, in which case the
same may be moved and relocated within the confines of the
designated picnicking or camping area.
20. To start a fire for cooking purposes or otherwise within any park
except in receptacles and facilities intended therefor.
21. Operate, park or race a motor vehicle or bicycle upon the grounds
or within the buildings other than in areas designated for the
operation of such vehicles, or leave any non-operable vehicle within
a park for a period to exceed six (6) hours.
22. Allow cattle or horses to be driven through, run loose, staked out,
or in any other way to be in a park except in such an area as
designated for showing or riding such animals.
23. Enter on or in any portion of any grounds or buildings of a park
where signs have been previously posted by the Parks and
Recreation Department prohibiting such entry.
B. Whenever the Parks and Recreation Director shall find that there has
been and is continuing a disturbance of the peace of persons within or
near the vicinity of any park, or he/she shall find that the safety of
persons or property within a park or within the vicinity thereof has been
or is being threatened by the conduct of persons in or about a park, the
Department is hereby authorized to close to the public, save employees
of the Parks and Recreation Department and officers and employees of
the City, the said park for such period of time not exceeding twelve (12)
hours as to him/her shall seem reasonably necessary to quell the
disturbance, or threat to life or property, and no person shall enter any
park so closed, if the notice of the closing thereof shall be posted in
conspicuous places thereabout, nor shall any person remain in such
park after it shall have been closed after knowledge of the closing shall
come to him/her by signs posted in the vicinity of the park or otherwise.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person other than an employee of the Parks
and Recreation Department or other officers or employees of the City of
Republic to enter or remain in or upon the grounds or buildings of any
public park of the City outside of the operating hours posted at that
facility, except an activity or event approved by the Parks and
Recreation Department may be continued to its normal conclusion and
observers thereof and participants therein shall leave the park by onehalf
(½) hour following the conclusion of the event.
Section
215.2220
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.2230
AO:239

ARTICLE XV
Miscellaneous Offenses
Section 215.2410. Permissible Hours of Construction or Repairing
of Buildings — Exception.
Section 215.2420. Playing in Streets. [CC 1999 §19-22; R.O. 1916
§442]
No person shall on any square, street, avenue, alley or public place in this
City play at any game of amusement or engage in any sport.
Section 215.2430. Harassment of Patrons.
It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, annoy, threaten, curse at,
abuse, mock or intentionally jostle any patron of any commercial
establishment within the buildings or upon the grounds thereof, except that
this Section shall not apply to a Law Enforcement Officer performing his/
her duty or to an employee of such a commercial establishment.
Section 215.2440. Distribution of Handbills.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or non-commercial
handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided however, that it shall not be
unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute, without
charge to the receiver thereof, a handbill to any occupant of a vehicle
willing to accept it.
Section 215.2450. Soliciting Rides, Business, Contributions or
Similar Conduct. [Ord. No. 06-06 §1, 2-27-2006]
A. The erection, excavating, demolition, alteration or repair of any
building other than between the hours of 6:00 A.M. and 9:00 P.M.,
except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and
safety, and then only with a permit from the Building Inspector, which
permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three (3) days or less
while the emergency continues and which permit may be renewed for
periods of three (3) days or less while the emergency continues.
B. If the Public Works Director should determine that the public health
and safety will not be impaired by the erection or repair of any public
infrastructure within the hours of 6:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M., and if the
Public Works Director shall further determine that loss or
inconvenience would result to any party in interest, the Public Works
Director may grant permission for such work to be done within the
hours of 6:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M., upon application being made at the
time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the
work.
A. No person shall be in or near a street, highway or roadway for the
purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle.
Section
215.2410
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
215.2450
AO:241
Section 215.2460. Garage Sale Conduct and Regulation. [Ord. No.
06-63 §1, 8-28-2006]
B. No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street, highway or
roadway for the purpose of soliciting employment, business or
contributions or distributing literature of any type whatsoever to or
from the occupants of any motor vehicle while the motor vehicle shall
be upon the public streets or ways of the City, unless the vehicle shall be
lawfully parked.
C. This Section shall apply to the conduct described in Section 215.2440.
A. "Garage sales" shall mean and include all general sales open to the
public, conducted from or on a residential premise in any residential
zone, as defined by the zoning ordinance, for the purpose of disposing
of personal property including, but not limited to, all sales entitled
"garage", "lawn", "yard", "attic", "porch", "room", "backyard", "patio",
"flea market" and "rummage sale". This definition shall not include a
situation where no more than five (5) specific items are held out for sale
and does not include motor vehicles and shall not include auctions
conducted by professional auctioneers. It shall be unlawful to conduct
more than four (4) garage sales per calendar year and each sale shall be
no more than three (3) days in length at any one (1) residential location.
B. It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any signs in violation of this
paragraph. Any signs used shall be erected not sooner than one (1) day
prior to the date of the sale and signs shall be removed at the end of the
last day upon which the sale is held. Each sign shall indicate the
beginning date of the sale and the ending date of the sale as well as the
sale address. There shall be no more than a maximum of three (3) signs
advertising any one (1) garage sale. Signs shall comply with Chapter
415.030 of this Code.
Section
215.2450
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
215.2460
AO:242
Chapter 220
ABANDONED PROPERTY
Cross References — As to general penalty, see §100.220 of this Code; as to
offenses generally, see ch. 215; as to prohibiting barking dogs and howling
cats, see §210.130 of this Code.
Editor's Note — Ord. no. 03-77 §3, adopted November 24, 2003, changed
the chapter heading herein from "nuisances" to "abandoned property" and
§2 of said ordinance deleted article headings herein.
Section 220.010. (Reserved)60
Section 220.020. (Reserved)61
Section 220.030. Definitions.
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set out
herein:
ABANDONED PROPERTY — Any unattended motor vehicle, trailer, allterrain
vehicle, outboard motor or vessel removed or subject to removal
from public or private property as provided in this Chapter, whether or not
operational.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation or other legal entity.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The entire width of land between the boundary lines of a
public road or State highway, including any roadway.
ROADWAY — That portion of a public road or State highway ordinarily used
for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
TOWING COMPANY — Any person or entity which tows, removes or stores
abandoned property.
URBANIZED AREA — An area with a population of fifty thousand (50,000)
or more designated by the Bureau of the Census, within boundaries to
be fixed by the State Highways and Transportation Commission and local
officials in cooperation with each other and approved by the Secretary of
Transportation. The boundary of an urbanized area shall, at a minimum,
encompass the entire urbanized area as designed by the Bureau of the
Census.
Section 220.040. Abandoning Motor Vehicle.
60.Editor's Note — Ord. no. 03-77 §1, adopted November 24, 2003, repealed section 220.010 ,
"nuisances affecting health" in its entirety. Former section 220.010 derived from the city's
original codification. At the editor's discretion, this section has been reserved for the
city's future use.
61.Editor's Note — As a result of changes requested by the city previous to adoption of the
code book, section 220.020: habitual offender, has been repealed in its entirety. This
section has been left reserved for the city's future use.
Section
215.2460
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
220.040
AO:243
Section 220.050. Towing of Abandoned Property On Public or
Private Real Property.
The towing of abandoned property shall be governed by the provisions of
Sections 304.154 through 304.158 of Chapter 304 of the Revised Statutes
of the State of Missouri as they now exist or as they may be revised or
amended.
Section 220.060. through Section 220.080. (Reserved)
Section 220.090. Maximum Charges.
A. A person commits the offense of abandoning a motor vehicle if he/she
abandons any motor vehicle on the right-of-way of any public road or
State highway or on or in any of the waters in this State or on the banks
of any stream, or on any land or water owned, operated or leased by the
State, any board, department, agency or commission thereof, or any
political subdivision thereof or on any land or water owned, operated or
leased by the Federal Government or on any private real property
owned by another without his/her consent.
B. For purposes of this Section, the last owner of record of a motor vehicle
or trailer found abandoned and not shown to be transferred pursuant to
Sections 301.196 and 301.197, RSMo., shall be deemed prima facie to
have been the owner of such motor vehicle or trailer at the time it was
abandoned and to have been the person who abandoned the motor
vehicle or trailer or caused or procured its abandonment. The
registered owner of the abandoned motor vehicle or trailer shall not be
subject to the penalties provided by this Section if the motor vehicle or
trailer was in the care, custody or control of another person at the time
of the violation. In such instance, the owner shall submit such evidence
in an affidavit permitted by the court setting forth the name, address
and other pertinent information of the person who leased, rented or
otherwise had care, custody or control of the motor vehicle or trailer at
the time of the alleged violation. The affidavit submitted pursuant to
this Subsection shall be admissible in a court proceeding adjudicating
the alleged violation and shall raise a rebuttable presumption that the
person identified in the affidavit was in actual control of the motor
vehicle or trailer. In such case, the court has the authority to terminate
the prosecution of the summons issued to the owner and issue a
summons to the person identified in the affidavit as the operator. If the
motor vehicle or trailer is alleged to have been stolen, the owner of the
motor vehicle or trailer shall submit proof that a Police report was filed
in a timely manner indicating that the vehicle was stolen at the time of
the alleged violation.
A. A towing company may only assess reasonable storage charges for
abandoned property towed without the consent of the owner.
Reasonable storage charges shall not exceed the charges for vehicles
which have been towed with the consent of the owner on a negotiated
Section
220.040
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
220.090
AO:244
Section 220.100. Sale of Abandoned Property By City.
When the City has physical possession of the abandoned property, it may
sell the abandoned property in accordance with its established provisions
and regulations and may transfer ownership by means of a bill of sale signed
by the City Clerk and sealed with the official City Seal. Such bill of sale
shall contain the make and model of the abandoned property, the complete
abandoned property identification number and the odometer reading of the
abandoned property if available and shall be lawful proof of ownership for
any dealer registered under the provisions of Section 301.218, RSMo. or
Section 301.560, RSMo., or for any other person.
Section 220.110. through Section 220.120. (Reserved)62
Chapter 225
HUMAN RIGHTS
basis. Storage charges may be assessed only for the time in which
the towing company complies with the procedural requirements of this
Chapter.
B. The City Council may from time to time establish maximum reasonable
towing, storage and other charges which can be imposed by towing and
storage companies operating within the City, and which are consistent
with this Chapter and with Sections 304.155 to 304.158, RSMo. Any
violation of said established maximum charges shall be deemed a
violation of this Section of the Code and shall be punishable pursuant to
Section 100.220.
C. A towing company may impose a charge of not more than one-half (½)
of the regular towing charge for the towing of abandoned property at
the request of the owner of private real property or that owner's agent
pursuant to this Chapter if the owner of the abandoned property or the
owner's agent returns to the abandoned property before it is removed
from the private real property. The regular towing charge may only be
imposed after the abandoned property has been removed from the
property and is in transit.
62.Editor's Note — Ord. no. 03-77 §1, adopted November 24, 2003, repealed section 220.110,
"controlling growth of weeds and grass" and section 220.120, "control and eradication of
thistle" in their entirety. Former sections 220.110 — 220.120 derived from CC 1999
§§15-11, 15-17. At the editor's discretion, these sections have been reserved for the city's
future use.
Section
220.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
220.110
AO:245

ARTICLE I
Request for Disability Accommodation
Section 225.010. Reasonable Accommodation Procedure - Scope
and Purpose. [Ord. No. 16-08 §1, 3-28-201663]
Section 225.020. Accommodation Procedure - Requesting
Reasonable Accommodation. [Ord. No. 16-08 §1, 3-28-2016]
A. Under the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. § 794, the Americans
with Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 U.S.C. § 12132, and the Americans with
Disabilities Amendments Act of 2008, 42 U.S.C. § 12101, the City of
Republic, Missouri, has dual ongoing obligations to those with physical
and mental disabilities. Employees with disabilities shall be given
reasonable accommodations that will enable them to perform their jobs.
Citizens with disabilities shall be given reasonable accommodations to
ensure equal access to local government. Beyond legal obligations, the
City has a strong institutional interest in providing reasonable
accommodations that will allow employees and citizens with disabilities
to continue to contribute and participate at the highest levels. The City
is committed to careful consideration of all requests for reasonable
accommodation of a disability. The City makes every effort to equitably
provide services to all persons.
B. The following guidelines have been prepared which describe the City of
Republic's policies and general procedures for processing reasonable
accommodation requests by job applicants, employees and citizens.
Each department will strive to work in coordination with other
departments in efficiently resolving each request for reasonable
accommodation. Each department should make every effort to wisely
and expeditiously facilitate the procurement of equipment, assistive
devices and services requested by job applicants, employees and
citizens with disabilities. The process for providing reasonable
accommodations requires the cooperation of employees, their
supervisors, and administration to achieve a common goal: to ensure to
the maximum extent possible that qualified individuals are given the
reasonable accommodations necessary to fully integrate within the
government of the City of Republic.
C. Any person with one or more disabilities, or his or her agent, may
request a reasonable accommodation in accordance with the Americans
with Disabilities Act (ADA) with respect to the services, activities,
programs, benefits or employment and hiring practices of the City of
Republic. Nothing in this Section requires persons with disabilities or
their representative to seek reasonable accommodation under this
Section.
63.Editor's Note: Section 1 of this ordinance repealed former Art. I, Handicapped Grievance
Procedure, as adopted and amended CC 1999 § 2-141 — 2-142.
Section
225.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
225.020
AO:247
A. Right To File. Any individual or group representing an individual who
believes that he/she has been discriminated against in a City-sponsored
service, program, activity or benefit because of disability status shall
have the right to file a written complaint using the City's standard
request for reasonable accommodation form, being submitted by email,
fax or in person at City Hall or to the ADA Coordinator. A request
for reasonable accommodation may be submitted alternately using a
variety of formats, including recorded oral statement. The request for
reasonable accommodation should contain pertinent information to
thoroughly evaluate the request such as the following:
1. The full name of the person requesting reasonable accommodation.
2. Full contact information, which may include: phone number,
alternate phone numbers, mailing address, physical address, and email
address.
3. Location of incident, if applicable.
4. Suggested corrective actions that may be acceptable by the person
requesting the reasonable accommodation.
5. Name of government entity or department which is believed to
have discriminated.
6. Contact information of witnesses, and additional pertinent
information.
7. Nature of the disability that requires reasonable accommodation.
8. The person requesting the reasonable accommodation may also
provide information as to whether the reasonable accommodation
may afford benefit to others.
B. Assistance In Filing. The City of Republic will, upon request, provide
assistance to the person requesting the reasonable accommodation as
necessary to complete and submit the request for reasonable
accommodation. Upon the City's receipt of the necessary information to
process the request form, the City will use the information to complete
the request for reasonable accommodation form.
C. Assistance In Appeal. The City of Republic will provide the assistance
necessary to any person requesting the reasonable accommodation to
appeal a denial of a request for reasonable accommodation to ensure
the appeal process is accessible to the person making the request. The
person requesting the reasonable accommodation is entitled to be
represented at all stages of the proceedings identified in this Section by
a person designated by the person making the request.
D. Confidentiality Of Medical Information. Should the information
provided by the person requesting reasonable accommodation to the
City of Republic include medical information or records, including
records indicating the medical condition, diagnosis or medical history
Section
225.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
225.020
AO:248
of the person requesting reasonable accommodation, the person
requesting reasonable accommodation may, at the time of submitting
such medical information, request that the City of Republic, to the
extent allowed by law, treat such medical information as confidential.
E. Request Of Medical Information. The City of Republic shall provide
written notice to the person requesting reasonable accommodation,
and any designee representing that person in the application
proceeding, of any request received by the City of Republic for
disclosure of the medical information or documentation which the
person requesting reasonable accommodation has previously requested
be treated as confidential. The City of Republic will cooperate with the
person requesting accommodation, to the extent allowed by law, in
actions initiated by the person requesting reasonable accommodation
to oppose the disclosure of such medical information or documentation.
F. Jurisdiction. Under the authority of the City Administrator, the ADA
Coordinator shall consider and act on requests for reasonable
accommodation. When a request for reasonable accommodation in the
hiring and application processes is filed with the City of Republic, it will
be referred to the ADA Coordinator and the Director of Human
Resources for review and consideration. When a request for reasonable
accommodation in the workplace is made by a current employee, it will
be referred to the director of the appropriately corresponding
department and the ADA Coordinator. When a request for reasonable
accommodation in City-provided services, programs or activities is
received, the City Administrator shall refer the matter to the ADA
Coordinator and appropriate departmental director for appropriate
response. Requests for reasonable accommodation requiring the
attention of more than one department shall be overseen by the City
Administrator or his designee. The ADA Coordinator shall serve to aid
in determination, facilitation and coordination of any request requiring
more than one department. Within this Section hereafter, City
personnel authorized by the City Administrator shall be referred to as
staff.
G. Request Procedure. Requests for reasonable accommodation and
reporting of any findings and determinations for reasonable
accommodation under the ADA will be administered according to the
most recent edition of the City's request for reasonable accommodation
procedure as established by the City Administrator and adopted by City
Council resolution, and according to any standards adopted pursuant to
this Section.
H. Findings For Reasonable Accommodation.
1. The following findings, while not exhaustive of all considerations
and findings that may be relevant, must be made before any action
is taken to approve or deny a request for reasonable
accommodation and must be incorporated into the record relating
to such approval or denial:
Section
225.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
225.020
AO:249
a. Whether the requested accommodation would require an
alteration to the fundamental nature of the relevant service,
activity, program, benefit, job description or hiring practices of
the City of Republic.
b. Whether the requested accommodation would impose undue
financial or administrative burdens on the City of Republic.
2. A request for reasonable accommodation shall not be denied for
reasons which violate the provisions of the ADA. This order does
not obligate the City to grant any accommodation request unless
required by the provisions of the ADA or applicable Missouri State
law.
3. In addition to the accessible format utilized for the response, any
notice of determination shall be in writing and sent to the person
requesting reasonable accommodation by certified mail, return
receipt requested and by regular mail. All determinations shall
state the grounds therefor, and shall give notice of the right to
appeal, including stating the right to request reasonable
accommodation in the appeals process.
I. Appeals.
1. Appeals processes for reasonable accommodation under the ADA
will be administered according to the ADA, the adopted edition of
the City's request for reasonable accommodation procedure, and
according to any standards adopted pursuant to this Section.
2. Appeals shall be made to the City Administrator, who shall be
ultimately responsible for final decisions of ADA requests for
reasonable accommodation. All determinations of the appeal
process made by the City Administrator shall address and be based
on the finding that the reasonable accommodation requested is
necessary to afford one or more disabled persons equal opportunity
to local government services, activities and programs, but does not
place undue financial burden upon the City nor alter the
fundamental nature of those services, activities and programs.
J. City Administrator Authorized. The City Administrator is authorized
and directed to develop and maintain a comprehensive and cohesive
policy consistent with the provisions of this Section. The policy, along
with any associated forms and procedures, shall be designated as the
request for reasonable accommodation. Once adopted by the City
Council, a copy of the request for reasonable accommodation shall be
kept on file by the City Clerk. The City Administrator is further
authorized to make periodic updates or modifications to the adopted
program, conditioned upon filing the updated or modified program with
the City Clerk for public comment, followed by a sixty-day period to
allow for public comment. After the sixty-day comment period, the
proposed updates or modifications together with any public comments
Section
225.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
225.020
AO:250
shall be presented to City Council for consideration and action by
resolution of the City Council.
K. Fees. The City shall not impose any additional fees or costs in
connection with a request for reasonable accommodation under the
provisions of this Section or an appeal of a denial of such request by the
City Administrator. Nothing in this Article obligates the City to pay
attorney fees or costs of the person requesting reasonable
accommodation.
L. Stay Of Enforcement. While a request for reasonable accommodation or
an appeal of a denial of said application is pending before the City, the
City will not enforce corrective action in relation to a specific request
for reasonable accommodation made by an employee or person
requesting accommodation. The ADA does not override the
responsibility of the City to prevent an issue of public safety when a
requested accommodation may be seen as a public safety threat.
M. Recordkeeping. All concerns or grievances received by the ADA
Coordinator or designee, appeals to the City Administrator or designee,
and responses from these two offices will be retained by the City of
Republic for three (3) years for citizen requests and seven (7) years for
applicant and employee requests or as deemed applicable.
Section
225.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
225.020
AO:251
Chapter 230
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Cross Reference — As to emergency notification system impact fees,
§500.060.
Section
225.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
225.020
AO:252
ARTICLE I
Emergency Management Organization
Section 230.010. Establishment.
There is hereby created within and for the City of Republic an emergency
management organization, which is responsible for the preparation and
implementation of emergency functions required to prevent injury and
minimize and repair damage due to disasters, to include emergency
management of resources and administration of such economic controls as
may be needed to provide for the welfare of the people, and emergency
activities (excluding functions for which military forces are primarily
responsible) in accordance with Chapter 44, RSMo., and supplements
thereto, and the Missouri Emergency Operations Plan adopted thereunder.
Section 230.020. Organization.
This agency shall consist of a Coordinator and other members appointed by
the City Administrator to conform to the State organization and procedures
for the conduct of emergency operations as outlined in the Missouri
Emergency Operations Plan.
Section 230.030. Functions.
The organization shall perform emergency management functions within
the City of Republic, and may conduct these functions outside the territorial
limits as directed by the Governor during the time of emergency pursuant
to the provisions of Chapter 44, RSMo., and supplements thereto.
Section 230.040. Coordinator.
Section 230.050. Scope of Operation.
A. The Coordinator will be appointed/removed by the City Administrator in
accordance with the approved personnel policy procedures.
B. The Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration and operations of local emergency management
operations, subject to the direction and control of the City
Administrator.
C. The Coordinator shall be responsible for maintaining records and
accounting for the use and disposal of all items of equipment placed
under the jurisdiction of the organization.
A. The City Administrator of the City of Republic in accordance with
Chapter 44, RSMo., may:
1. Appropriate and expend funds, make contracts, obtain and
distribute equipment, materials and supplies for emergency
management purposes; provide for the health and safety of
persons, the safety of property; and direct and coordinate the
Section
230.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
230.050
AO:253
Section 230.060. Mutual-Aid Agreements.
The Mayor of the City, with the approval of the Governor and consistent
with the Missouri Emergency Operations Plan and the provisions of Section
70.837, RSMo., and Section 320.090, RSMo., may enter into mutual-aid
agreements with other public and private agencies within and without the
State for reciprocal emergency aid. The Coordinator may assist in the
negotiation of such reciprocal mutual-aid agreements.
Section 230.070. City May Accept Services, Etc.
The Mayor of the City may, with the consent of the Governor, accept
services, materials, equipment, supplies or funds gifted, granted or loaned
by the Federal Government or an officer or agency thereof for emergency
management purposes, subject to the terms of the offer.
Section 230.080. Oath.
No person shall be employed or associated in any capacity in the
organization who advocates or has advocated a change by force or violence
in the constitutional form of the Government of the United States or in this
State or the overthrow of any Government in the United States by force
or violence, or has been convicted of or is under indictment or information
charging any subversive act against the United States. Each person who is
appointed to serve in the organization shall, before entering upon his/her
duties, take an oath, in writing, before a person authorized to administer
oaths in this State, which oath shall be substantially as follows:
"I,_____________________________________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that
I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution of the State of Missouri, against all enemies, foreign and
domestic; that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the same; that I take
this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion;
and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am
about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate,
nor am I a member of any political party or organization that advocates
the overthrow of the Government of the United States or of this State by
force or violence; and that during such a time as I am a member of the
organization, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political
party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the Government of
the United States or of this State by force or violence."
development of disaster plans and programs in accordance with the
policies and plans of the Federal and State governments.
2. Appoint, provide or remove rescue teams, auxiliary fire and Police
personnel and other emergency operation teams, units or
personnel who may serve without compensation.
Section
230.050
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
230.090
AO:254
Section 230.090. Office Space.
The City Administrator is authorized to designate space in any City-owned
or leased building for the organization.
Section
230.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
230.090
AO:255

ARTICLE II
Disaster Emergency Powers
Section 230.100. Purpose and Declaration of Policy. [Ord. No. 12-57
§1, 10-22-2012) ]
This Article is enacted to set out and clarify the authority of the City and its
officers and employees with regard to emergency and disaster situations.
It is intended to grant as broad a power as permitted by statutory and
constitutional authority. Any conflict between this Article and Federal or
State laws including, but not limited to, the National Response Plan should
be interpreted so as to harmonize the ordinance with Federal or State law
or plan regarding disaster response. (Ord. No. 12-57 §1, 10-22-12)
Section 230.110. Definitions. [Ord. No. 12-57 §1, 10-22-2012]
When used in this Chapter, the following words shall have the definitions
set forth below:
DISASTER — A disaster, whether natural or man-made, shall include, but
not be limited to, flood, fire, cyclone, tornado, earthquake, severe high or
low temperatures, water contamination or pollution, land contamination or
pollution, air pollution, blizzard, landslide, mudslide, hurricane, building
or structural collapse, high water table, pandemic disease, epidemic, riot,
blight, drought, civil emergency, utility emergency, severe energy
shortages, snow, ice, windstorm, hazardous substance spills or releases,
chemical spills or releases, petroleum spills or releases, biological matter
spills or releases, radiation releases or exposures, infestation, explosions,
sabotage, mass transportation accidents or public health emergencies. This
definition should not be applied rigidly to exclude situations not
enumerated.
PUBLIC EMERGENCY — The imminent threat or occurrence of a disaster,
civil emergency or utility emergency affecting the City and its residents and
inhabitants where the Mayor determines that the exercise or discharge of
emergency or disaster powers is necessary to save lives, protect property,
protect the public health and safety, or to lessen or to avert the threat of a
catastrophe or calamity within the City.
"Civil emergency", as used in this Section, shall include, but not be
limited to, any condition of unrest, riot, civil disobedience, affray,
unlawful assembly, hostile or military or paramilitary action, war,
terrorism, or sabotage, epidemic or any event which results in mass
casualties which may be beyond normal capacity.
1.
"Utility emergency", as used in this Section, shall include, but not be
limited to, conditions which endanger or threaten to endanger the
safety, potability, availability, transmission, distribution, treatment, or
storage of water, natural gas, gas, fuel, electricity, communication,
garbage, or sewage.
2.
Section
230.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
230.120
AO:257
Section 230.120. Mayor's Power During Emergency. [Ord. No. 12-57
§1, 10-22-2012]
Section 230.130. Statutory Procedures Suspended in Event of
Emergency. [Ord. No. 12-57 §1, 10-22-2012) ]
In the event of an emergency, the Mayor is authorized to procure all
services, supplies, equipment or materials necessary to continue the
effective operation of the emergency preparedness plan without regard
to normal statutory procedures or formalities normally prescribed by law
A. Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary, when the
Mayor determines in the Mayor's sole discretion that a state of public
emergency exists within the City, the Mayor may by proclamation
declare a state of emergency, govern the City by proclamation, and
exercise all emergency powers, including, but not limited to, all of the
following:
1. The power to direct emergency response activities by City
departments including, but not limited to, the Police and Fire
Departments, and by such emergency services personnel as the
Mayor may designate or appoint.
2. The power to execute contracts for the emergency construction or
repair of public improvements, when the delay of advertising and
public bidding might cause serious loss or injury to the City.
3. The power to purchase or lease goods and services that the Mayor
deems necessary to the City's emergency response or for the repair
of City facilities, or both, and to acquire and distribute, with or
without compensation, of supplies, materials, and facilities.
4. The power to lease or lend real property, or structures, or both, that
the Mayor deems necessary for the continued operation of City
Government.
5. The power to promulgate rules and orders to implement and clarify
the Mayoral proclamation exercising emergency power.
6. The power to delegate any or all of these duties and to provide for
sub-delegation.
7. The Mayor shall be authorized to appoint any commissioned Law
Enforcement Officer in this State as a temporarily commissioned
officer of this City.
8. The power to transfer, appropriate, or lend between funds as may
be necessary in the circumstances.
B. In the event the Mayor is unavailable, the Mayor Pro Tem of the City
Council shall have the authorities listed in this Section, followed by the
City Administrator, and then followed by the most senior ranked
member of the City Council.
Section
230.120
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
230.130
AO:258
pertaining to municipal contracts or obligations; provided that if the City
Council is meeting at the time, the Mayor shall act pursuant to the orders
and directions imposed by that body. In the event of an emergency, the
Mayor, by proclamation, may waive any time-consuming formalities or
procedures required by Statute or by the provisions of this Code or other
ordinances pertaining to the advertisement of bids for the execution of
contracts and for the performance of public work contracts. (Ord. No. 12-57
§1, 10-22-12)
Section 230.140. Emergency Procurement. [Ord. No. 12-57 §1,
10-22-2012) ]
Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary, the Mayor, upon
declaration of a state of emergency by proclamation as provided in Section
230.120, may authorize the City Administrator or the City Administrator's
designees to procure by purchase or lease, such goods and services as are
deemed necessary for the City's emergency response effort. This emergency
procurement of goods or services may be made in the open market without
filing a requisition or estimate and without advertisement for immediate
delivery or furnishing. A full written account of all emergency procurements
made during this emergency, together with a requisition for the required
materials, supplies, equipment, or services, shall be submitted to or
provided by the City Administrator within thirty (30) days after their
procurement, and shall be open to public inspection for a period that
meets the requirements of the Secretary of State's Retention Manual. The
City Administrator shall, within three (3) months of the conclusion of the
emergency, formally communicate these emergency expenditures in a full
written account to the City Council. (Ord. No. 12-57 §1, 10-22-12)
Section 230.150. Effective Date and Termination of Emergency
Powers. [Ord. No. 12-57 §1, 10-22-2012) ]
Proclamations, rules, and orders issued pursuant to Section 230.120 shall
be effective upon issuance and shall remain in effect for a period of up to
thirty (30) days or until terminated by the Mayor or Council, whichever
comes first. This period may be extended by the Mayor only upon approval
of the City Council. Upon the expiration of the local state of emergency,
those persons acting pursuant to Section 230.120 shall cease to exercise
emergency powers. The Mayor or Council shall consult with the incident
commander prior to terminating the state of emergency. (Ord. No. 12-57 §1,
10-22-12)
Section 230.160. Penalty For Violation of Emergency Proclamation,
Rule, or Order. [Ord. No. 12-57 §1, 10-22-2012) ]
The violation of a proclamation of emergency, a subsequent proclamation
exercising emergency powers, a rule, or order, which proclamation, rule or
order is issued pursuant to Section 230.120, or the violation of any order
or directive given by a Peace Officer or designated emergency services
personnel pursuant to authority resulting from Section 230.120 is a
Section
230.130
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
230.160
AO:259
violation and punishable as provided in Section 100.220 of this Code. (Ord.
No. 12-57 §1, 10-22-12)
Section
230.160
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
230.160
AO:260
Chapter 235
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
Section 235.010. Definitions. [CC 1999 §25-1]
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall be deemed to
have the meaning indicated below:
APPROVED INCINERATOR — An incinerator which complies with all
current regulations of the Missouri Air Conservation Commission.
BULKY RUBBISH — Non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of combustible
and/or non-combustible waste materials from dwelling units, commercial,
industrial, institutional or agricultural establishments which are either too
large or too heavy to be safely and conveniently loaded in solid waste
collection vehicles by solid waste collectors with the equipment available
therefor.
CITY — The City of Republic, Missouri.
COLLECTION — Removal and transportation of solid waste from its place
of storage to its place of processing or disposal.
COMMERCIAL YARD WASTES — Yard wastes resulting from the operation
of any commercial, industrial, institutional, or agricultural establishment,
and multiple housing facilities with more than three (3) dwelling units.[Ord.
No. 19-05, 5-7-2019]
DEMOLITION AND CONSTRUCTION WASTE — Waste materials from the
construction or destruction of residential, industrial or commercial
structures.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Solid Waste Management Program shall
be the person designated by the City Administrator or his/her authorized
representative.
DISPOSABLE SOLID WASTE CONTAINER — Disposable plastic or paper
sacks with a capacity of twenty (20) to thirty-five (35) gallons specifically
designed for storage of solid waste.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a structure
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used, or are
intended to be used, for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal or vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, serving or consumption of food.
HAZARDOUS WASTES — Any waste or combination of wastes, as
determined by the commission by rules and regulations, which, because
of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious
characteristics, may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in
mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible,
illness, or pose a present or potential threat to the health of humans or the
environment.
Section
230.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
235.010
AO:261
MULTIPLE HOUSING FACILITY — A housing facility containing more than
one (1) dwelling unit under one (1) roof.
OCCUPANT — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others,
shall be in actual possession of any dwelling unit or of any other improved
real property, either as owner or as a tenant.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, political
subdivision, or organization of any kind, or their legal representative, agent
or assigns.
PROCESSING — Incinerating, composting, baling, shredding, salvaging,
compacting and other processes whereby solid waste characteristics are
modified or solid waste quantity is reduced.
REFUSE — Solid waste.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials including,
but not limited to, solid and semisolid waste materials resulting from
industrial, commercial, agricultural, governmental and domestic activities,
but does not include hazardous waste as defined in sections 260.360 to
260.432, RSMo., recovered materials, overburden, rock, tailings, matte,
slag or other waste material resulting from mining, milling or smelting.
SOLID WASTE CONTAINER — Receptacle used by any person to store solid
waste during the interval between solid waste collections.
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL — The process or discarding or getting rid of
unwanted material. In particular the final disposition of solid waste by man.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM — The entire process of managing
solid waste in a manner which minimizes the generation and subsequent
disposal of solid waste, including waste reduction, source separation,
collection, storage, transportation, recycling, resource recovery, volume
minimization, processing, market development, and disposal of solid
wastes.
STORAGE — Keeping, maintaining or storing solid waste from the time of
its production until the time of its collection.
YARD WASTES — Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden vegetation and
Christmas trees.[Ord. No. 19-05, 5-7-2019]
Section 235.020. City Yard Wastes Disposal Site. [Ord. No. 19-05,
5-7-2019]
Commercial solid waste: Solid waste, resulting from the operation of
any commercial, industrial, institutional or agricultural establishment,
and multiple housing facilities with more than three (3) dwelling units.
1.
Residential solid waste: Solid waste resulting from the maintenance
and operation of dwelling units excluding multiple housing facilities
with more than three (3) dwelling units.
2.
Section
235.010
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
235.020
AO:262
Section 235.030. Solid Waste Storage. [CC 1999 §25-3]
A. The City may elect to operate a yard wastes disposal site at the
discretion of the City Administrator.
B. The location, hours, and manner of operation shall be at the direction of
the Public Works Director. The Public Works Director has the authority
to close the yard wastes disposal site should weather conditions, space
constraints, or any other matter that impacts the health, safety, or
welfare dictate.
C. Only yard wastes shall be allowed at the yard wastes disposal site and
no yard wastes shall exceed six (6) inches in diameter or six (6) feet in
length. The Public Works Director is authorized, should a weather event
occur that necessitates allowing yard wastes in a greater diameter or
length, during the weather event or shortly thereafter to temporarily
allow larger diameter or lengths of yard wastes under this Subsection.
D. Use of the yard wastes disposal site shall be limited to persons who own
property in the City or residents of the City. Only yard wastes generated
within the City shall be allowed at the Yard Wastes Disposal Site.
E. No commercial yard wastes of any kind will be allowed at the yard
wastes disposal site. Persons owning residential property who lease out
the property within the City shall not be classified as a commercial yard
wastes disposer unless the parcel of land contains more than three (3)
dwelling units.
A. The occupant of every dwelling unit and of every institutional,
commercial or business, industrial or agricultural establishment
producing solid waste within the corporate limits of the City of
Republic, Missouri, shall provide sufficient and adequate containers for
the storage of all solid waste except bulky rubbish and demolition and
construction waste to serve such dwelling unit and or establishment;
and to maintain such solid waste containers at all times in good repair.
B. The occupant of every dwelling unit and of every institutional,
commercial, industrial, agricultural or business establishment shall
place all solid waste to be collected in proper solid waste containers,
except as otherwise provided herein, and shall maintain such solid
waste containers and the area surrounding them in a clean, neat and
sanitary condition at all times.
C. Residential solid waste shall be stored in containers of not more than
thirty-five (35) gallons nor less than twenty (20) gallons of nominal
capacity. Containers shall be leakproof, waterproof and fitted with a flytight
lid and shall be properly covered at all times except when
depositing waste therein or removing the contents therein or removing
the contents thereof. The containers shall have handles, bails or other
suitable lifting devices or features. Containers shall be of a type
originally manufactured for residential solid waste with tapered sides
Section
235.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
235.030
AO:263
Section 235.040. through Section 235.060. (Reserved)64
Section 235.070. Prohibited Practices. [CC 1999 §25-8]
Section 235.080. (Reserved)65
for easy emptying. They shall be of lightweight and sturdy construction.
The weight of any individual container and contents shall not exceed
seventy-five (75) pounds. Galvanized metal containers, rubber or
fiberglass containers, and plastic containers which do not become
brittle in cold weather may be used. Disposable solid waste containers
such as plastic sacks or bags may be used as well as other disposable
solid waste containers with suitable frames or containers as approved
by the Director may be used for storage of residential solid waste.
D. Commercial solid waste shall be stored in approved solid waste
containers. The containers shall be waterproof, leakproof and shall be
covered at all times except when depositing waste therein or removing
the contents thereof.
E. Absent an agreement with the solid waste collection service, yard
waste, tree limbs and similar substances shall not be placed in solid
waste containers nor left out for solid waste collection.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Deposit solid waste in any solid waste container other than his/her
own without the written consent of the owner of such container
and/or with the intent of avoiding payment of any charges for solid
waste collection and disposal;
2. Interfere in any manner with solid waste collection equipment or
with solid waste collectors in the lawful performance of their duties
as such;
3. Burn any solid waste unless a permit therefor has been obtained
from the Department of Natural Resources, or unless such burning
is for outdoor, non-commercial preparation of food, campfires, or
other fires used solely for recreational purposes or ceremonial
occasions as long as such fires are comprised only of firewood,
kindling, charcoal, or such other substance ordinarily used to start
and maintain such fire.
4. Dispose of solid waste at any facility or location which is not
approved by the Missouri Division of Health.
64.Editor's Note — As a result of changes requested by the city previous to adoption of the
code book, section 235.040: collection of solid waste, has been repealed in its entirety.
Said former section derived from CC 1999 §25-4. Section 235.050: disposal of solid waste,
has also been repealed in its entirety. Said former section derived from CC 1999 §25-5.
And section 235.060: rules and regulations, has been also repealed in its entirety. Said
former section derived from CC 1999 §25-7. These sections have been left reserved for the
city's future use.
Section
235.030
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
235.090
AO:264
Section 235.090. Penalties. [CC 1999 §25-10]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter, or any lawful
rules or regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, upon conviction, shall
be punished by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); provided, that each day's violation thereof
shall be a separate offense for the purpose hereof.
Chapter 240
PARKS AND RECREATION USER FEES
Section 240.010. Fees. [Ord. No. 03-52 §1, 7-28-2003; Ord. No.
04-04 §1, 1-26-2004; Ord. No. 05-10 §1, 1-24-2005; Ord. No. 06-01
§1, 2-13-2006; Ord. No. 07-01 §§1 — 2, 1-29-2007; Ord. No. 07-84 §1,
12-10-2007; Ord. No. 12-20 §§1 — 2, 1-23-2012; Ord. No. 18-08,
1-16-2018; Ord. No. 18-47, 1-8-2019]
The user fees for various recreational and leisure services offered by the
Republic Parks & Recreation Department such as programming, special
events, rentals, and access to recreational facilities are hereby approved,
adopted, enacted and implemented.
2019 Parks and Recreation User Fees — Effective January 8, 2019
Athletics
Youth Athletics (Team Sports)
2019 Team Fee
(Resident/Non-Resident)
Youth Basketball $250.00/$275.00
Youth Pee Wee Hoops $150.00/$175.00
Youth Volleyball (Winter) $225.00/$250.00
Youth Volleyball (Fall) $200.00/$225.00
Youth Soccer (Spring/Fall, Ages 5 &
Up)
$250.00/$275.00
Youth Soccer (Spring/Fall, Ages 3 —
4)
$150.00/$175.00
Youth Baseball & Softball $275.00/$300.00
Youth Tot-Ball $125.00/$140.00
Youth Flag Football $175.00/$200.00
Youth Athletic Tournaments Varies ($75.00 — $125.00)
65.Editor's Note — As a result of changes requested by the city previous to adoption of the
code book, section 235.080: service charges, has been repealed in its entirety. Said former
section derived from CC 1999 §25-9. This section has been left reserved for the city's
future use.
Section
235.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
240.010
AO:265
Youth Athletics (Individual) 2019 Player Fee
Youth Lacrosse (Jr. High Boys) $300.00
Youth Lacrosse (High School Boys) $400.00
Youth Lacrosse (High School Girls) $200.00
Youth Open Gym Free
Adult Athletics (Team Sports) 2019 Team Fee
Adult Basketball (Fall & Winter) $275.00
Adult Softball (Spring) $200.00
Adult Softball (Summer) $300.00
Adult Softball (Fall) $225.00
Adult Athletics (Individual) 2019 Player Fee
Adult Pickleball Open Play Free
Adult Open Gym $2.00
Athletic Admissions
Facility 2019 Admission Fee
Bervin White Baseball/Softball
Complex
For Youth/Adult Baseball/Softball
Games
$2.00 (Ages 12 – 64)
$1.00 (65+)
Republic Community Center
For Youth Basketball/Volleyball
Games
$1.50 (Ages 12 – 55)
January - August
$2.00 (Ages 12 – 64)
$1.00 (65+)
Beginning September 2019
Republic Aquatic Center Daily Admissions
Type 2019 Admission Fee
Daily Admission (Resident) $5.00
Daily Admission (Non-Resident) $6.00
"The Huna" Add-On (Resident and
Non-Resident)
$2.00
Non-Swimmer $1.50
Morning Splash $2.00
Morning Lap Swim $2.00
Section
240.010
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
240.010
AO:266
Republic Aquatic Center Daily Admissions
Type 2019 Admission Fee
Evening Swim $2.00
Group Swim (20+ Per Group) $3.00
Republic Aquatic Center Season Passes
Type 2019 Fee
Single/Initial Family Member
(Resident)
$100.00
Single/Initial Family Member (Non-
Resident)
$120.00
Additional Family Member —
(Resident)
$20.00
Additional Family Member — (Non-
Resident)
$25.00
Republic Aquatic Center Programming
Program 2019 Fee
Parent/Child Starfish Swim Lesson $25.00
Swim Lesson $50.00
Open Water Exercise $30.00
Senior Water Exercise $24.00
Tiger Sharks Swim Team $75.00
Republic Aquatic Center Rentals
Type 2019 Rental Fee
Party Package A (18 People w/Pizza) $150.00
Party Package A (18 People — No
Pizza)
$125.00
Party Package B (36 People w/Pizza) $275.00
Party Package B (36 People — No
Pizza)
$225.00
Facility Rental (75 People or Less) $150.00/Hour
Facility Rental (76 — 150 People) $175.00/Hour
Facility Rental (150+ People) $200.00/Hour
"The Huna" Add-On $50.00/Hour
"The Huna" Stand Alone $75.00/Hour
Section
240.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
240.010
AO:267
Community Programming
Toddler Programming 2019 Individual Fee
Toddler Open Gym $3.00
Toddler Tumbling $20.00
Doodlebugs $20.00
Munchkin Movie Day Free
Youth Programming 2019 Individual Fee
Okinawan Karate $90.00 (Initial Family Member)
$75.00 (Additional Family Member)
$50.00 Uniform Fee
School's Out Program $22.00
Summer Recreation Day Camp
(Full-Time)
$90.00/$80.00
Summer Recreation Day Camp
(Part-Time)
$45.00/$40.00
Summer Recreation Day Camp
Registration Fee
$10.00
Homeschool PE $3.00
Homeschool Art $5.00
Homeschool Theater $3.00
Senior Citizen Programming 2019 Individual Fee
Arthritis Foundation Exercise
Program
Free
Senior Movie Day Free
Senior Trips $20.00 — $60.00 (Varies)
Senior Wii Bowling $2.00
All Ages
2019 Fee
100 Mile Walking Club Free
Special Events
Special Event 2019 Fee
Father/Daughter Valentine Dance $25.00/$10.00 (Early)
$30.00/$15.00 (Late)
Easter Egg Hunt Free
Section
240.010
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
240.010
AO:268
Special Events
Special Event 2019 Fee
Movies/Events at The Amp (9) Free
Have-A-Blast Patriotic Celebration Free
Youth Tigger Triathlon $25.00 (Early)
$30.00 (Late)
Adult Tiger Triathlon $65.00 — $110.00 (Varies)
got Mud? Run $25.00 (Early)
$30.00 (Mid)
$35.00 (Late)
Senior (Citizen) Dine & Dance $12.00 (Early)
$15.00 (Late)
BOOgie Bash Free
Treat Yourself in Republic Free
Reindeer Run 5K $17.00/$25.00 (Early)
$22.00/$30.00 (Late)
Breakfast with Santa $3.00 (Breakfast)
$1.00 (Photo)
Facility/Venue Rentals
Gymnasiums 2019 Rental Fee
FC Gymnasium (League Fee) $20.00/Hour
FC Gymnasium (Non-Profit) $25.00/Hour
FC Gymnasium (Non-Profit, 5+
Hours)
$20.00/Hour
FC Gymnasium (Profit) $40.00/Hour
FC Gymnasium (Profit, 5+ Hours) $28.00/Hour
HC Gymnasium (League Fee) $10.00/Hour
HC Gymnasium (Non-Profit) $12.50/Hour
HC Gymnasium (Profit) $20.00/Hour
Community Rooms 2019 Rental Fee
Community Room A (Non-Profit) $25.00/Hour
Community Room A (Non-Profit, 5+
Hrs.)
$17.50/Hour
Section
240.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
240.010
AO:269
Community Rooms 2019 Rental Fee
Community Room A (Profit) $40.00/Hour
Community Room A (Profit, 5+ Hrs.) $28.00/Hour
Community Room B (Non-Profit) $35.00/Hour
Community Room B (Non-Profit, 5+
Hrs.)
$24.50/Hour
Community Room B (Profit) $56.00/Hour
Community Room B (Profit, 5+ Hrs.) $40.00/Hour
A&B (Non-Profit) $50.00/Hour
A&B (Non-Profit, 5+ Hrs.) $35.00/Hour
A&B (Profit) $80.00/Hour
A&B (Profit, 5+ Hrs.) $56.00/Hour
Community Room C (Non-Profit) $15.00/Hour
Community Room C (Non-Profit, 5+
Hrs.)
$10.50/Hour
Community Room C (Profit) $24.00/Hour
Community Room C (Profit, 5+ Hrs.) $17.00/Hour
Gerry Pool Senior Center (First 4
Hours)
$75.00
Gerry Pool Senior Center (Each +
Hour)
$10.00/Hour
Pavilions 2019 Rental Fee
All Pavilions (First 2 Hours) $20.00
All Pavilions (Each + Hour) $5.00
Equipment Rentals
Type 2019 Rental Fee
Canoe (4 Day) $25.00
Kayak (4 Day) $30.00
Tandem Kayak (4 Day) $35.00
Bounce House $25.00/Hour
Chapter 245
FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
240.010
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
245.010
AO:270
Section 245.010. Definitions. [Ord. No. 11-24 §1, 9-26-2011]
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have these prescribed
meanings:
CODE — The current version of the Missouri Food Code as adopted by the
Springfield-Greene County Health Department.
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH — The Director of the Springfield-Greene County
Health Department or the Director's designee.
EMBARGO — To prohibit the shipment, sale or movement of food or food
products.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Includes restaurants, cafes, or other businesses
selling processed food for consumption on or off the premises and food
processing and food manufacturing plants whether temporary or not.
PERMIT — The document issued by the regulatory authority that authorizes
a person to operate a food establishment.
PERMIT HOLDER — The entity that:
REGULATORY AUTHORITY — The Springfield-Greene County Health
Department is the authorized enforcement body having jurisdiction over the
food establishment.
TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — A food establishment that may be
transient in nature or which operates for a short period of time or which
operates sporadically.
Section 245.015. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 11-24 §1, 9-26-2011]
Is legally responsible for the operation of the food establishment such
as the owner, the owner's agent, or other person; and
1.
2. Possesses a valid permit to operate a food establishment.
A. The City desires to assist in assuring public health and safety with
regard to food inspections within the City.
B. The Springfield-Greene County Health Department currently is the
agency charged with enforcement of the Code in Greene County.
Enforcement is in accordance with the current version of the Missouri
Food Code as adopted by the Springfield-Greene County Health
Department. A copy of Code is kept on file at Director of Health's office
and at the office of the City Clerk of the City of Republic and is
incorporated herein as if fully set out.
C. Health inspectors authorized by the Springfield-Greene County Health
Department to conduct inspections of food establishments in Greene
County may bring an enforcement action in the Republic Municipal
Court for a violation by issuing a summons in a form prescribed by the
City of Republic and subject to review and filing by the municipal
prosecuting attorney.
Section
245.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
245.020
AO:271
Section 245.020. Permit Required — Fees — Suspension or
Revocation.66 [Ord. No. 11-24 §1, 9-26-2011; Ord. No. 13-12 §1,
3-11-2013]
A. No person shall operate a food establishment in the City of Republic
who does not possess a permit from the Springfield-Greene County
Health Department, nor shall any person operate a food establishment
after the suspension or revocation of such permit. The permit shall be
posted in a conspicuous place. Only persons who comply with the
requirements of this Chapter shall be entitled to receive and retain such
a permit. A person shall be required to secure a permit for the operation
of a temporary food establishment. Vending machine locations are not
required to obtain a permit, but may be inspected as often as deemed
necessary by the regulatory authority.
B. Upon the violation by the permit holder of any of the terms of this
Chapter, any permit issued under this Chapter may be temporarily
suspended by the regulatory authority, or revoked after an opportunity
for a hearing by the regulatory authority upon serious or repeated
violations.
C. Operation of a food establishment under a City business license is
conditioned on the food establishment having a valid permit from the
Springfield-Greene County Health Department. Upon notification of a
suspension, revocation or denial of a permit by the Springfield-Greene
County Health Department, the City Clerk may proceed pursuant to
City Code Section 605.070 regarding notice and hearing for the denial,
revocation or suspension of a City business license.
D. A temporary food establishment operating at a special event is required
to obtain a health permit.
E. It is unlawful to operate a food establishment without a permit issued
by the Springfield-Greene County Health Department or during a time
in which a permit has been suspended or revoked.
F. In order to provide adequate funding for the permitting and inspection
services, the City hereby establishes a fee schedule in substantially the
same form and amounts as set forth in the annual fee study adopted by
the City of Springfield as General Ordinance No. 6027, as may be
amended from time to time, subject to any amendments deemed
necessary and proper for the particular circumstances related to
inspections within the City. The City may also choose to adopt an
independent fee schedule.
G. The permit fee provisions shall not apply to school cafeterias, religious
or fraternal organizations, or civic organizations.
H. All permits shall be for one (1) year, beginning on January first (1st) and
ending December thirty-first (31st), with the exception of temporary
66.Editor's Note — The current applicable fee schedule can be found on file in the city offices.
Section
245.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
245.020
AO:272
Section 245.025. Reinstatement of Permit After Suspension or
Revocation. [Ord. No. 11-24 §1, 9-26-2011]
Upon receipt of proof of reinstatement of a permit by the Springfield-Greene
County Health Department, the food establishment may apply for a City
business license and the procedure for issuance or denial of a City business
license shall be followed.
Section 245.030. Authority To Take Samples For Analysis —
Condemnation of Unwholesome, Adulterated or Misbranded Food or
Drink. [Ord. No. 11-24 §1, 9-26-2011]
Samples of food, drink and other substances may be taken at food
establishments and examined by the regulatory authority as often as may
be necessary for the detection of unwholesomeness or adulteration. The
Director of Health may enter an order to embargo, condemn and forbid the
food establishment permits and mobile food permits or unless
otherwise provided for by ordinance and shall be renewed thereafter
annually only by payment of the proper fee to the regulatory authority.
New businesses or discontinued businesses making timely application
for a permit after the beginning of a current permit year shall pay
a pro-rated monthly rate to the regulatory authority, which includes
the month of application, for the remainder of the permit year. Permit
renewals must be completed within forty-five (45) days of becoming due
or the food establishment will be closed until the renewal is completed.
I. The City and the regulatory authority providing the services described
in this Chapter shall enter into an agreement setting forth the
procedure for processing and payment of the fees authorized in this
Chapter and establishing how the fees shall be distributed based upon
the services provided by the City and the services provided by the
regulatory authority.
J. The fees as established pursuant to Subsection (F) above shall be
effective upon the filing of a certified copy of the City of Springfield fee
ordinance with the City Clerk of the City of Republic.
The certified ordinance placed on file with the City Clerk is hereby
incorporated in this Section as if fully set out herein and shall be
maintained on file with the City Clerk and shall be available to the
public. The City of Republic may amend the fee schedule established in
Subsection (F) as deemed appropriate by adoption of an independent
fee ordinance.
K. Fees for the year 2013 shall be pro-rated based upon the effective date
of this Section as to any person or entity required to obtain a permit
that was operating within the City of Republic as of the date of passage
of this Section. Future annual fees shall be established pursuant to the
fee study described in Subsection (F) that is generally effective July first
(1st) of each year.
Section
245.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
245.030
AO:273
sale of, or cause to be removed or destroyed, any food or drink which is
unwholesome, adulterated or misbranded.
Section 245.035. Authority To Close Establishments Constituting A
Menace To Public Health. [Ord. No. 11-24 §1, 9-26-2011]
The Director of Health shall enter an order to close any food establishment
when such place shall, in the judgment of the Director of Health, constitute
a public health hazard or jeopardizes public health by reason of food that is
unsafe, adulterated or not honestly presented.
Section 245.040. Food Processing and Food Manufacturing Plants.
[Ord. No. 11-24 §1, 9-26-2011]
Rules and regulations governing the operation of food processing and food,
manufacturing plants shall be in accordance with the Statutes, regulations
and administrative guidelines of the State of Missouri pertaining to the
manufacturing, sale and distribution of food.
Section 245.045. Embargoes. [Ord. No. 11-24 §1, 9-26-2011]
The Director of Health may enter an order to embargo food or drink which
is suspected of being unwholesome, adulterated or misbranded until such
time as appropriate analysis, tests or examinations can be conducted.
Section 245.050. Unlawful Acts. [Ord. No. 11-24 §1, 9-26-2011]
It shall be unlawful to violate any provision of the code, any order issued on
behalf of the Springfield-Greene County Health Department to enforce the
code or this Chapter or any provision of this Chapter. A violation is subject
to the penalty provisions of Code Section 100.220.
Title III Notes
NOTES AND APPENDIXES
Appendix III-A, Fee/Fine/Forfeiture, is included as an attachment to this
Title.
Chapter 300
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 300.010. (Reserved)67
Section 300.020. Definitions. [Ord. No. 09-07 §1, 3-23-2009]
The following words and phrases when used in this Title mean:
67.Editor's Note — As a result of the 2007 review and changes directed by the city attorney,
this section 300.010 "model traffic code — adoption and exceptions" has been deleted.
Section
245.030
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
300.020
AO:274
ALLEY OR ALLEYWAY — Any street with a roadway of less than twelve (12)
feet in width.
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE — Any motorized vehicle manufactured and used
exclusively for off-highway use which is fifty (50) inches or less in width,
with an unladen dry weight of six hundred (600) pounds or less, traveling
on three (3), four (4) or more low pressure tires, with a seat designed to be
straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering control.
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE — A vehicle publicly owned and
operated as an ambulance, or a vehicle publicly owned and operated by
the State Highway Patrol, Police or Fire Department, Sheriff, Constable or
Deputy Sheriff, traffic officer or any privately owned vehicle operated as an
ambulance when responding to emergency calls.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Every vehicle designed, maintained or used
primarily for the transportation of property.
CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY — Every highway, street or roadway in
respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons
have no legal right of access to or from the same except at such points only
and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having
jurisdiction over the highway, street or roadway.
CROSSWALK —
CURB LOADING ZONE — A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or
materials.
DRIVER — Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE — A space adjacent to a curb for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight (or
passengers).
HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.
INTERSECTION —
That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs from the
edges of the traversable roadway.
1.
Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the
surface.
2.
The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral
curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways
of two (2) highways which join one another at, or approximately at,
1.
Section
300.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
300.020
AO:275
LANED ROADWAY — A roadway which is divided into two (2) or more
clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any self-propelled vehicle not operated exclusively
upon tracks, except farm tractors and motorized bicycles.
MOTORCYCLE — Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use
of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in
contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor.
MOTORIZED BICYCLE — Any two-wheeled or three-wheeled device having
an automatic transmission and a motor with a cylinder capacity of not more
than fifty (50) cubic centimeters which produces less than three (3) gross
brake horsepower and is capable of propelling the device at a maximum
speed of not more than thirty (30) miles per hour on level ground.
MOTORIZED PLAY VEHICLE — Includes mini-motorcycles, pocket bikes, or
any similar miniaturized two-wheel vehicle that is capable of transporting
a person or persons at a speed in excess of five (5) miles per hour or
motorized skateboards not having a seat or saddle for use of the rider;
that is self propelled by a motor or engine and is not otherwise defined by
Missouri Statutes or the Republic City Code as a motor vehicle, motorcycle,
or motorized bicycle.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD — Whenever certain hours are named herein
they shall mean standard time or daylight-saving time as may be in current
use in the City.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES — All signs, signals, markings and
devices not inconsistent with this Title placed or erected by authority of
a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic.
PARK OR PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE — A place adjacent to a curb reserved
for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of
passengers.
PEDESTRIAN — Any person afoot.
PERSON — Every natural person, firm, co-partnership, association or
corporation.
right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict; or
Where a highway includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more
apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by
an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
In the event such intersecting highway also includes two (2) roadways
thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways
of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
2.
Section
300.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
300.020
AO:276
POLICE OFFICER — Every officer of the municipal Police Department or
any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for
violations of traffic regulations.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY — Every way or place in private ownership
and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or
implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
RAILROAD — A carrier of persons or property upon cars operated upon
stationary rails.
RAILROAD TRAIN — A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails.
RESIDENCE DISTRICT — The territory contiguous to and including a
highway not comprising a business district when the property on such
highway for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is in the main
improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The right of one (1) vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a
lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching
under such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise
to danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the other.
ROADWAY — That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a
highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways the term "roadway" as
used herein shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such
roadways collectively.
SAFETY ZONE — The area or space officially set apart within a roadway
for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked
or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of
pedestrians.
STAND OR STANDING — The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving
or discharging passengers.
STOP — When required, complete cessation from movement.
STOP OR STOPPING — When prohibited, any halting even momentarily of
a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a Police Officer or
traffic control sign or signal.
STREET OR HIGHWAY — The entire width between the lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the uses of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel. "State Highway", a highway maintained by
the State of Missouri as a part of the State Highway system.
Section
300.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
300.020
AO:277
THROUGH HIGHWAY — Every highway or portion thereof on which
vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to
which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to
yield right-of-way to vehicles on such through highway in obedience to
either a stop sign or a yield sign, when such signs are erected as provided
in this Title.
TRAFFIC — Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other
conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for purposes
of travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL — Any device, whether manually, electrically
or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and
to proceed.
VEHICLE — Any mechanical device on wheels, designed primarily for use,
or used, on highways, except motorized bicycles, vehicles propelled or
drawn by horses or human power, or vehicles used exclusively on fixed rails
or tracks, cotton trailers or motorized wheelchairs operated by handicapped
persons.
Section 300.030. Temporary Closing of Streets. [Ord. No. 99-47
§§1–4, 10-11-1999; Ord. No. 10-56 §1, 1-10-2011]
A. It shall be unlawful for any individual, entity or organization to impede
or block, or to cause the impedance or blockage of the routine flow of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic upon any active City street without an
authorized permit. An individual, entity or organization may file a
written request to temporarily close or to allow restricted use of a
street as specified herein.
B. All requests by any individual, entity or organization for the temporary
closure of any City street for any purpose shall be directed to the Public
Works Director using the forms and procedures promulgated for that
purpose.
C. The temporary closure or restriction of a City street may be authorized
by the Public Works Director with the consent of the Chief of Police and
the Fire Chief, and without the necessity of any formal action on the
part of the City Council.
D. The Public Works Director may, at his or her discretion, impose
restrictions and conditions upon the applicant as a condition of
approval of the permit, including, but not limited to:
1. Specific operational requirements placed upon the applicant to
ensure the protection of the life, health and safety of adjoining
property owners and the general public.
2. The completion of specified actions to ensure the notification of the
general public and/or affected residents and property owners.
3. The written indemnification of the City.
Section
300.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
300.030
AO:278
Chapter 305
TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
Section 305.010. Records of Traffic Violations.
Section 305.020. Police Department To Investigate Accidents.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department to investigate traffic accidents,
to arrest and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with
violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents.
Section 305.030. Traffic Accident Reports.
The Police Department shall maintain files in manner so they can be
accessed alphabetically by location if needed. Such reports shall be
available for the use and information of the City Traffic Engineer.
4. The procurement of insurance in the amount and to the benefit of
the City of Republic, as may be determined.
5. The submission of surety in an amount and form sufficient to
ensure the restoration of the affected area.
6. An equipment deposit, which may be applied to the cost of
replacing any lost, stolen or damaged equipment as provided by the
City.
E. If the Public Works Director, the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief are
not in unanimous agreement as to the conditions or restrictions under
which the temporary closure of any City street will be approved, then
the application shall be denied.
F. Once issued, the Public Works Director, the Chief of Police or the Fire
Chief may suspend or revoke the temporary street closure permit for
good cause.
A. The Police Department shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic
ordinances of the City or of the State vehicle laws of which any person
has been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all
such alleged offenses. Such record shall be so maintained as to show all
types of violations and the total of each. Said record shall accumulate
during at least a five (5) year period and from that time on the record
shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five (5) year
period.
B. All forms for records of violations and notices of violations shall be
serially numbered. For each month and year a written record shall be
kept available to the public showing the disposal of all such forms.
C. All such records and reports shall be public records.
Section
300.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
305.040
AO:279
Section 305.040. Driver Files To Be Maintained.
The Police Department shall maintain a suitable record of all traffic
accidents, warnings, arrests, convictions and complaints reported for each
driver, which shall be filed alphabetically under the name of the driver
concerned.
Section 305.050. Police Department To Submit Annual Traffic
Safety Report.
Section 305.060. (Reserved)68
Section 305.070. City Traffic Engineer.
Section 305.080. Emergency and Experimental Regulations.
A. The Police Department shall annually prepare a traffic report which
shall be filed with the City Administrator. Such report shall contain
information on traffic matters in the City as follows:
1. The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the
number of persons injured and other pertinent traffic accident
data.
2. The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent
data on the safety activities of the Police.
3. The plans and recommendations of the Police Department for
future traffic safety activities.
A. The office of City Traffic Engineer is established. The Public Works
Director or other designated official shall serve as City Traffic Engineer
in addition to his/her other functions and shall exercise the powers and
duties with respect to traffic as provided in this Title.
B. The City Traffic Engineer shall determine the installation and proper
timing and maintenance of traffic control devices, conduct engineering
analyses of traffic accidents and devise remedial measures, conduct
engineering investigation of traffic conditions, plan the operation of
traffic on the streets and highways of the City, and cooperate with other
City Officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic
conditions, and carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by
ordinances of the City.
A. The Chief of Police by and with the approval of the City Traffic Engineer
is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective
the provisions of the traffic ordinances of the City and to make and
enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or
68.Editor's Note — As a result of changes requested by the city previous to adoption of the
code book, section 305.060: police department to designate method of identifying funeral
processions, has been repealed in its entirety. This section has been left reserved for the
city's future use.
Section
305.040
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
305.080
AO:280
Chapter 310
ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC
REGULATIONS
Section 310.010. Authority of Police and Fire Department Officials.
Section 310.020. Obedience To Police and Fire Department
Officials.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of a Police Officer or Fire Department official.
Section 310.030. Persons Propelling Pushcarts or Riding Animals
To Obey Traffic Regulations.
Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an animal upon a roadway,
and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the
provisions of this Title applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those
provisions of this Title which by their very nature can have no application.
Section 310.040. Use of Coasters, Roller Skates, Motorized Play
Vehicles and Similar Devices Restricted. [Ord. No. 09-07 §2,
3-23-2009]
No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, or
toy vehicle, or motorized play vehicle, or similar device, shall go upon any
roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and when so crossing
special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall
remain in effect for more than ninety (90) days.
B. The City Traffic Engineer may test traffic control devices under actual
conditions of traffic.
A. It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department or such
officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police to enforce all street traffic
laws of the City and all of the State vehicle laws applicable to street
traffic in the City.
B. Officers of the Police Department or such officers as are assigned by the
Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand
or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided that, in the event of
a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the Police Department may direct traffic as
conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic
laws.
C. Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct
or assist the Police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity.
Section
305.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
310.040
AO:281
such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of
the duties applicable to pedestrians. This Section shall not apply upon any
street while set aside as a play street as authorized by ordinance of the City.
Section 310.050. Public Employees To Obey Traffic Regulations.
The provisions of this Title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by
or used in the service of the United States Government, this State, County
or City and it shall be unlawful for any said driver to violate any of the
provisions of this Title, except as otherwise permitted in this Title.
Section 310.060. Authorized Emergency Vehicles.
Section 310.070. Failure To Yield To An Emergency Vehicle. [Ord.
No. 05-94 §1, 11-28-2005]
A. The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator
of the law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire
alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this Section, but subject
to the conditions herein stated.
B. The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
1. Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this Title;
2. Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
3. Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he/she does not
endanger life or property; and
4. Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning
in specified directions.
C. The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle
shall apply only when the driver of any said vehicle while in motion
sounds audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle as may be
reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least
one (1) lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under normal
atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the
front of such vehicle or a flashing blue light authorized by Section
307.175, RSMo.
D. The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety
of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his/her reckless disregard for the safety of others.
A. Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle
making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of
the laws of this State, or of a Police vehicle properly and lawfully
Section
310.040
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
310.070
AO:282
Section 310.080. Sirens and Flashing Lights Emergency Use —
Persons Authorized — Violation — Penalty.
Motor vehicles and equipment, not otherwise defined in this Title as an
authorized emergency vehicle, which are operated by any member of an
organized Fire Department, ambulance association, or rescue squad,
whether paid or volunteer, may be operated on streets and highways in
this City as an emergency vehicle under the provisions of Section 304.022,
RSMo., while responding to a fire call or ambulance call or at the scene of a
fire call or ambulance call and while using or sounding a warning siren and
while using or displaying thereon fixed, flashing or rotating blue lights, but
sirens and blue lights shall be used only in bona fide emergencies. Permits
for the operation of such vehicles equipped with sirens or blue lights shall
be in writing and shall be issued and may be revoked by the Chief of
an organized Fire Department, organized ambulance association or rescue
squad and no person shall use or display a siren or rotating blue lights on a
motor vehicle, fire, ambulance or rescue equipment without a valid permit
authorizing the use. Permit to use a siren or lights as heretofore set out does
not relieve the operator of the vehicle so equipped with complying with all
other traffic laws and regulations. Violation of this Section constitutes an
ordinance violation.
Section 310.090. Immediate Notice of Accident.
The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or
death of any person or total property damage to an apparent extent of five
making use of an audible signal only, the driver of every other vehicle
shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position
parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb
of the roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain
in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed,
except when otherwise directed by a Police Officer.
B. Upon approaching a stationary emergency vehicle displaying lighted
red or red and blue lights, the driver of every motor vehicle shall:
1. Proceed with caution and yield the right-of-way, if possible with due
regard to safety and traffic conditions, by making a lane change
into a lane not adjacent to that of the stationary vehicle, if on a
roadway having at least four (4) lanes with not less than two (2)
lanes proceeding in the same direction as the approaching vehicle;
or
2. Proceed with due caution and reduce the speed of the vehicle,
maintaining a safe speed for road conditions, if changing lanes
would be unsafe or impossible.
C. This Section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety
of all persons using the highway.
Section
310.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
310.090
AO:283
hundred dollars ($500.00) or more to one (1) person shall immediately by
the quickest means of communication give notice of such accident to the
Police Department if such accident occurs within the City.
Section 310.100. Written Report of Accident.
The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident
resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or total property damage
to an apparent extent of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more to one (1)
person shall, within five (5) days after such accident, forward a written
report of such accident to the Police Department. The provisions of this
Section shall not be applicable when the accident has been investigated at
the scene by a Police Officer while such driver was present thereat.
Section 310.110. When Driver Unable To Report.
Section 310.120. Public Inspection of Reports Relating To
Accidents.
Section 310.130. Leaving The Scene of A Motor Vehicle Accident.
A. Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving
immediate notice of an accident as required in Section 310.090 and
there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident
capable of doing so, such occupant shall give, or cause to be given, the
notice not given by the driver.
B. Whenever the driver is physically incapable of making a written report
of an accident as required in Section 310.100 and such driver is not the
owner of the vehicle, then the owner of the vehicle involved in such
accident shall within five (5) days after the accident make such report
not made by the driver.
A. All written reports made by persons involved in accidents or by garages
shall be without prejudice to the individual so reporting and shall be for
the confidential use of the Police Department or other governmental
agencies having use for the records for accident prevention purposes,
except that the Police Department or other governmental agency may
disclose the identity of a person involved in an accident when such
identity is not otherwise known or when such person denies his/her
presence at such accident.
B. No written reports forwarded under the provisions of this Section shall
be used as evidence in any trial, civil or criminal, arising out of an
accident except that the Police Department shall furnish upon demand
of any party to such trial, or upon demand of any court, a certificate
showing that a specified accident report has or has not been made to
the Department in compliance with law and if such report has been
made, the date, time and location of the accident, the names and
addresses of the drivers, the owners of the vehicles involved and the
investigating officers.
Section
310.090
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
310.130
AO:284
Chapter 315
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
Section 315.010. Authority To Install Traffic Control Devices.
The City Traffic Engineer shall place and maintain traffic control signs,
signals and devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of
the City to make effective the provisions of said ordinances and may place
and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he/she may deem
necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of the City or
under State law or to guide or warn traffic.
Section 315.020. Manual and Specifications For Traffic Control
Devices.
All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the Manual of
Uniform Traffic Control Devices (latest edition) or to such other regulations
approved by resolution adopted of the City Council of the City. All signs
or signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as
practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the City. All traffic
control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Title shall be official traffic control devices.
Section 315.030. Obedience To Traffic Control Devices.
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic
control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the provisions
of this Title, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or Police Officer, subject
to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in
this Title.
A. A person commits the offense of leaving the scene of a motor vehicle
accident when being the operator or driver of a vehicle on the
highways, streets or roads of the City or on any publicly or privately
owned parking lot or parking facility, within the City, generally open for
use by the public and knowing that an injury has been caused to a
person or damage has been caused to property, due to his/her
culpability or to accident, he/she leaves the place of the injury, damage
or accident without stopping and giving his/her name, residence,
including City and street number, motor vehicle number and driver's
license number, if any, to the injured party or to a Police Officer, or if no
Police Officer is in the vicinity, then to the nearest Police Station or
judicial officer.
B. For the purposes of this Section, all Peace Officers shall have
jurisdiction, when invited by an injured person, to enter the premises of
any such privately owned parking lot or parking facility for the purpose
of investigating an accident and performing all necessary duties
regarding such accident.
Section
310.130
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
315.040
AO:285
Section 315.040. When Official Traffic Control Devices Required For
Enforcement Purposes.
No provision of this Title for which official traffic control devices are
required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and
place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper position and
sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever
a particular Section does not state that official traffic control devices are
required, such Section shall be effective even though no devices are erected
or in place.
Section 315.050. Official Traffic Control Devices — Presumption of
Legality.
Section 315.060. Traffic Control Signal Legend — Right Turn On
Red Light — When.
A. Whenever official traffic control devices are placed in position
approximately conforming to the requirements of this Title, such
devices shall be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or
direction of lawful authority, unless the contrary shall be established by
competent evidence.
B. Any official traffic control device placed pursuant to the provisions of
this Title and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements
pertaining to such devices shall be presumed to comply with the
requirements of this Title, unless the contrary shall be established by
competent evidence.
A. Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting
different colored lights, or colored lighted arrows, successively one (1)
at a time or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall
be used except for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend,
and said lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and
pedestrians as follows:
1. Green indication.
a. Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed
straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place
prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including
vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to
other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the
intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is
exhibited.
b. Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in
combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such
arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other
indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic shall
Section
315.040
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
315.060
AO:286
yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an
adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the
intersection.
c. Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as
provided in Section 315.070, pedestrians facing any green
signal, except when the sole green signal is a turn arrow, may
proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked
crosswalk.
2. Steady yellow indication.
a. Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby
warned that the related green movement is being terminated
or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately
thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the
intersection.
b. Pedestrians facing a steady yellow signal, unless otherwise
directed by a pedestrian control signal as provided in Section
315.070, are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to
cross the roadway before a red indication is shown and no
pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway.
3. Steady red indication.
a. Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal alone shall stop
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection
and shall remain standing until a green indication is shown
except as provided in paragraph (b) of this Subsection.
b. The driver of a vehicle which is stopped as close as practicable
at the entrance to the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, if none, then at the entrance to the intersection
in obedience to a red signal may cautiously enter the
intersection to make a right turn but shall yield the right-ofway
to pedestrians and other traffic proceeding as directed by
the signal at the intersection, except that the State Highways
and Transportation Commission with reference to an
intersection involving a State highway, and local authorities
with reference to an intersection involving other highways
under their jurisdiction, may prohibit any such right turn
against a red signal at any intersection where safety conditions
so require, said prohibition shall be effective when a sign is
erected at such intersection giving notice thereof.
c. Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as
provided in Section 315.070, pedestrians facing a steady red
signal alone shall not enter the roadway.
Section
315.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
315.060
AO:287
Section 315.070. Pedestrian Control Signals.
Section 315.080. Flashing Signals.
Section 315.090. Lane Direction Control Signals.
When lane direction control signals are placed over the individual lanes of
a street or highway, vehicular traffic may travel in any lane over which a
green signal is shown but shall not enter or travel in any lane over which a
red signal is shown.
4. In the event an official traffic control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of
this Section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which
by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be
made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the
stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking
the stop shall be made at the signal.
A. Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words
"Walk" or "Don't Walk" are in place such signals shall indicate as
follows:
1. "WALK": Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the
roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the rightof-
way by the drivers of all vehicles.
2. "WAIT" or "DON'T WALK": No pedestrian shall start to cross the
roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has
partially completed his/her crossing on the walk signal shall
proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the wait signal is
showing.
A. Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic
sign or signal it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
1. Flashing red (stop signal), when a red lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering
the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when
marked or, if none, then before entering the intersection, and the
right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after
making a stop at a stop sign.
2. Flashing yellow (caution signal), when a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed
through the intersection or past such signal only with caution.
B. This Section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of
drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be
governed by the rules as set forth in Section 335.090 of this Title.
Section
315.060
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
315.100
AO:288
Section 315.100. Display of Unauthorized Signs, Signals or
Markings.
No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway an
unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an
imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or railroad sign or
signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides
from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control
device or any railroad sign or signal.
Section 315.110. Interference With Official Traffic Control Devices
or Railroad Signs or Signals.
No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface,
injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device or any
railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any
other part thereof.
Section 315.120. through Section 315.130. (Reserved)69
Section 315.140. City Traffic Engineer To Designate Crosswalks and
Establish Safety Zones.
Section 315.150. Traffic Lanes.
Chapter 320
A. The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized:
1. To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines
upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where
in his/her opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing
the roadway, and at such other places as he/she may deem
necessary.
2. To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such
places as he/she may deem necessary for the protection of
pedestrians.
A. The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes
upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment
of traffic is necessary.
B. Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the
boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another
vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.
69.Editor's Note — As a result of the 2007 review and changes directed by the city attorney,
these sections 315.120 "authority to establish play streets" and 315.130 "play streets"
have been deleted.
Section
315.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
315.150
AO:289
SPEED REGULATIONS
Section 320.010. State Speed Laws Applicable. [Ord. No. 05-44 §1,
6-16-2005; Ord. No. 09-29 §1, 8-10-2009]
The State traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable
upon all State roads and State highways within the City unless otherwise set
by ordinance and meeting State requirements for approval, if any. The City
may, by ordinance, set speed limits for City streets within the City. It shall
be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any
speed so declared when signs are in place giving notice thereof. No person
shall exceed the speed limits so established within the speed zones set forth
and described in Schedule I.
Section 320.020. Regulation of Speed By Traffic Signals.
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic
signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe
manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable
within the district or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs
giving notice thereof.
Section 320.030. Speed Limit Generally. [CC 1999 §14-12]
Every person operating a vehicle upon the public streets of the City shall
drive the same at a rate of speed not to exceed thirty (30) miles per hour;
provided, that there shall be placed at the intersection of North Main Street
and the Missouri State Highway, and at the intersection of South Main
Street and the Missouri State Highway, and at the west end of Elm Street,
and at the east end of Elm Street in the City, and at any other appropriate
place within the corporate limits of the City, so as to warn the traveling
public and all other persons of the provisions of this Section regulating
speed of vehicles, an appropriate sign in large letters which shall read:
SPEED LIMIT
30 MILES PER HOUR
Section 320.040. Slow Speed — Regulations.
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or
block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced
speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. Peace
Officers may enforce the provisions of this Section by directions to drivers,
and in the event of apparent willful disobedience to this provision and
refusal to comply with direction of an officer in accordance herewith, the
continued slow operation by a driver is an ordinance violation.
Section
315.150
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
320.050
AO:290
Section 320.050. Special Speed Limits On Roadways.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon those portions of the
roadways which are set forth and described in Schedule I at a rate of speed
in excess of that speed limit set for such portions of the roadways by said
Schedule.
Chapter 325
TURNING MOVEMENTS
Section 325.010. Required Position and Method of Turning At
Intersection.
Section 325.020. Authority To Place and Obedience To Turning
Markers.
A. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
follows:
1. Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn
shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge
of the roadway.
2. Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is
permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the
intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that
portion of the right-half of the roadway nearest the centerline
thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it
enters the intersection and after entering the intersection the left
turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the
centerline of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the
left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left
of the center of the intersection.
3. Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection
where traffic is restricted to one (1) direction on one (1) or more of
the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any
such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme
left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of
travel of such vehicle and after entering the intersection the left
turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as
practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving
in such direction upon the roadway being entered.
A. The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to place markers, buttons or
signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to
be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as
prescribed by law or ordinance.
Section
320.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
325.020
AO:291
Section 325.030. Authority To Place Restricted Turn Signs.
The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine those
intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or Uturn
and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such
turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at
other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs
or they may be removed when such turns are permitted.
Section 325.040. Obedience To No-Turn Signs.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or Uturn
is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any
such sign.
Section 325.050. Limitations On Turning Around.
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall not upon
any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in
safety and without interfering with other traffic.
Chapter 330
ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
Section 330.010. Authority To Sign One-Way Streets and Alleys.
Whenever any ordinance of the City designates any one-way street or
alley, the City Traffic Engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice
thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are
in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall
be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite
direction is prohibited.
Section 330.020. One-Way Streets and Alleys.
Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys described and
designated by ordinance, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated
direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and
maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction
is prohibited.
Section 330.030. Authority To Restrict Direction of Movement On
Streets During Certain Periods.
B. When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed
within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles
turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of
such indications.
Section
325.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
330.030
AO:292
Chapter 335
STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS, RAILROAD CROSSINGS
Section 335.010. Through Streets Designated.
The City Council may adopt by ordinance streets and parts of streets that
are designated as through streets for the purposes of Sections 335.010 to
335.090.
Section 335.020. Signs Required At Through Streets.
Whenever any ordinance of the City designates and describes a through
street, it shall be the duty of the City Traffic Engineer to place and maintain
a stop sign, or on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation at
any intersection a yield sign, on each and every street intersecting such
through street unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all
times by traffic control signals; provided however, that at the intersection of
two (2) such through streets or at the intersection of a through street and
a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the
approaches of either of said streets as may be determined by the City Traffic
Engineer upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study.
Section 335.030. Other Intersections Where Stop or Yield Required.
The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate
intersections where particular hazard exists upon other than through
streets and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one (1) or more
entrances to any such intersection in which event he/she shall cause to be
erected a stop sign at every such place where a stop is required, or whether
vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a different street at such
intersection as prescribed in Subsection (A) of Section 335.040, in which
event he/she shall cause to be erected a yield sign at every place where
obedience thereto is required.
Section 335.040. Stop and Yield Signs.
A. The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine and
designate streets, parts of streets or specific lanes thereon upon which
vehicular traffic shall proceed in one (1) direction during one (1) period
and the opposite direction during another period of the day and shall
place and maintain appropriate markings, signs, barriers or other
devices to give notice thereof. The City Traffic Engineer may erect signs
temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the roadway.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in violation of
such markings, signs, barriers or other devices so placed in accordance
with this Section.
Section
330.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
335.040
AO:293
Section 335.050. Vehicle Entering Stop Intersection.
Except when directed to proceed by a Police Officer or traffic control signal,
every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop
sign shall stop as required by Subsection (B) of Section 335.040 and after
having stopped shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered
the intersection from another highway or which is approaching so closely
on said highway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when
such driver is moving across or within the intersection.
Section 335.060. Vehicle Entering Yield Intersection.
The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in obedience to such
sign slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and shall
yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on
another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during
the time such driver is moving across or within the intersection; provided
however, that if such a driver is involved in a collision with a vehicle in the
intersection, after driving past a yield sign without stopping, such collision
shall be deemed prima facie evidence of his/her failure to yield right-of-way.
Section 335.070. Emerging From Alley, Driveway or Building.
The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging
from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior
to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway or driveway, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as
may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
Section 335.080. Stop When Traffic Obstructed.
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there
is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he/she is operating without obstructing the
A. The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if required for safety to
stop shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked
stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting
roadway.
B. Except when directed to proceed by a Police Officer or traffic control
signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection
indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall
stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest
the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching
traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection.
Section
335.040
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
335.080
AO:294
passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control
signal indication to proceed.
Section 335.090. Obedience To Signal Indicating Approach of Train.
Chapter 340
MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
Section 340.010. Following Fire Apparatus Prohibited.
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow
any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than five
hundred (500) feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where
fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
Section 340.020. Crossing Fire Hose.
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a Fire Department
when laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire
or alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department official in
command.
Section 340.030. Funeral Processions.
A. Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade
crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this Section, the
driver of such vehicle shall stop within fifty (50) feet, but not less than
fifteen (15) feet from the nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not
proceed until he/she can do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall
apply when:
1. A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning
of the immediate approach of a railroad train;
2. A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or
continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad
train; or
3. An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous
proximity to such crossing.
B. No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier
is closed or is being opened or closed.
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall mean:
FUNERAL DIRECTOR — A person licensed as a funeral director
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 333, RSMo.
Section
335.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
340.030
AO:295
FUNERAL LEAD VEHICLE OR LEAD VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle
equipped with at least one (1) lighted circulating lamp exhibiting an
amber or purple light or lens or alternating flashing headlamps visible
under normal atmospheric conditions for a distance of five hundred
(500) feet from the front of the vehicle. A hearse or coach properly
equipped may be a lead vehicle.
ORGANIZED FUNERAL PROCESSION — Two (2) or more vehicles
accompanying the remains of a deceased person from a funeral
establishment, church, synagogue or other place where a funeral
service has taken place to a cemetery, crematory or other place of final
disposition, or a funeral establishment, church, synagogue or other
place where additional funeral services will be performed, if directed
by a licensed funeral director from a licensed establishment.
B. Driving Rules.
1. Except as otherwise provided for in this Section, pedestrians and
operators of all other vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle which is a part of an organized funeral procession.
2. Notwithstanding any traffic control device or right-of-way provision
prescribed by State or local law, when the funeral lead vehicle in an
organized funeral procession lawfully enters an intersection, all
vehicles in the procession shall follow the lead vehicle through the
intersection. The operator of each vehicle in the procession shall
exercise the highest degree of care toward any other vehicle or
pedestrian on the roadway.
3. An organized funeral procession shall have the right-of-way at all
intersections regardless of any traffic control device at such
intersections, except that operators of vehicles in an organized
funeral procession shall yield the right-of-way to any approaching
emergency vehicle pursuant to the provisions of law or when
directed to do so by a Law Enforcement Officer.
4. All vehicles in an organized funeral procession shall follow the
preceding vehicle in the procession as closely as is practical and
safe under the conditions.
5. No person shall operate any vehicle as part of an organized funeral
procession without the flashing emergency lights of such vehicle
being lighted.
6. Any person who is not an operator of a vehicle in an organized
funeral procession shall not:
a. Drive between the vehicles comprising an organized funeral
procession while such vehicles are in motion and have the
flashing emergency lights lighted pursuant to Subsection
(B)(5), above, except when required to do so by a Law
Section
340.030
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
340.030
AO:296
Section 340.040. Driving in Procession.
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the righthand
edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead
as close as is practicable and safe.
Section 340.050. (Reserved)70
Section 340.060. When Permits Required For Parades and
Processions.
No funeral, procession or parade containing two hundred (200) or more
persons or fifty (50) or more vehicles except the forces of the United States
Army or Navy, the military forces of this State and the forces of the Police
and Fire Departments shall occupy, march or proceed along any street
except in accordance with a permit issued by the Chief of Police and such
other regulations as are set forth herein which may apply.
Section 340.070. Vehicle Shall Not Be Driven On A Sidewalk.
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except on a
permanent or temporary driveway.
Section 340.080. Limitations On Backing.
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can
be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic.
Enforcement Officer or when such person is operating an
emergency vehicle giving an audible or visual signal;
b. Join a funeral procession for the purpose of securing the rightof-
way; or
c. Attempt to pass any vehicle in an organized funeral procession,
except where a passing lane has been specifically provided.
7. When an organized funeral procession is proceeding through a red
signal light as permitted herein, a vehicle not in the organized
funeral procession shall not enter the intersection unless such
vehicle may do so without crossing the path of the funeral
procession.
8. No ordinance, regulation or any other provision of law shall
prohibit the use of a motorcycle utilizing flashing amber lights to
escort an organized funeral procession on the highway.
9. Any person convicted of violating any provision of this Section shall
be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).
70.Editor's Note — As a result of changes requested by the city previous to adoption of the
code book, section 340.050: funeral procession to be identified, has been repealed in its
entirety. This section has been left reserved for the city's future use.
Section
340.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
340.090
AO:297
Section 340.090. Opening and Closing Vehicle Doors.
No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available
to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall
any person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to
moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers.
Section 340.100. Riding On Motorcycles — Additional Passenger —
Requirements.
Section 340.110. Riding Bicycle On Sidewalks — Limitations —
Motorized Bicycles Prohibited.
Section 340.120. All-Terrain Vehicles — Prohibited — Exceptions —
Operation Under An Exception — Prohibited Uses — Penalty.
A. A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent
and regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any
other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless
such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one (1) person, in which
event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if
designed for two (2) persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to
the rear or side of the operator.
B. The operator of a motorized bicycle shall ride only astride the
permanent and regular seat attached thereto and shall not permit more
than one (1) person to ride thereon at the same time, unless the
motorized bicycle is designed to carry more than one (1) person. Any
motorized bicycle designed to carry more than one (1) person must be
equipped with a passenger seat and footrests for the use of a passenger.
A. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business
district.
B. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person
shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible
signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
C. No person shall ride a motorized bicycle upon a sidewalk.
A. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle, as defined in Section
300.020, upon the streets and highways of this City, except as follows:
1. All-terrain vehicles owned and operated by a governmental entity
for official use;
2. All-terrain vehicles operated for agricultural purposes or industrial
on-premises purposes between the official sunrise and sunset on
the day of operation; or
Section
340.090
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
340.120
AO:298
Section 340.130. Riding Bicycles, Sleds, Roller Skates, By
Attaching To Another Vehicle — Prohibited.
No person riding upon any bicycle, motorized bicycle, coaster, roller skates,
sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself/herself to any vehicle
upon a roadway.
3. All-terrain vehicles whose operators carry a special permit issued
by this City pursuant to Section 304.013, RSMo.
B. No person shall operate an off-road vehicle, as defined in Section
304.001, RSMo., within any stream or river in this City, except that offroad
vehicles may be operated within waterways which flow within the
boundaries of land which an off-road vehicle operator owns, or for
agricultural purposes within the boundaries of land which an off-road
vehicle operator owns or has permission to be upon, or for the purpose
of fording such stream or river of this State at such road crossings as
are customary or part of the highway system. All Law Enforcement
Officials or Peace Officers of this State and its political subdivisions
shall enforce the provisions of this Subsection within the geographic
area of their jurisdiction.
C. A person operating an all-terrain vehicle on a street or highway
pursuant to an exception covered in this Section shall have a valid
operator's or chauffeur's license but shall not be required to have
passed an examination for the operation of a motorcycle, and the
vehicle shall be operated at speeds of less than thirty (30) miles per
hour. When operated on a street or highway, an all-terrain vehicle shall
have a bicycle safety flag, which extends not less than seven (7) feet
above the ground, attached to the rear of the vehicle. The bicycle safety
flag shall be triangular in shape with an area of not less than thirty (30)
square inches and shall be dayglow in color.
D. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle:
1. In any careless way so as to endanger the person or property of
another;
2. While under the influence of alcohol or any controlled substance;
or
3. Without a securely fastened safety helmet on the head of an
individual who operates an all-terrain vehicle or who is being towed
or otherwise propelled by an all-terrain vehicle, unless the
individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
E. No operator of an all-terrain vehicle shall carry a passenger, except for
agricultural purposes.
F. A violation of this Section shall be an ordinance violation.
Section
340.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
340.140
AO:299
Section 340.140. Controlled Access.
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled access roadway
except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority.
Section 340.150. Railroad Trains Not To Block Streets.
It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad
train to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such a manner as
to prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time
longer than five (5) minutes; provided that this Section shall not apply to
a moving train or to one stopped because of an emergency or for repairs
necessary before it can proceed safely.
Section 340.160. Driving Through Safety Zone Prohibited.
No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone.
Section 340.170. Manner of Operation of Motor Vehicles — Careful
and Prudent.
Every person operating a motor vehicle on the highways of this City shall
drive the vehicle in a careful and prudent manner and at a rate of speed so
as not to endanger the property of another or the life or limb of any person
and shall exercise the highest degree of care.
Section 340.180. Driving To The Right.
A. Upon all public roads or highways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be
driven upon the right-half of the roadway, except as follows:
1. When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction pursuant to the rules governing such movement;
2. When placing a vehicle in position for and when such vehicle is
lawfully making a left turn in compliance with the provisions of this
Title;
3. When the right-half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair; or
4. Upon a roadway designated by local ordinance as a one-way street
and marked or signed for one-way traffic.
B. It is unlawful to drive any vehicle upon any highway or road which has
been divided into two (2) or more roadways by means of a physical
barrier or by means of a dividing section or delineated by curbs, lines or
other markings on the roadway, except to the right of such barrier or
dividing section, or to make any left turn or semi-circular or U-turn on
any such divided highway, except in a cross-over or intersection.
Section
340.140
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
340.180
AO:300
Section 340.190. Passing Regulations.
C. Whenever any roadway has been divided into three (3) or more clearly
marked lanes for traffic, the following rules in addition to all other
consistent herewith shall apply:
1. A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver
has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.
2. Upon a roadway which is divided into three (3) lanes a vehicle shall
not be driven in the center lane, except in preparation for a left
turn. In no such case shall preparation include travel in such lane
for a distance greater than one hundred (100) feet.
3. Upon all highways any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal
speed of traffic thereon shall be driven in the right-hand lane for
traffic or as close as practicable to the right-hand edge or curb,
except as otherwise provided in Sections 304.014 to 304.026,
RSMo.
4. Official signs may be erected by the Highways and Transportation
Commission or the Highway Patrol may place temporary signs
directing slow moving traffic to use a designated lane or allocating
specified lanes to traffic moving in the same direction and drivers
of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign.
5. Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass
each other to the right, and except when a roadway has been
divided into traffic lanes, each driver shall give to the other at least
one-half (½) of the main traveled portion of the roadway whenever
possible.
D. All vehicles in motion upon a highway having two (2) or more lanes of
traffic proceeding in the same direction shall be driven in the righthand
lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle or when
preparing to make a proper left turn or when otherwise directed by
traffic markings, signs or signals.
A. The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction, subject to the limitations and
exceptions hereinafter stated:
1. The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and
shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely
clear of the overtaken vehicle; and
2. Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of
the overtaking vehicle and shall not increase the speed of such
driver's vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
Section
340.180
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
340.190
AO:301
Section 340.200. Hand and Mechanical Signals.
B. The driver of a motor vehicle may overtake and pass to the right of
another vehicle only under the following conditions:
1. When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
2. Upon a City street with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width
for two (2) or more lines of vehicles in each direction; or
3. Upon a one-way street.
The driver of a motor vehicle may overtake and pass another
vehicle upon the right only under the foregoing conditions
when such movement may be made in safety. In no event shall
such movement be made by driving off the paved or main
traveled portion of the roadway. The provisions of this
Subsection shall not relieve the driver of a slow-moving vehicle
from the duty to drive as closely as practicable to the righthand
edge of the roadway.
C. Except when a roadway has been divided into three (3) traffic lanes, no
vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the centerline of a highway or
public road in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of
oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such
overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with
the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction or any vehicle overtaken.
D. No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left side of the roadway
under the following conditions:
1. When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve of the
highway where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance
as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach
from the opposite direction.
2. When the view is obstructed upon approaching within one hundred
(100) feet of any bridge, viaduct, tunnel or when approaching
within one hundred (100) feet of or at any intersection or railroad
grade crossing.
A. No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of or turn a vehicle
from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and
until such movement can be made with reasonable safety and then only
after the giving of an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein.
1. An operator or driver when stopping, or when checking the speed
of the operator's vehicle, if the movement of other vehicles may
reasonably be affected by such checking of speed, shall extend
Section
340.190
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
340.200
AO:302
Section 340.210. Stopping For School Bus.
such operator's arm at an angle below horizontal so that the same
may be seen in the rear of the vehicle.
2. An operator or driver intending to turn the vehicle to the right shall
extend such operator's arm at an angle above horizontal so that the
same may be seen in front of and in the rear of the vehicle and shall
slow down and approach the intersecting highway as near as
practicable to the right side of the highway along which such
operator is proceeding before turning.
3. An operator or driver intending to turn the vehicle to the left shall
extend such operator's arm in a horizontal position so that the
same may be seen in the rear of the vehicle and shall slow down
and approach the intersecting highway so that the left side of the
vehicle shall be as near as practicable to the centerline of the
highway along which the operator is proceeding before turning.
4. The signals herein required shall be given either by means of the
hand and arm or by a signal light or signal device in good
mechanical condition of a type approved by the State Highway
Patrol; however, when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded that a
hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear
of such vehicle then such signals shall be given by such light or
device. A vehicle shall be considered as so constructed or loaded
that a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front
and rear when the distance from the center of the top of the
steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab or load
exceeds twenty-four (24) inches, or when the distance from the
center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or
load thereon exceeds fourteen (14) feet, which limit of fourteen
(14) feet shall apply to single vehicles or combinations of vehicles.
The provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to any trailer
which does not interfere with a clear view of the hand signals of the
operator or of the signalling device upon the vehicle pulling such
trailer; provided further, that the provisions of this Section as far as
mechanical devices on vehicles so constructed that a hand and arm
signal would not be visible both to the front and rear of such vehicle
as above provided shall only be applicable to new vehicles
registered within this State after the first (1st) day of January,
1954.
A. The driver of a vehicle upon a highway upon meeting or overtaking
from either direction any school bus which has stopped on the highway
for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school children and
whose driver has in the manner prescribed by law given the signal to
stop shall stop the vehicle before reaching such school bus and shall not
proceed until such school bus resumes motion, or until signaled by its
driver to proceed.
Section
340.200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
340.210
AO:303
B. Every bus used for the transportation of school children shall bear upon
the front and rear thereon a plainly visible sign containing the words
"School Bus" in letters not less than eight (8) inches in height. Each bus
shall have lettered on the rear in plain and distinct type the following:
"State Law: Stop While Bus is Loading and Unloading". Each school bus
subject to the provisions of Sections 304.050 to 304.070, RSMo., shall
be equipped with a mechanical and electrical signaling device approved
by the State Board of Education, which will display a signal plainly
visible from the front and rear and indicating intention to stop.
C. Every school bus operated to transport students in the public school
system which has a gross vehicle weight rating of more than ten
thousand (10,000) pounds, which has the engine mounted entirely in
front of the windshield and the entrance door behind the front wheels,
and which is used for the transportation of school children shall be
equipped with a crossing control arm. The crossing control arm, when
activated, shall extend a minimum of five (5) feet six (6) inches from the
face of the front bumper. The crossing control arm shall be attached on
the right side of the front bumper and shall be activated by the same
controls which activate the mechanical and electrical signaling devices
described in Subsection (B) of this Section. This Subsection may be
cited as "Jessica's Law" in commemoration of Jessica Leicht and all
other Missouri school children who have been injured or killed during
the operation of a school bus.
D. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, the driver of a school bus
in the process of loading or unloading students upon a street or
highway shall activate the mechanical and electrical signaling devices,
in the manner prescribed by the State Board of Education, to
communicate to drivers of other vehicles that students are loading or
unloading. A public school district has the authority pursuant to Section
304.050, RSMo., to adopt a policy which provides that the driver of a
school bus in the process of loading or unloading students upon a
divided highway of four (4) or more lanes may pull off of the main
roadway and load or unload students without activating the mechanical
and electrical signaling devices in a manner which gives the signal for
other drivers to stop and may use the amber signaling devices to alert
motorists that the school bus is slowing to a stop; provided that the
passengers are not required to cross any traffic lanes and also provided
that the emergency flashing signal lights are activated in a manner
which indicates that drivers should proceed with caution, and in such
case, the driver of a vehicle may proceed past the school bus with due
caution. No driver of a school bus shall take on or discharge passengers
at any location upon a highway consisting of four (4) or more lanes of
traffic, whether or not divided by a median or barrier, in such manner as
to require the passengers to cross more than two (2) lanes of traffic; nor
shall any passengers be taken on or discharged while the vehicle is
upon the road or highway proper unless the vehicle so stopped is
plainly visible for at least five hundred (500) feet in each direction to
drivers of other vehicles in the case of a highway with no shoulder and a
Section
340.210
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
340.210
AO:304
Section 340.220. Right-Of-Way At Intersection — Signs At
Intersections.
Section 340.230. Distance At Which Vehicle Must Follow.
The driver of a vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than
is reasonably safe and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the roadway. Vehicles being
driven upon any roadway outside of a business or residence district in a
speed limit greater than sixty (60) miles per hour and at least three
hundred (300) feet in each direction to drivers of other vehicles upon
other highways, and on all highways, only for such time as is actually
necessary to take on and discharge passengers.
E. The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways need
not stop upon meeting or overtaking a school bus which is on a different
roadway, which is proceeding in the opposite direction on a highway
containing four (4) or more lanes of traffic, or which is stopped in a
loading zone constituting a part of, or adjacent to, a limited or
controlled access highway at a point where pedestrians are not
permitted to cross the roadway.
A. The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the rightof-
way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different
highway, provided however, there is no form of traffic control at such
intersection.
B. When two (2) vehicles enter an intersection from different highways at
approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall
yield the right-of-way to the driver of the vehicle on the right. This
Subsection shall not apply to vehicles approaching each other from
opposite directions when the driver of one (1) of such vehicles is
attempting to or is making a left turn.
C. The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the
left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as
to constitute an immediate hazard.
D. The driver of a vehicle intending to make a left turn into an alley, private
road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching
from the opposite direction when the making of such left turn would
create a traffic hazard.
E. The City may, on any section of road where construction or major
maintenance operations are being effected, fix a speed limit in such
areas by posting of appropriate signs, and the operation of a motor
vehicle in excess of such speed limit in the area so posted shall be
deemed prima facie evidence of careless and imprudent driving and a
violation of Section 340.170.
Section
340.210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
340.230
AO:305
caravan or motorcade, whether or not towing other vehicles, shall be so
operated, except in a funeral procession or in a duly authorized parade, so
as to allow sufficient space between each such vehicle or combination of
vehicles as to enable any other vehicle to overtake or pass such vehicles
in safety. This Section shall in no manner affect Section 304.044, RSMo.,
relating to distance between trucks traveling on the highway.
Section 340.235. Striking A Lawfully Stopped, Parked or Operating
Vehicle. [Ord. No. 08-05 §1, 1-28-2008]
Section 340.240. Use of Engine Braking Devices (Jake Brakes)
Prohibited — When.
It shall be unlawful to operate or use engine braking devices within the City
limits of the City of Republic, such braking devices sometimes being known
as "Jake brakes", except in the case of emergencies. For the purpose of this
Section an engine braking device is a hydraulic electric engine attachment
that converts the engine exhaust of a vehicle engine into an air compressor
by changing the operation of the engine exhaust valve. The operation of
such device is very loud.
Section 340.250. Avoiding A Traffic Signal Prohibited. [CC 1999
§14-46]
It shall be unlawful for any person to purposely avoid a traffic signal or sign
by cutting through a parking lot or adjacent lot and in so doing avoid the
intersection at which traffic signal or sign exists.
Section 340.260. Careless and Imprudent Operation Prohibited On
Parking Lots. [CC 1999 §14-48]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in a careless
and imprudent manner on any parking lot within the City normally used by
the public.
Section 340.270. (Reserved)71
Section 340.280. Width, Height, Length and Weight Restrictions.
A. The driver of a vehicle shall be guilty of failing to devote sufficient
attention to the control of his vehicle if the vehicle collides with any
other vehicle that is lawfully stopped, lawfully parked or lawfully
proceeding in the same direction of travel in a designated lane of traffic.
B. As used in this Section, "control" shall mean to regulate, guide or
exercise restraining or directing influence over.
71.Editor's Note — As a result of the 2007 review and changes directed by the city attorney,
this section 340.270 "transporting dead animals" has been deleted.
Section
340.230
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
340.280
AO:306
Section 340.290. Driving Overloaded, Etc., Vehicles Prohibited. [CC
1999 §14-4]
No person shall drive an overloaded vehicle or one loaded in such manner
that any part of the load is likely to fall upon and litter any highway, street
or alley in this municipality, or cause injury or grief to persons, or damage to
other vehicles, nor shall such person permit any part, portion or the whole
of such load to fall upon and to remain upon the highway, street or alley.
A. Width. No vehicle operated upon any street in the City shall have a
width, including load, in excess of ninety-six (96) inches, except
clearance lights, rearview mirrors or other accessories required or
permitted by Federal or State law.
B. Height. No vehicle operated upon the interstate highway system or
upon any route designated by the Chief Engineer of the State Highways
and Transportation Department shall have a height, including load, in
excess of fourteen (14) feet. On all other highways, no vehicle shall
have a height, including load, in excess of thirteen and one-half (13½)
feet, except that any vehicle or combination of vehicles transporting
automobiles or other motor vehicles may have a height, including load,
of not more than fourteen (14) feet.
C. Length. No motor vehicle operated upon any street in the City shall
have a length in excess of that provided for in Section 304.170, RSMo.
D. Weight. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or convey upon any
street in the City any vehicle of any kind with a weight in excess of that
provided for in Section 304.180, RSMo.
E. Permits. The City shall issue a permit for the operation of vehicles
exceeding the width, height, length and weight limits prescribed in this
Section. Such approval shall specify the terms and conditions under
which such vehicles may be operated, and designate the streets over
which such vehicle may be operated and the hours of the day between
which such operation shall be permitted. Each applicant for such
permit shall first apply for approval with the office of Public Works in
accordance with Section 500.070 of this Code relating to Moving
Buildings or Houses — Permit Required. [Ord. No. 16-23 § 1,
11-28-2016]
F. Damages. Any person who drives any vehicle exceeding the width,
height, length or weight limits prescribed in Subsections (A), (B), (C)
and (D) of this Section, whether operating under the permit required by
Subsection (E) of this Section or not, shall be liable for the amount of
any damage such vehicle causes to any street, bridge, culvert, sewer or
other public property and any such vehicle shall be subject to a lien for
the full amount of such damage.
Section
340.280
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
340.300
AO:307
Section 340.300. Vehicles Used For Hauling Earth, Etc., Manure,
Etc., To Be Equipped So As To Prevent Dropping, Etc. [CC 1999
§14-5]
Every person engaged in hauling or removing earth, sand, rock, manure,
rubbish, offal or other material shall have boxes, on his/her wagon, cart or
other vehicle, and the same so constructed with good, tight side, end and
bottom boards, as to prevent the dropping, spilling or wasting of such earth,
sand, rock, manure, rubbish, offal or other material in or upon any street,
avenue or alley.
Section 340.305. Glass, Tacks, Injurious Substances, Duty To
Remove From Highway — When.
Any person who has purposely, accidentally or by reason of an accident
dropped any tacks, nails, wire, scrap metal, glass, crockery, sharp stones or
other substances injurious to the feet of persons or animals, or to the tires
or wheels of vehicles, including motor vehicles, upon any street or highway
shall immediately make all reasonable efforts to clear the street or highway
of the substances.
Section 340.310. Prohibiting The Use of Certain Streets By Vehicles
More Than Eighteen Thousand Pounds. [CC 1999 §14-179; §16-61;
Ord. No. 08-69 §1, 9-8-2008]
A. Definition. As used in this Section, the following terms shall have these
prescribed meanings:
OVERNIGHT PARKING — Parking of a truck, as defined in this Section,
for an extended length of time (exceeding six (6) hours) in a twenty-four
(24) hour period.
B. Through truck traffic is prohibited from being operated on or parking
on City streets except those streets designated as truck routes or as
exempted herein. For the purposes of this Section, "trucks" are defined
as all motorized vehicles licensed for more than eighteen thousand
(18,000) pounds and having more than two (2) axles. The streets
designated for through truck traffic within the City limits shall be as
follows:
1. Missouri State Highway 174.
2. U.S. Highway 60.
3. Main Street, also known as Highway N, north of Missouri State
Highway 174.
4. Main Street, also known as Missouri State Route P, south of U.S.
Highway 60.
5. Missouri State Highway 360 (James River Freeway).
6. Missouri State Route M (Republic Road).
Section
340.300
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
340.310
AO:308
Section 340.320. Racing On Streets or Parking Lots.
7. Missouri State Route MM (Brookline Boulevard).
8. Missouri State Route ZZ (Wilson Creek Boulevard).
9. West Carnahan Street.
Truck traffic shall not be permitted on any street in the City
other than designated truck routes except for the purpose of
making pickups and deliveries, returning to a primary business
location for overnight parking or service, or returning to the
owner's primary residence for overnight parking.
C. The City Traffic Engineer is hereby given authority to post signs on such
prohibited streets as he/she deems appropriate. The fact that a
prohibited street is not posted shall be no defense to a violation of this
Section.
D. Those vehicles exempted by this Section and allowed to travel on
residential streets to be parked in residential areas shall be prevented
from operating for more than fifteen (15) minutes at a time and no more
than thirty (30) minutes within a twenty-four (24) period while in a
residential neighborhood as defined by this Section.
E. This Section shall not apply to bobtails or the power units of tractortrailer
rigs where adequate off-street parking is provided.
A. Prohibited — Exception. No person shall drive any vehicle upon the
public streets or highways, or upon any public or private parking lot, in
any race, speed competition or contest, drag race or acceleration
contest, test of physical endurance, or exhibition of speed or
acceleration, or for the purpose of making a speed record, and no
person shall in any manner participate in any race, competition,
contest, test or racing events except when sponsored by auto clubs
where one (1) vehicle is maneuvering through an obstacle course or any
other similar type of activity if such activity takes place on private or
public parking lots with the permission of the property owners, nor
shall this Section be construed to prohibit any activity sponsored by a
charitable or similar not-for-profit organization when authorized by
resolution of the City Council.
B. Definitions. For purposes of this Section, the following definitions shall
apply:
DRAG RACE — The operation of two (2) or more vehicles from a
point side-by-side at accelerating speeds in a competitive attempt to
outdistance each other, or the operation of one (1) or more vehicles
over a common selected course, from the same point to the same
point, for the purpose of comparing the relative speeds or power of
acceleration of such vehicles within a certain distance or time limit.
Section
340.310
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
340.320
AO:309
Section 340.330. Prohibited Noises — Loud Sound Amplification
Systems.
Chapter 342
ALCOHOL-RELATED TRAFFIC OFFENSES
Cross Reference — As to reimbursement of certain costs related to arrest
under this chapter, see §130.260 of this Code.
Section 342.010. Definitions. [CC 1999 §3-48]
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have these prescribed
meanings:
DRIVE, DRIVING, OPERATES OR OPERATING — Physically driving or
operating a motor vehicle.
RACING — The use of one (1) or more vehicles in an attempt to outgain,
outdistance or prevent another vehicle from passing, to arrive at a
given destination ahead of another vehicle or vehicles, or to test the
physical stamina or endurance of drivers over long-distance driving
routes.
C. Aiding Or Assisting Exhibition Of Acceleration. No person shall aid or
assist in the performance of an exhibition of acceleration on a public
street, public parking lot or private parking lot by any means
whatsoever. Any person who shall deposit a substance on a street or
parking lot for the purpose of enabling a vehicle to break traction for an
exhibition of acceleration, and any person who shall push or hold a
motor vehicle which is engaging in an exhibition of acceleration, shall
be deemed to aid or assist in the performance of an exhibition of
acceleration.
A. No person operating or occupying a motor vehicle on a street, highway,
alley, parking lot or driveway shall operate or permit the operation of
any sound amplification system from within the vehicle so that the
sound is plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) or more feet from the
vehicle.
B. For purposes of this Section, the term "sound amplification system"
means any radio, tape player, compact disc player, loudspeaker or other
electronic device used for the amplification of sound.
C. For purposes of this Section, the term "plainly audible" means any
sound produced by a sound amplification system from within the
vehicle, which clearly can be heard at a distance of fifty (50) feet or
more. Measurement standards shall be by the auditory senses, based
upon direct line of sight. Words or phrases need not be discernible, and
bass reverberations are included. The motor vehicle may be stopped,
standing, parked or moving on a street, highway, alley, parking lot or
driveway.
Section
340.320
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
342.010
AO:310
INTOXICATED CONDITION — A person is in an "intoxicated condition"
when he/she is under the influence of alcohol, a controlled substance, or
drug, or any combination thereof.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER OR ARRESTING OFFICER — Includes the
definition of Law Enforcement Officer in Subdivision (17) of Section
556.061, RSMo., and Military Policemen conducting traffic enforcement
operations on a Federal military installation under military jurisdiction in
the State of Missouri.
Section 342.020. Driving While Intoxicated.
A person commits the offense of "driving while intoxicated" if he/she
operates a motor vehicle while in an intoxicated or drugged condition.
No person convicted of or pleading guilty to the offense of driving while
intoxicated shall be granted a suspended imposition of sentence for such
offense, unless such person shall be placed on probation for a minimum of
two (2) years.
Section 342.030. Driving With Excessive Blood Alcohol Content.
Section 342.040. Chemical Test For Alcohol Content — Consent
Implied — Administered — When — How — Videotaping of Chemical
or Field Sobriety Test Admissible Evidence.
A. A person commits the offense of "driving with excessive blood alcohol
content" if such person operates a motor vehicle in this City with eighthundredths
of one percent (.08%) or more by weight of alcohol in such
person's blood.
B. As used in this Section, "percent by weight of alcohol" in the blood shall
be based upon grams of alcohol per one hundred (100) milliliters of
blood or two hundred ten (210) liters of breath and may be shown by
chemical analysis of the person's blood, breath, saliva or urine. For the
purposes of determining the alcoholic content of a person's blood under
this Section, the test shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of Sections 577.020 to 577.041, RSMo.
A. Any person who operates a motor vehicle upon the public highways of
this City shall be deemed to have given consent to, subject to the
provisions of Sections 577.020 to 577.041, RSMo., a chemical test or
tests of the person's breath, blood, saliva or urine for the purpose of
determining the alcohol or drug content of the person's blood pursuant
to the following circumstances:
1. If the person is arrested for any offense arising out of acts which
the arresting officer had reasonable grounds to believe were
committed while the person was driving a motor vehicle while in an
intoxicated or drugged condition;
2. If the person is under the age of twenty-one (21), has been stopped
by a Law Enforcement Officer, and the Law Enforcement Officer
Section
342.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
342.040
AO:311
has reasonable grounds to believe that such person was driving a
motor vehicle with a blood alcohol content of two-hundredths of
one percent (.02%) or more by weight;
3. If the person is under the age of twenty-one (21), has been stopped
by a Law Enforcement Officer, and the Law Enforcement Officer
has reasonable grounds to believe that such person has committed
a violation of the traffic laws of the State, or any political
subdivision of the State, and such officer has reasonable grounds to
believe, after making such stop, that such person has a blood
alcohol content of two-hundredths of one percent (.02%) or
greater; or
4. If the person is under the age of twenty-one (21), has been stopped
at a sobriety checkpoint or roadblock, and the Law Enforcement
Officer has reasonable grounds to believe that such person has a
blood alcohol content of two-hundredths of one percent (.02%) or
greater. The test shall be administered at the direction of the Law
Enforcement Officer whenever the person has been arrested or
stopped for any reason.
B. The implied consent to submit to the chemical tests listed in Subsection
(A) of this Section shall be limited to not more than two (2) such tests
arising from the same arrest, incident or charge.
C. Chemical analysis of the person's breath, blood, saliva or urine to be
considered valid pursuant to the provisions of Sections 577.020 to
577.041, RSMo., shall be performed according to methods approved by
the State Department of Health by licensed medical personnel or by a
person possessing a valid permit issued by the State Department of
Health for this purpose.
D. The person tested may have a physician, or a qualified technician,
chemist, registered nurse or other qualified person at the choosing and
expense of the person to be tested, administer a test in addition to any
administered at the direction of a Law Enforcement Officer. The failure
or inability to obtain an additional test by a person shall not preclude
the admission of evidence relating to the test taken at the direction of a
Law Enforcement Officer.
E. Upon the request of the person who is tested, full information
concerning the test shall be made available to him/her.
F. Any person given a chemical test of the person's breath pursuant to
Subsection (A) of this Section or a field sobriety test may be videotaped
during any such test at the direction of the Law Enforcement Officer.
Any such video recording made during the chemical test pursuant to
this Subsection or a field sobriety test shall be admissible as evidence
for a violation of any municipal ordinance, or any license revocation or
suspension proceeding pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 302,
RSMo.
Section
342.040
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
342.050
AO:312
Section 342.050. Exception — Passengers On Transit Authority. [CC
1999 §3-51]
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prohibit the otherwise legal
consumption of alcoholic beverages by passengers on a privately or publicly
owned transit authority that has been chartered and is not being utilized for
conveyance of the general public where the operation and control of such
conveyance is by a person not in possession of or with ready access to such
alcoholic beverages.
Chapter 345
PEDESTRIANS' RIGHTS AND DUTIES
Section 345.010. Pedestrians Subject To Traffic Control Devices.
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals as heretofore declared
in Sections 315.060 and 315.070 of this Title, but at all other places
pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions
stated in this Chapter.
Section 345.020. Pedestrians' Right-Of-Way in Crosswalks.
Section 345.030. Pedestrians To Use Right-Half of Crosswalks.
Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right-half of
crosswalks.
A. When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping
if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a
crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon
which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so
closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger.
B. No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and
walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is
impossible for the driver to yield.
C. Subsection (A) shall not apply under the conditions stated in Subsection
(B) of Section 345.050.
D. Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross
the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear
shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
Section
342.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
345.040
AO:313
Section 345.040. Crossing At Right Angles.
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at
right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except
in a crosswalk.
Section 345.050. When Pedestrian Shall Yield.
Section 345.060. Prohibited Crossing.
Section 345.070. Obedience of Pedestrians To Bridge and Railroad
Signals.
Section 345.080. Pedestrians Walking Along Roadways.
A. Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
B. Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the rightof-
way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
C. The foregoing rules in this Section have no application under the
conditions stated in Section 345.060 when pedestrians are prohibited
from crossing at certain designated places.
A. Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a
crosswalk.
B. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in any
business district.
C. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk upon any
street designated by ordinance.
D. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic control devices; and, when authorized to
cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the
official traffic control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.
A. No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach
thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate or barrier after a bridge
operation signal indication has been given.
B. No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge when such gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
A. Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to
walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
Section
345.040
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
345.080
AO:314
Section 345.090. Drivers To Exercise Highest Degree of Care.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Title, every driver of a
vehicle shall exercise the highest degree of care to avoid colliding with any
pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn
when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any
child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway.
Chapter 350
METHOD OF PARKING
Section 350.010. Standing or Parking Close To Curb. [CC 1999
§14-136]
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, every vehicle stopped or
parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped
or parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within
eighteen (18) inches of the right-hand curb except in the case of angle or
diagonal parking. In the case of angle or diagonal parking, no person shall
stand or park a vehicle other than with the front of such vehicle directed
toward the front or curb of such angle or diagonal parking space.
Section 350.020. Signs or Markings Indicating Angle Parking.
Section 350.030. Obedience To Angle Parking Signs or Markers.
On those streets which have been signed or marked by the City Traffic
Engineer for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other
than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs
or markings.
B. Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall when practicable walk only on the left side of the
roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the
opposite direction.
A. The City Traffic Engineer shall determine upon what streets angle
parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets but such
angle parking shall not be indicated upon any Federal-aid or State
highway within the City unless the State Highways and Transportation
Commission has determined by resolution or order entered in its
minutes that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking
without interfering with the free movement of traffic.
B. Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where
passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the
left side of the street.
Section
345.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
350.040
AO:315
Section 350.040. Permits For Loading or Unloading At An Angle To
The Curb.
Section 350.050. Lamps On Parked Vehicles.
Chapter 355
STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN
SPECIFIED PLACES
Section 355.010. Stopping, Standing or Parking Prohibited. [Ord.
No. 03-67 §1, 10-13-2003]
A. The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to issue special permits to
permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or
unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions
of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or
lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to
such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein.
B. It shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of
the special terms or conditions of any such permit.
A. Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked upon a street or highway during
the hours between a half (½) hour after sunset and a half (½) hour
before sunrise and in the event there is sufficient light to reveal any
person or object within a distance of five hundred (500) feet upon such
street or highway, no lights need be displayed upon such parked
vehicle.
B. Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a roadway or shoulder
adjacent thereto, whether attended or unattended, during the hours
between a half (½) hour after sunset and a half (½) hour before sunrise
and there is not sufficient light to reveal any person or object within a
distance of five hundred (500) feet upon such highway, such vehicle so
parked or stopped shall be equipped with one (1) or more lamps
meeting the following requirements: At least one (1) lamp shall display
a white or amber light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet
to the front of the vehicle, and the same lamp or at least one (1) other
lamp shall display a red light visible from a distance of five hundred
(500) feet to the rear of the vehicle, and the location of said lamp or
lamps shall always be such that at least one (1) lamp or combination of
lamps meeting the requirements of this Section is installed as near as
practicable to the side of the vehicle which is closer to passing traffic.
The foregoing provisions shall not apply to a motor-driven cycle.
C. Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or
dimmed.
Section
350.040
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
355.010
AO:316
A. Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with law or the directions of a Police Officer or official
traffic control device, no person shall:
1. Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
a. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of a street;
b. On a sidewalk;
c. Within an intersection or within twenty (20) feet of an
intersection;
d. On a crosswalk;
e. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty
(30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of
a safety zone, unless the (traffic authority) indicates a different
length by signs or markings;
f. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction
when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
g. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel;
h. On any railroad tracks; or
i. At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
2. Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
momentarily to pickup or discharge a passenger or passengers:
a. In front of a public or private driveway;
b. Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant;
c. Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
d. Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing
signal, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a
roadway;
e. Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any
fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of said entrance (when
properly signposted); or
f. At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
3. Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading
merchandise or passengers:
Section
355.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
355.010
AO:317
Section 355.020. Driver's Responsibility Not To Obstruct Traffic.
Except in the case of an accident resulting in the injury or death of any
person, the driver of a vehicle which for any reason obstructs the regular
flow of traffic on the roadway of any State highway shall make every
reasonable effort to move the vehicle or have it moved so as not to block the
regular flow of traffic. Any person who fails to comply with the requirements
of this Section is guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than
fifty dollars ($50.00).
Section 355.030. Parking in Alleys.
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under
such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of
the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall
stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the
driveway entrance to any abutting property.
Section 355.040. Parking For Certain Purposes Prohibited.
Section 355.050. Stopping, Standing or Parking Prohibited Near
Schools. [Ord. No. 08-63 §1, 8-11-2008]
a. Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
or
b. At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
4. For the purposes of this Chapter, the following colored curb
markings may be used as official signs designating parking
restrictions as described herein:
a. Red curbing with the words "No Parking" placed upon the curb
shall designate a no parking zone.
b. White curbing with the words "Loading Zone" shall designate a
loading zone.
c. Blue curbing in conjunction with other markings and signage
as specified in this Chapter shall designate a "Physically
Disabled" parking zone.
B. No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his/her control into
any such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is
unlawful.
A. No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal
purpose of:
1. Displaying such vehicle for sale; or
2. Repair such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency.
Section
355.010
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
355.050
AO:318
Section 355.060. Parking Prohibited On Narrow Streets.
Section 355.070. Standing or Parking On One-Way Streets.
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to erect signs upon the left-hand side
of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles, and
when such signs are in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon
such left-hand side in violation of any such sign.
Section 355.080. Standing or Parking On One-Way Roadways.
In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and
traffic is restricted to one (1) direction upon any such roadway, no person
shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way
roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The
City Traffic Engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking
may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and
to erect signs giving notice thereof.
Section 355.090. No Stopping, Standing or Parking Near Hazardous
or Congested Places.
A. The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating
no stopping, standing or parking upon either or both sides of any street
near to any school property when such stopping, standing or parking
would, in his/her opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous
situation.
B. When official signs are erected indicating no stopping, standing or
parking upon either side of a street near to any school property as
authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any
such designated place.
A. The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no
parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed
twenty (20) feet, or upon one (1) side of a street as indicated by such
signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty (30) feet.
B. When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets
as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such
street in violation of any such sign.
A. The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine and
designate by proper signs places not exceeding one hundred (100) feet
in length in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would
create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay
to traffic.
B. When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as
authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any
such designated place.
Section
355.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
355.100
AO:319
Section 355.100. Physically Disabled Parking. [Ord. No. 05-72 §1,
8-22-2005; Ord. No. 07-67 §1, 11-13-2007; Ord. No. 08-66 §1,
9-8-2008]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or stand any vehicle in any
stall or space designated or reserved for physically disabled persons, as
defined in Section 301.142, RSMo., as amended, whether upon public
or private property open to public use, unless the vehicle bears the
State of Missouri license plate or placard for the disabled as provided
for in Sections 301.071 or 301.142, RSMo., as amended, or an
equivalent license or placard of the State where the vehicle is licensed.
The space shall be indicated by an upright sign whether on a pole or
attached to a building upon which shall be inscribed the international
symbol of accessibility and shall also include any appropriate wording
to indicate that the space is reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles
which display a distinguishing license plate or card. The sign described
in this Subsection shall also state, or an additional sign shall be posted
below or adjacent to the sign stating, the following: "$50 to $300 fine".
B. Any vehicle operator who is not physically disabled shall not use the
handicapped parking space unless there is a physically disabled person
in the vehicle, or while the vehicle is being used to transport a
physically disabled person.
C. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Section, on-street parking
spaces designated in residential areas for the exclusive use of vehicles
displaying a distinguishing license plate or card issued pursuant to
Section 301.071 or 301.142, RSMo., as amended, shall meet the
requirements of the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act pursuant to
this Subsection and any such space shall have clearly and visibly
painted upon it the international symbol of accessibility and any curb
adjacent to the space shall be clearly and visibly painted blue.
D. Any person convicted of parking in violation of this Section is guilty of
an offense and shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00). Any person
convicted of violating the requirements to provide disabled parking
spaces is guilty of an offense and shall be subject to the penalties
provided for in Section 100.220 of this Code. Every day upon which
such violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
E. Any owner of private property used for public parking shall designate
parking spaces for the exclusive use of vehicles which display a
distinguishing license plate or card issued pursuant to Sections
301.071 or 301.142, RSMo., as amended. The space shall be indicated
by a sign described in Subsection (A) of this Section. A commercial or
retail property lessee is jointly and severally responsible with the
property owner for maintaining the number of designated public
parking spaces as required in Subsection (F) of this Section unless the
commercial or retail property is a multi-tenant property. In multi-tenant
property, the property owner or the property owner's agent shall be
Section
355.100
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
355.100
AO:320
responsible for compliance with this Section unless the commercial or
retail property is a multi-tenant property. In multi-tenant property, the
property owner or the property owner's agent shall be responsible for
compliance with this Section.
F. The number of designated parking spaces required under Subsection
(E) shall be determined pursuant to the 2006 International Building
Code, Chapter 11; except that any owner of private property used for
public parking that does not have a paved parking area as of November
13, 2007, may satisfy the requirements of this Section by locating
signage on one (1) disabled parking space for each seven thousand
(7,000) square feet of area used for public parking. This exception
applies to non-conforming uses as defined in Section 405.720 in
Republic Municipal Code.
G. The signs for parking spaces shall be unobstructed from view and shall
be maintained so as to be legible at all times. Signs shall be
substantially in compliance with the requirements of the ICC, ANSI
Section 117.1 (2003). It shall be no defense to a violation of Subsections
(A) or (B) of this Section that a sign or a marking is not substantially in
compliance with the above guidelines so long as the sign or marking is
clearly visible and legible.
H. It shall be unlawful for the owner or lessee of private property to fail to
designate parking spaces as required by this Section except this
Subsection shall not apply to a lessee in a multi-tenant property. The
owner or lessee of private property as described in Subsection (E) who
is required to have any type of City license must upon application for a
license or renewal thereof present proof that the owner is in
compliance with Subsection (E). Failure to comply with Subsection (E)
shall be a basis for denial of a license and is a basis for suspension of a
City license. This Section shall not apply to home occupations as
described in Code Section 405.630.
I. The City Administrator is hereby authorized to appoint Parking Control
Officers to enforce disability parking regulations of the City including
the requirement for property owners or lessees to provide the
appropriate number of designated parking spaces as set forth in
Subsection (F). Parking Control Officers shall have authority to issue
violation notices with regard to rules, regulations and ordinances
pertaining to disability parking on public property and on private
property open to public use. The City Administrator shall have the
power to designate appropriate duties and restrictions upon such
persons with respect to enforcement of these laws.
J. Upon finding an illegally parked vehicle, the Parking Control Officer
shall take its registration number and may take any other information
displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user and shall
conspicuously affix to such vehicle a notice of violation on a form
provided by the City for the driver or registered owner to answer the
Section
355.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
355.100
AO:321
Section 355.110. Parking Vehicles With Offensive Odors Prohibited
in Certain Places — Exception. [CC 1999 §14-6]
It shall be unlawful for any person driving a motor vehicle carrying
livestock, garbage, carrion, fecal matter, or any odoriferous cargo, which
may be declared a public nuisance detrimental to public health and welfare,
to park the same within two hundred (200) feet of any residence or business
establishment, except for loading or unloading purposes and then not
exceeding thirty (30) minutes, at any area or place in this municipality.
It shall further be unlawful to park such motor vehicle, empty, which has
been hauling or contains such described odoriferous matter which may
likewise be classed as a nuisance within two hundred (200) feet of any
residence or business establishment in this municipality, until the same has
been thoroughly cleaned and disinfected according to the orders of health
officials.
Section 355.120. Parking in Prohibited Area. [Ord. No. 06-70 §1,
8-28-2006]
charge against him during the hours and at the place specified in the
notice of violation.
K. Upon finding private property open to use for public parking without
the required designated parking spaces, the Parking Control Officer
may issue a written warning to the property owner and/or lessee of a
single tenant property stating that within a specified time the proper
number of designated parking spaces must be provided. The time
specified to come into compliance shall be a minimum of thirty (30)
days and may be extended for good cause shown upon written request
filed with the City Clerk. To be effective, approval or denial of the
request for extension of time must be in writing and the approval or
denial shall be issued within a reasonable time after receipt of the
request for extension of time by the City Clerk. Upon a failure to comply
with the notice in the time required, the Parking Control Officer may
issue a notice of violation on a form provided by the City to either or
both the property owner and the lessee of a single tenant property.
L. Law enforcement officials may enter upon private property open to
public use to enforce the provisions of this Section, including private
property designated by the owner of such property for the exclusive use
of vehicles which display a distinguishing license plate or card issued
pursuant to Sections 301.071 or 301.142, RSMo., as amended.
M. The presence of any vehicle found parked or stopped in violation of any
of the parking restrictions imposed by Chapters 350 and 355 of this
Code shall be prima facie evidence that the person in whose name such
vehicle is registered on either the records of the County Collector or the
records of the District Director of Revenue of the State for the County
committed or authorized such violation.
Section
355.100
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
355.120
AO:322
Chapter 360
STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING ONLY
Section 360.010. City Traffic Engineer To Designate Curb Loading
Zones.
The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine the location
of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain
appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which
the provisions of this Section are applicable.
Section 360.020. Permits For Curb Loading Zones.
The City Traffic Engineer shall not designate or sign any curb loading zone
upon special request of any person unless such person makes application
for a permit for such zone and for two (2) signs to indicate the ends of each
such zone. The City Traffic Engineer upon granting a permit and issuing
such signs shall collect from the applicant and deposit in the City Treasury
a service fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per year or fraction thereof and may by
general regulations impose conditions upon the use of such signs and for
reimbursement of the City for the value thereof in the event of their loss or
A. Any person who shall park a motor vehicle upon the property of another
without the permission of the owner of the property or without the
permission of the person or entity lawfully in possession of the property
shall be guilty of parking in a prohibited area and upon conviction
thereof shall be punished as provided in Section 100.220.
B. The prohibition set forth in paragraph (A) shall not apply to property
that is generally open to use for public parking unless either a verbal
warning has been given as to a parking restriction or signs limiting or
prohibiting parking are visibly posted on the property or some other
form of warning or barrier exists to limit access to the property for
parking.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or place a vehicle, trailer or
other object in City right-of-way for the purpose of storing, selling,
bartering or trading any goods or property or for the purpose of
conducting a repair, remodeling or construction type project. This
paragraph shall not apply to parking a vehicle or trailer for the time
reasonably necessary to deliver goods or property nor shall it apply to
vehicles or trailers removed from the right-of-way daily from a repair,
remodeling or construction type project. However, nothing contained in
this paragraph shall authorize the creation of a hazardous condition or
the creation of an obstruction to normal traffic flow in City right-of-way.
D. The presumption set forth in Section 355.100(M) shall apply to a
violation of paragraph (A).
Section
355.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
360.020
AO:323
damage and their return in the event of misuse or upon expiration of permit.
Every such permit shall expire at the end of one (1) year.
Section 360.030. Standing in Passenger Curb Loading Zone.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of
time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in
any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the
regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, and then only
for a period not to exceed three (3) minutes.
Section 360.040. Standing in Freight Curb Loading Zones.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of
time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and
loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone
during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect.
Section 360.050. City Traffic Engineer To Designate Public Carrier
Stops and Stands.
The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized and required to establish bus
stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common
carrier motor vehicles on such public streets in such places and in such
number as he/she shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and
convenience to the public, and every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand
or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs.
Section 360.060. Stopping, Standing and Parking of Buses and
Taxicabs Regulated.
A. The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided
herein.
B. The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any
place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their
baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone
so designated as provided herein, except in case of an emergency.
C. The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or passenger
loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus when
stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage shall be in a position
with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than eighteen (18)
inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so
as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic.
D. The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated as
provided herein. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a
taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or
Section
360.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
360.060
AO:324
Section 360.070. Restricted Use of Bus and Taxicab Stands.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop
or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has
been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver
of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of
and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such
stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about
to enter such zone.
Chapter 365
STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING RESTRICTED OR
PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS
Section 365.010. Application of Chapter.
The provisions of this Title prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle
shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as indicated on
official signs except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a Police Officer or
official traffic control device.
Section 365.020. Regulations Not Exclusive.
The provisions of this Title imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve
any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in
specified places or at specified times.
Section 365.030. Parking Prohibited At All Times On Certain
Streets. [Ord. No. 04-07 §1, 1-26-2004]
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the streets described by ordinance. No person shall
park a motor vehicle upon those portions of the roadways which are set
forth and described in Schedule VI.
Section 365.040. Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours On
Certain Streets.
When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall
park a vehicle between the hours specified by ordinance of any day except
Sunday and public holidays within the districts or upon any of the streets
described by ordinance.
parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
Section
360.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
365.050
AO:325
Section 365.050. Stopping, Standing or Parking Prohibited During
Certain Hours On Certain Streets and Designation of Time Limited
Parking. [Ord. No. 12-31 §1, 4-9-2012]
Section 365.060. Parking Signs Required.
Whenever by this Title or any ordinance of the City any parking time limit is
imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets, it shall be the duty
of the City Traffic Engineer to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof
and no such regulations shall be effective unless said signs are erected and
in place at the time of any alleged offense.
Section 365.070. Commercial Vehicles Prohibited From Using
Certain Streets.
In cases where an equally direct and convenient alternate route is provided,
an ordinance may describe and signs may be erected giving notice thereof
that no persons shall operate any commercial vehicle upon streets or parts
of streets so described except those commercial vehicles making deliveries
thereon.
Chapter 370
MUNICIPAL COURT VIOLATIONS BUREAU
Section 370.010. When Person Charged May Elect To Appear At
Bureau.
A. When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person
shall stop, stand or park a vehicle between the hours specified by
ordinance of any day except Sundays and public holidays within the
district or upon any of the streets described by ordinance.
B. The Police Chief and Traffic Engineer may designate within the City
time limited parking spaces when they shall find that:
1. The parking demands of the area reasonably require such
designation; and
2. The time limitations are as narrowly applied as may be practical to
meet the demands of the public and regional merchants.
C. When signs are posted giving notice of time limited parking places, no
person shall park a vehicle in any such parking space for a consecutive
period beyond that which is posted.
A. Any person charged with an offense for which payment of a fine may be
made to the Municipal Court Violations Bureau shall have the option of
paying such fine within the time specified in the notice of arrest at the
Municipal Court Violations Bureau upon entering a plea of guilty and
upon waiving appearance in court; or may have the option of depositing
Section
365.050
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
370.010
AO:326
Section 370.020. Duties of Municipal Court Violations Bureau.
Section 370.030. Municipal Court Violations Bureau To Keep
Records.
The Municipal Court Violations Bureau shall keep records and submit to the
judges hearing violations of City ordinances summarized monthly reports
of all notices issued and arrests made for violations of the traffic laws and
ordinances in the City and of all the fines collected by the Municipal Court
Violations Bureau or the court, and of the final disposition or present status
of every case of violation of the provisions of said laws and ordinances. Such
records shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the
totals of each. Said records shall be public records.
Section 370.040. Additional Duties of Municipal Court Violations
Bureau.
The Municipal Court Violations Bureau shall follow such procedure as may
be prescribed by the traffic ordinances of the City or as may be required by
any laws of this State.
Chapter 375
PROCEDURE ON ARREST
Section 375.010. Forms and Records of Traffic Citations and
Arrests.
required lawful bail, and upon a plea of not guilty shall be entitled to a
trial as authorized by law.
B. The payment of a fine to the Bureau shall be deemed an
acknowledgement of conviction of the alleged offense, and the Bureau,
upon accepting the prescribed fine, shall issue a receipt to the violator
acknowledging payment thereof.
A. The following duties are hereby imposed upon the Municipal Court
Violations Bureau in reference to traffic offenses:
1. It shall accept designated fines, issue receipts and represent in
court such violators as are permitted and desire to plead guilty,
waive court appearance and give power of attorney;
2. It shall receive and issue receipts for cash bail from the persons
who must or wish to be heard in court, enter the time of their
appearance on the court docket and notify the arresting officer and
witnesses, if any, to be present.
A. The City shall provide books containing uniform traffic tickets as
prescribed by Supreme Court Rule. Said books shall include serially
Section
370.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
375.010
AO:327
Section 375.020. Procedure of Police Officers.
Except when authorized or directed under State law to immediately take
a person before the Municipal Judge for the violation of any traffic laws,
a Police Officer who halts a person for such violation other than for the
purpose of giving him/her a warning or warning notice and does not take
such person into custody under arrest shall issue to him/her a uniform
traffic ticket which shall be proceeded upon in accordance with Supreme
Court Rule Number 37.
Section 375.030. Uniform Traffic Tickets To Be Issued When Vehicle
Illegally Parked or Stopped.
Whenever any motor vehicle without driver is found parked or stopped in
violation of any of the restrictions imposed by ordinance of the City or by
State law, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number
and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may
identify its user and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a uniform
traffic ticket for the driver to answer to the charge against him/her within
five (5) days during the hours and at a place specified in the uniform traffic
ticket.
Section 375.040. Warning of Arrest Sent Upon Failure To Appear.
If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing or parking under the
traffic laws or ordinances does not appear in response to a uniform traffic
ticket affixed to such motor vehicle within a period of five (5) days, the
Municipal Court Violations Bureau shall send to the owner of the motor
vehicle to which the uniform traffic ticket was affixed a letter informing him/
her of the violation and warning him/her that in the event such letter is
disregarded for a period of five (5) days a warrant of arrest will be issued.
Section 375.050. Police May Remove Vehicle — When.
numbered sets of citations in quadruplicate in the form prescribed by
Supreme Court Rule.
B. Such books shall be issued to the Chief of Police or his/her duly
authorized agent, a record shall be maintained of every book so issued
and a written receipt shall be required for every book. The judge or
judges hearing City ordinance violation cases may require that a copy of
such record and receipts be filed with the court.
C. The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the issuance of such books
to individual members of the Police Department. The Chief of Police
shall require a written receipt for every book so issued and shall
maintain a record of every such book and each set of citations
contained therein.
A. Members of the Police Department are authorized to remove a vehicle
from a street or highway to the nearest garage or other place of safety,
Section
375.010
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
375.050
AO:328
Chapter 380
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT
or to a garage designated or maintained by the Police Department, or
otherwise maintained by the City under the circumstances hereinafter
enumerated:
1. When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct or
causeway or in any tube or tunnel where such vehicle constitutes
an obstruction to traffic;
2. When a vehicle upon a highway is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person in charge of the vehicle is by
reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be
unable to provide its custody or removal; or
3. When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so parked
illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the
normal movement of traffic.
B. Whenever an officer causes a vehicle to be towed, the reporting and
notice requirements of Sections 304.155 through 304.158, RSMo., shall
be followed.
Section
375.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
375.050
AO:329

ARTICLE I
Light Regulations
Section 380.010. When Lights Required.
Section 380.020. Headlamp On Motor Vehicles.
Except as in this Article provided, every motor vehicle other than a motordrawn
vehicle and other than a motorcycle shall be equipped with at least
two (2) approved headlamps mounted at the same level with at least one (1)
on each side of the front of the vehicle. Every motorcycle shall be equipped
with at least one (1) and not more than two (2) approved headlamps. Every
motorcycle equipped with a sidecar or other attachment shall be equipped
with a lamp on the outside limit of such attachment capable of displaying a
white light to the front.
Section 380.030. Multiple-Beam Headlamps — Arrangement.
A. "When lighted lamps are required" means at any time from a half (½)
hour after sunset to a half (½) hour before sunrise and at any other time
when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible persons
and vehicles on the highway at a distance of five hundred (500) feet
ahead.
B. No person shall drive, move, park or be in custody of any vehicle or
combination of vehicles on any street or highway during the times when
lighted lamps are required unless such vehicle or combination of
vehicles displays lighted lamps and illuminating devices as hereinafter
in this Article required. No person shall use on any vehicle any
approved electric lamp or similar device unless the light source of such
lamp or device complies with the conditions of approval as to focus and
rated candlepower.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, the headlamps or the auxiliary driving
lamp or the auxiliary passing lamp or combination thereof on motor
vehicles other than motorcycles or motor-driven cycles shall be so
arranged that the driver may select at will between distributions of
light projected to different elevations and such lamps may, in addition,
be so arranged that such selection can be made automatically, subject
to the following limitations:
1. There shall be an uppermost distribution of light, or composite
beam, so aimed and of such intensity as to reveal persons and
vehicles at a distance of at least three hundred fifty (350) feet
ahead for all conditions of loading.
2. There shall be a lowermost distribution of light, or composite beam,
so aimed and of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles
at a distance of at least one hundred (100) feet ahead; and on a
straight level road under any condition of loading none of the high-
Section
380.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
380.030
AO:331
Section 380.040. Dimming of Lights — When.
Every person driving a motor vehicle equipped with multiple-beam road
lighting equipment, during the times when lighted lamps are required, shall
use a distribution of light, or composite beam, directed high enough and
of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a safe distance
in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following requirements and
limitations: Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming
vehicle within five hundred (500) feet, or is within three hundred (300) feet
to the rear of another vehicle traveling in the same direction, the driver
shall use a distribution of light or composite beam so aimed that the glaring
rays are not projected into the eyes of the other driver, and in no case shall
the high-intensity portion which is projected to the left of the prolongation
of the extreme left side of the vehicle be aimed higher than the center of the
lamp from which it comes at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet ahead, and
in no case higher than a level of forty-two (42) inches above the level upon
which the vehicle stands at a distance of seventy-five (75) feet ahead.
Section 380.050. Taillamps — Reflectors.
intensity portion of the beam shall be directed to strike the eyes of
an approaching driver.
A. Every motor vehicle and every motor-drawn vehicle shall be equipped
with at least two (2) rear lamps, not less than fifteen (15) inches or more
than seventy-two (72) inches above the ground upon which the vehicle
stands, which when lighted will exhibit a red light plainly visible from a
distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear. Either such rear lamp or
a separate lamp shall be so constructed and placed as to illuminate with
a white light the rear registration marker and render it clearly legible
from a distance of fifty (50) feet to the rear. When the rear registration
marker is illuminated by an electric lamp other than the required rear
lamps, all such lamps shall be turned on or off only by the same control
switch at all times.
B. Every motorcycle registered in this State, when operated on a highway,
shall also carry at the rear, either as part of the rear lamp or separately,
at least one (1) approved red reflector, which shall be of such size and
characteristics and so maintained as to be visible during the times
when lighted lamps are required from all distances within three
hundred (300) feet to fifty (50) feet from such vehicle when directly in
front of a motor vehicle displaying lawful undimmed headlamps.
C. Every new passenger car, new commercial motor vehicle, motor-drawn
vehicle and omnibus with a capacity of more than six (6) passengers
registered in this State after January 1, 1966, when operated on a
highway shall also carry at the rear at least two (2) approved red
reflectors, at least one (1) at each side, so designed, mounted on the
vehicle and maintained as to be visible during the times when lighted
lamps are required from all distances within five hundred (500) to fifty
Section
380.030
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
380.050
AO:332
Section 380.060. Auxiliary Lamps — Number — Location.
Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not to exceed three (3) auxiliary
lamps mounted on the front at a height not less than twelve (12) inches
nor more than forty-two (42) inches above the level surface upon which the
vehicle stands.
Section 380.070. Cowl, Fender, Running Board and Backup Lamps.
Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than two (2) side cowl
or fender lamps which shall emit a white or yellow light without glare.
Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one (1) running
board courtesy lamp on each side thereof which shall emit a white or yellow
light without glare. Any motor vehicle may be equipped with a backup lamp
either separately or in combination with another lamp; except that no such
backup lamp shall be continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in
forward motion.
Section 380.080. Spotlamps.
Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not to exceed one (1) spotlamp but
every lighted spotlamp shall be so aimed and used so as not to be dazzling
or glaring to any person.
Section 380.090. Colors of Various Lamps — Restriction of Red
Lights.
Headlamps, when lighted, shall exhibit lights substantially white in color;
auxiliary lamps, cowllamps and spotlamps, when lighted, shall exhibit lights
substantially white, yellow or amber in color. No person shall drive or
move any vehicle or equipment, except a school bus when used for school
purposes or an emergency vehicle, upon any street or highway with any
lamp or device thereon displaying a red light visible from directly in front
thereof.
Section 380.100. Limitations On Lamps Other Than Headlamps —
Flashing Signals Prohibited Except On Specified Vehicles.
Any lighted lamp or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle other than
headlamps, spotlamps, front direction signals or auxiliary lamps which
projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than three hundred (300)
candlepower shall be so directed that no part of the beam will strike the
(50) feet from such vehicle when directly in front of a motor vehicle
displaying lawful undimmed headlamps. Every such reflector shall meet
the requirements of this Article and shall be mounted upon the vehicle
at a height not to exceed sixty (60) inches nor less than fifteen (15)
inches above the surface upon which the vehicle stands.
D. Any person who knowingly operates a motor vehicle without the lamps
required in this Section in operable condition is guilty of an infraction.
Section
380.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
380.100
AO:333
level of the roadway on which the vehicle stands at a distance of more
than seventy-five (75) feet from the vehicle. Alternately flashing warning
signals may be used on school buses when used for school purposes and on
motor vehicles when used to transport United States mail from post offices
to boxes of addressees thereof and on authorized emergency vehicles as
defined in Section 300.020 of this Title but are prohibited on other motor
vehicles, motorcycles and motor-drawn vehicles except as a means for
indicating a right or left turn.
Section 380.110. Limitation On Total of Lamps Lighted At One
Time.
At the times when lighted lamps are required, at least two (2) lighted
lamps shall be displayed, one (1) on each side of the front of every motor
vehicle except a motorcycle and except a motor-drawn vehicle except when
such vehicle is parked subject to the provisions governing lights on parked
vehicles. Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlamps as in this
Article required is also equipped with any auxiliary lamps or a spotlamp
or any other lamp on the front thereof projecting a beam of an intensity
greater than three hundred (300) candlepower, not more than a total of four
(4) of any such lamps on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at any one
time when upon a highway.
Section 380.120. Other Vehicles — How Lighted.
All vehicles, including agricultural machinery or implements, road
machinery, road rollers, traction engines and farm tractors not in this
Article specifically required to be equipped with lamps, shall be equipped
during the times when lighted lamps are required with at least one (1)
lighted lamp or lantern exhibiting a white light visible from a distance of five
hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle and with a lamp or lantern
exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to
the rear, and such lamps and lanterns shall exhibit lights to the sides of such
vehicle.
Section 380.130. Animal-Driven Vehicles — Lighting Requirements
— Penalty.
Any person who shall place or drive or cause to be placed or driven upon or
along any State highway of this City any animal-driven vehicle whatsoever,
whether in motion or at rest, shall after sunset to one-half (½) hour before
sunrise have attached to every such vehicle at the rear thereof a red
taillight or a red reflecting device of not less than three (3) inches in
diameter of effective area or its equivalent in area. When such device shall
consist of reflecting buttons there shall be no less than seven (7) of such
buttons covering an area equal to a circle with a three (3) inch diameter.
The total subtended effective angle of reflection of every such device shall
be no less than sixty degrees (60°) and the spread and efficiency of the
reflected light shall be sufficient for the reflected light to be visible to the
driver of any motor vehicle approaching such animal-drawn vehicle from
Section
380.100
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
380.130
AO:334
the rear of a distance of not less than five hundred (500) feet. In addition,
any person who operates any such animal-driven vehicle during the hours
between sunset and one-half (½) hour before sunrise shall have at least one
(1) light flashing at all times the vehicle is on any highway of this City. Such
light or lights shall be amber in the front and red in the back and shall be
placed on the left side of the vehicle at a height of no more than six (6)
feet from the ground and shall be visible from the front and the back of the
vehicle at a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet. Any person violating
the provisions of this Section shall be guilty of an ordinance violation.
Section
380.130
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
380.130
AO:335

ARTICLE II
Other Vehicle Equipment
Section 380.140. Other Equipment of Motor Vehicles.
A. Signaling Devices. Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a horn,
directed forward, or whistle in good working order, capable of emitting
a sound adequate in quantity and volume to give warning of the
approach of such vehicle to other users of the highway and to
pedestrians. Such signaling device shall be used for warning purposes
only and shall not be used for making any unnecessary noise, and no
other sound-producing signaling device shall be used at any time.
B. Muffler Cutouts. Muffler cutouts shall not be used and no vehicle shall
be driven in such manner or condition that excessive and unnecessary
noises shall be made by its machinery, motor, signaling device, or other
parts, or by any improperly loaded cargo. The motors of all motor
vehicles shall be fitted with properly attached mufflers of such capacity
or construction as to quiet the maximum possible exhaust noise as
completely as is done in modern gas engine passenger motor vehicles.
Any cutout or opening in the exhaust pipe between the motor and the
muffler on any motor vehicle shall be completely closed and
disconnected from its operating lever and shall be so arranged that it
cannot automatically open, or be opened or operated while such vehicle
is in motion.
C. Brakes. All motor vehicles, except motorcycles, shall be provided at all
times with two (2) sets of adequate brakes kept in good working order,
and motorcycles shall be provided with one (1) set of adequate brakes
kept in good working order.
D. Mirrors. All motor vehicles which are so constructed or loaded that the
operator cannot see the road behind such vehicle by looking back or
around the side of such vehicle shall be equipped with a mirror so
adjusted as to reveal the road behind and be visible from the operator's
seat.
E. Projections On Vehicles. All vehicles carrying poles or other objects,
which project more than five (5) feet from the rear of such vehicle,
shall, during the period when lights are required by this Chapter, carry
a red light at or near the rear end of the pole or other object so
projecting. At other times a red flag or cloth, not less than sixteen (16)
inches square, shall be displayed at the end of such projection.
F. Towlines. When one vehicle is towing another, the connecting device
shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet. During the time that lights are
required by Sections 307.020 to 307.120, RSMo., the required lights
shall be displayed by both vehicles. Every towed vehicle shall be
coupled to the towing vehicle by means of a safety chain, cable or
equivalent device in addition to the primary coupling device, except
that such secondary coupling device shall not be necessary if the
Section
380.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
380.140
AO:337
Section 380.150. Loads Which Might Become Dislodged To Be
Secured — Failure — Penalty.
Section 380.160. Seat Belts.
connecting device is connected to the towing vehicle by a centerlocking
ball located over or nearly over the rear axle and not supported
by the rear bumper of the towing vehicle. Such secondary safety
connecting devices shall be of sufficient strength to control the towed
vehicle in the event of failure of the primary coupling device. The
provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to wreckers towing
vehicles or to vehicles secured to the towing vehicle by a fifth-wheel
type connection. The provisions of this Subsection shall also not apply
to farm implements, or to any vehicle which is not required to be
registered.
G. Commercial Motor Vehicles And Trailers. When being operated on any
highway, street or road of this City, commercial motor vehicles and
trailers shall be equipped with adequate and proper brakes, lighting
equipment, signaling devices, steering mechanisms, horns, mirrors,
windshield wipers, tires, wheels, exhaust system, glazing, air pollution
control devices, fuel tank and any other safety equipment required by
the State in such condition so as to obtain a certificate of inspection and
approval as required by the provisions of Section 307.360, RSMo.
H. Devices attached to or towed by motor vehicles for the purpose of
transporting hay shall have the protruding parts raised or retracted
when not in use to a position which will not cause injury or damage to
persons or property in the vicinity of such device when on the highways,
streets or roads of this City.
A. All motor vehicles and every trailer and semi-trailer operating upon the
public highways, streets or roads of this City and carrying goods or
material or farm products which may reasonably be expected to
become dislodged and fall from the vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer as a
result of wind pressure or air pressure and/or by the movement of the
vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer shall have a protective cover or be
sufficiently secured so that no portion of such goods or material can
become dislodged and fall from the vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer while
being transported or carried.
B. Operation of a motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer in violation of this
Section shall be an ordinance violation, and any person convicted
thereof shall be punished as provided by Section 100.220 of this Code.
A. As used in this Section, the term "passenger car" means every motor
vehicle designed for carrying ten (10) persons or less and used for the
transportation of persons; except that, the tern "passenger car" shall
not include motorcycles, motorized bicycles, motortricycles and trucks
with a licensed gross weight of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds or
more.
Section
380.140
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
380.160
AO:338
Section 380.170. Child Restraint System.
B. Each driver, except persons employed by the United States Postal
Service while performing duties for that Federal agency which require
the operator to service postal boxes from their vehicles or which
require frequent entry into and exit from their vehicles, and front seat
passenger of a passenger car manufactured after January 1, 1968,
operated on a street or highway in this State, and persons less than
eighteen (18) years of age operating or riding in a truck, as defined in
Section 301.010, RSMo., on a street or highway of this State shall wear
a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt that meets Federal
National Highway, Transportation and Safety Act requirements. No
person shall be stopped, inspected or detained solely to determine
compliance with this Subsection. The provisions of this Section and
Section 380.170 shall not be applicable to persons who have a medical
reason for failing to have a seat belt fastened about their body, nor shall
the provisions of this Section be applicable to persons while operating
or riding a motor vehicle being used in agricultural work-related
activities. Non-compliance with this Subsection shall not constitute
probable cause for violation of any other provision of law. The
provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to the transporting of
children under sixteen (16) years of age as provided in Section 380.170.
C. Each driver of a motor vehicle transporting a child less than sixteen
(16) years of age shall secure the child in a properly adjusted and
fastened restraint under Section 380.170.
D. Except as otherwise provided for in Section 380.170, each person who
violates the provisions of Subsection (B) of this Section is guilty of an
ordinance violation for which a fine not to exceed ten dollars ($10.00)
may be imposed. All other provisions of law and court rules to the
contrary notwithstanding, no court costs shall be imposed on any
person due to a violation of this Section. In no case shall points be
assessed against any person, pursuant to Section 302.302, RSMo., for a
violation of this Section.
E. If there are more persons than there are seat belts in the enclosed area
of a motor vehicle, then the passengers who are unable to wear seat
belts shall sit in the area behind the front seat of the motor vehicle
unless the motor vehicle is designed only for a front-seated area. The
passenger or passengers occupying a seat location referred to in this
Subsection is not in violation of this Section. This Subsection shall not
apply to passengers who are accompanying a driver of a motor vehicle
who is licensed under Section 302.178, RSMo.
A. As used in this Section, the following terms shall mean:
CHILD BOOSTER SEAT — A seating system which meets the Federal
Motor Vehicle Safety Standards set forth in 49 C.F.R. 571.213, as
amended, that is designed to elevate a child to properly sit in a federally
approved safety belt system.
Section
380.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
380.170
AO:339
CHILD PASSENGER RESTRAINT SYSTEM — A seating system which
meets the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards set forth in 49 C.F.R.
571.213, as amended, and which is either permanently affixed to a
motor vehicle or is affixed to such vehicle by a safety belt or a universal
attachment system.
DRIVER — A person who is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle.
B. Every driver transporting a child under the age of sixteen (16) years
shall be responsible, when transporting such child in a motor vehicle
operated by that driver on the streets or highways of this State, for
providing for the protection of such child as follows:
1. Children less than four (4) years of age, regardless of weight, shall
be secured in a child passenger restraint system appropriate for
that child.
2. Children weighing less than forty (40) pounds, regardless of age,
shall be secured in a child passenger restraint system appropriate
for that child.
3. Children at least four (4) years of age but less than eight (8) years
of age, who also weigh at least forty (40) pounds but less than
eighty (80) pounds, and who are also less than four (4) feet, nine (9)
inches tall, shall be secured in a child passenger restraint system or
booster seat appropriate for that child.
4. Children at least eighty (80) pounds or children more than four (4)
feet, nine (9) inches in height shall be secured by a vehicle safety
belt or booster seat appropriate for that child.
5. A child who otherwise would be required to be secured in a booster
seat may be transported in the back seat of a motor vehicle while
wearing only a lap belt if the back seat of the motor vehicle is not
equipped with a combination lap and shoulder belt for booster seat
installation.
6. When transporting children in the immediate family when there are
more children than there are seating positions in the enclosed area
of a motor vehicle, the children who are not able to be restrained by
a child safety restraint device appropriate for the child shall sit in
the area behind the front seat of the motor vehicle unless the motor
vehicle is designed only for a front seat area. The driver
transporting children referred to in this Subsection is not in
violation of this Section.
This Subsection shall only apply to the use of a child passenger
restraint system or vehicle safety belt for children less than sixteen
(16) years of age being transported in a motor vehicle.
C. Any driver who violates Subdivision (1), (2) or (3) of Subsection (B) of
this Section is guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction, may be
punished by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) and court
Section
380.170
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
380.170
AO:340
Section 380.180. Vision-Reducing Material Applied To Windshield
or Windows Without Permit Prohibited — Penalty — Rules —
Procedure.
costs. Any driver who violates Subdivision (4) of Subsection (B) of this
Section shall be subject to the penalty in Subsection (D) of Section
380.160. If a driver receives a citation for violating Subdivision (1), (2)
or (3) of Subsection (B) of this Section, the charges shall be dismissed
or withdrawn if the driver prior to or at his or her hearing provides
evidence of acquisition of a child passenger restraint system or child
booster seat which is satisfactory to the court or the party responsible
for prosecuting the driver's citation.
D. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to any public carrier for
hire. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to students four (4)
years of age or older who are passengers on a school bus designed for
carrying eleven (11) passengers or more and which is manufactured or
equipped pursuant to Missouri Minimum Standards for School Buses as
school buses are defined in Section 301.010, RSMo.
A. Any person may operate a motor vehicle with the front sidewing vents
or windows located immediately to the left and right of the driver that
have a sun-screening device, in conjunction with safety glazing
material, that has a light transmission of thirty-five percent (35%) or
more plus or minus three percent (3%) and a luminous reflectance of
thirty-five percent (35%) or less plus or minus three percent (3%).
Except as provided in Subsection (D) of this Section, any sun-screening
device applied to front sidewing vents or windows located immediately
to the left and right of the driver in excess of the requirements of this
Section shall be prohibited without a permit pursuant to a physician's
prescription as described below. A permit to operate a motor vehicle
with front sidewing vents or windows located immediately to the left
and right of the driver that have a sun-screening device, in conjunction
with safety glazing material, which permits less light transmission and
luminous reflectance than allowed under the requirements of this
Subsection may be issued by the Department of Public Safety to a
person having a serious medical condition which requires the use of a
sun-screening device if the permittee's physician prescribes its use. The
permit shall allow operation of the vehicle by any titleholder or relative
within the second degree of consanguinity or affinity, which shall mean
a spouse, each grandparent, parent, brother, sister, niece, nephew,
aunt, uncle, child and grandchild of a person who resides in the
household. Except as provided in Subsection (B) of this Section, all sunscreening
devices applied to the windshield of a motor vehicle are
prohibited.
B. This Section shall not prohibit labels, stickers, decalcomania or
informational signs on motor vehicles or the application of tinted or
solar-screening material to recreational vehicles as defined in Section
700.010, RSMo., provided that such material does not interfere with the
Section
380.170
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
380.180
AO:341
Section 380.190. Headgear Required — Motorcycles or
Motortricycles.
Section 380.200. Studded Tires — Prohibited When.
No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon any road or highway of this
City between the first (1st) day of April and the first (1st) day of November
while the motor vehicle is equipped with tires containing metal or carbide
studs.
Section 380.210. Restriction On Use of Metal-Tired Vehicles.
driver's normal view of the road. This Section shall not prohibit factoryinstalled
tinted glass, the equivalent replacement thereof or tinting
material applied to the upper portion of the motor vehicle's windshield
which is normally tinted by the manufacturer of motor vehicle safety
glass.
C. Any person who violates the provisions of this Section is guilty of an
ordinance violation.
D. Any vehicle licensed with a historical license plate shall be exempt from
the requirements of this Section.
A. Every person operating or riding as a passenger on any motorcycle or
motortricycle, as defined in this Title, upon any highway of this City
shall wear protective headgear at all times the vehicle is in motion. The
protective headgear shall meet reasonable standards and specifications
established by the Director of Revenue.
B. The penalty for failure to wear protective headgear as required by
Subsection (A) of this Section shall be deemed an infraction for which a
fine not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) may be imposed.
Notwithstanding all other provisions of law and court rules to the
contrary, no court costs shall be imposed upon any person due to such
violation. No points shall be assessed pursuant to Section 302.302,
RSMo., for a failure to wear such protective headgear.
A. No metal-tired vehicle shall be operated over any of the improved
highways of this City, except over highways constructed of gravel or
claybound gravel, if such vehicle has on the periphery of any of the road
wheels any lug, flange, cleat, ridge, bolt or any projection of metal or
wood which projects radially beyond the tread or traffic surface of the
tire, unless the highway is protected by putting down solid planks or
other suitable material, or by attachments to the wheels so as to
prevent such vehicles from damaging the highway, except that this
prohibition shall not apply to tractors or traction engines equipped with
what is known as caterpillar treads, when such caterpillar does not
contain any projection of any kind likely to injure the surface of the
road. Tractors, traction engines and similar vehicles may be operated
which have upon their road wheels "V" shaped, diagonal or other cleats
Section
380.180
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
380.210
AO:342
Section 380.220. Passengers in Trucks.
arranged in such manner as to be continuously in contact with the road
surface if the gross weight on the wheels per inch of width of such
cleats or road surface, when measured in the direction of the axle of the
vehicle, does not exceed eight hundred (800) pounds.
B. No tractor, tractor engine or other metal-tired vehicle weighing more
than four (4) tons, including the weight of the vehicle and its load, shall
drive onto, upon or over the edge of any improved highway without
protecting such edge by putting down solid planks or other suitable
material to prevent such vehicle from breaking off the edges of the
pavement.
C. Any person violating this Section, whether operating pursuant to a
permit or not, or who shall willfully or negligently damage a highway,
shall be liable for the amount of such damage caused to any highway,
bridge, culvert or sewer, and any vehicle causing such damage shall be
subject to a lien for the full amount of such damage, which lien shall not
be superior to any duly recorded or filed chattel mortgage or other lien
previously attached to such vehicle; the amount of such damage may be
recovered in any action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
A. As used in this Section, the term "truck" means a motor vehicle
designed, used or maintained for the transportation of property.
B. No person shall operate any truck, as defined in Subsection (A) of this
Section, with a licensed gross weight of less than twelve thousand
(12,000) pounds on any highway which is part of the State or Federal
highway system or when such truck is operated within the corporate
limits of the City when any person under eighteen (18) years of age is
riding in the unenclosed bed of such truck. No person under eighteen
(18) years of age shall ride in the unenclosed bed of such truck when
the truck is in operation.
C. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to:
1. Any employee engaged in the necessary discharge of the
employee's duties where it is necessary to ride in the unenclosed
bed of the truck;
2. Any person while engaged in agricultural activities where it is
necessary to ride in the unenclosed bed of the truck;
3. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck while such truck
is being operated in a parade, caravan or exhibition which is
authorized by law;
4. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck if such truck has
installed a means of preventing such person from being discharged
or such person is secured to the truck in a manner which will
Section
380.210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
380.220
AO:343
prevent the person from being thrown, falling or jumping from the
truck;
5. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck if such truck is
being operated solely for the purpose of participating in a special
event and it is necessary that the person ride in such unenclosed
bed due to a lack of available seating. "Special event", for the
purposes of this Section, is a specific social activity of a definable
duration which is participated in by the person riding in the
unenclosed bed;
6. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck if such truck is
being operated solely for the purposes of providing assistance to,
or ensuring the safety of, other persons engaged in a recreational
activity; or
7. Any person riding in the unenclosed bed of a truck if such truck is
the only legally titled, licensed and insured vehicle owned by the
family of the person riding in the unenclosed bed and there is
insufficient room in the passenger cab of the truck to accommodate
all passengers in the truck. For the purposes of this Section, the
term "family" shall mean any persons related within the first
degree of consanguinity.
Section
380.220
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
380.220
AO:344
Chapter 385
BICYCLES AND MOTORIZED BICYCLES
Section 385.010. Bicycle and Motorized Bicycle — Defined.
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall mean:
BICYCLE — Every vehicle propelled solely by human power upon which any
person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels, except scooters and similar
devices.
MOTORIZED BICYCLE — Any two- or three-wheeled device having an
automatic transmission and a motor with a cylinder capacity of not more
than fifty (50) cubic centimeters, which produces less than three (3) gross
brake horsepower, and is capable of propelling the device at a maximum
speed of not more than thirty (30) miles per hour on level ground. A
motorized bicycle shall be considered a motor vehicle for purposes of any
homeowners' or renters' insurance policy.
Section 385.020. Brakes Required.
Every bicycle and motorized bicycle shall be equipped with a brake or
brakes which will enable its driver to stop the bicycle or motorized bicycle
within twenty-five (25) feet from a speed of ten (10) miles per hour on dry,
level, clean pavement.
Section 385.030. Lights and Reflectors — When Required —
Standards To Be Met.
A. Every bicycle and motorized bicycle when in use on a street or highway
during the period from one-half (½) hour after sunset to one-half (½)
hour before sunrise shall be equipped with the following:
1. A front-facing lamp on the front or carried by the rider which shall
emit a white light visible at night under normal atmospheric
conditions on a straight, level, unlighted roadway at five hundred
(500) feet;
2. A rear-facing red reflector, at least two (2) square inches in
reflective surface area, or a rear-facing red lamp on the rear which
shall be visible at night under normal atmospheric conditions on a
straight, level, unlighted roadway when viewed by a vehicle driver
under the lower beams of vehicle headlights at six hundred (600)
feet;
3. Reflective material and/or lights on any part of the bicyclist's
pedals, crank arms, shoes or lower leg visible from the front and
the rear at night under normal atmospheric conditions on a
straight, level, unlighted roadway when viewed by a vehicle driver
under the lawful lower beams of vehicle headlights at two hundred
(200) feet; and
Section
380.220
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
385.030
AO:345
Section 385.040. Rights and Duties of Bicycle and Motorized
Bicycle Riders.
Every person riding a bicycle or motorized bicycle upon a street or highway
shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to the driver of a vehicle as provided by Chapter 304, RSMo.,
and this Title, except as to special regulations in this Chapter, and except
as to those provisions of Chapter 304, RSMo., and this Title, which by their
nature can have no application.
Section 385.050. Riding To Right — Required For Bicycles and
Motorized Bicycles — Mandatory Use of Bicycle Path By Bicycles.
Every person operating a bicycle or motorized bicycle at less than the
posted speed or slower than the flow of traffic upon a street or highway shall
ride as near to the right side of the roadway as safe, exercising due care
when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction,
except when making a left turn, when avoiding hazardous conditions, when
the lane is too narrow to share with another vehicle, or when on a one-way
street. Bicyclists may ride abreast when not impeding other vehicles.
Section 385.060. Penalty For Violation.
Any person seventeen (17) years of age or older who violates any provision
of this Chapter is guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be punished by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than
twenty-five dollars ($25.00). If any person under seventeen (17) years of
age violates any provision of this Chapter, in the presence of a Peace Officer
possessing the duty and power of arrest for violation of the general criminal
laws of the State or for violation of ordinances of Counties or municipalities
of the State, said officer may impound the bicycle or motorized bicycle
involved for a period not to exceed five (5) days upon issuance of a receipt
to the child riding it or to its owner.
Section 385.070. Motorized Bicycles — License Required.
4. Reflective material and/or lights visible on each side of the bicycle
or bicyclist and visible at night under normal atmospheric
conditions on a straight, level, unlighted roadway when viewed by a
vehicle driver under the lawful lower beams of vehicle headlights at
three hundred (300) feet. The provisions of this Subdivision shall
not apply to motorized bicycles which comply with National
Highway Traffic and Safety Administration regulations relating to
reflectors on motorized bicycles.
A. No person shall operate a motorized bicycle on any highways, streets or
roads in this City unless the person has a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle.
Section
385.030
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
385.070
AO:346
Section 385.080. Equipment Required.
No person shall operate a motorized bicycle on any highways, streets or
roads in this City unless it is equipped in accordance with the minimum
requirements for construction and equipment of MOPEDS, Regulation
VESC-17, approved July, 1977, as promulgated by the Vehicle Equipment
Safety Commission.
Chapter 390
LICENSING REQUIREMENTS
B. No motorized bicycle may be operated on any public thoroughfare
located within this City which has been designated as part of the
Federal interstate highway system.
Section
385.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
385.080
AO:347

ARTICLE I
Driver's Licenses
Section 390.010. Driving While License Suspended or Revoked.
A person commits the offense of driving while revoked if he/she operates
a motor vehicle on a highway when his/her license or driving privilege has
been canceled, suspended or revoked under the laws of this State and acts
with criminal negligence with respect to knowledge of the fact that his/her
driving privilege has been canceled, suspended or revoked.
Section 390.020. Operation of Motor Vehicle Without Proper
License Prohibited — Motorcycles — Special License.72
Section 390.030. Prohibited Uses of License.
A. Unless otherwise provided for by law, it shall be unlawful for any
person, except those expressly exempted by Section 390.040, to:
1. Operate any vehicle upon any highway in this City unless the
person has a valid license in his/her possession;
2. Operate a motorcycle or motortricycle upon any highway of this
City unless such person has a valid license that shows the person
has successfully passed an examination for the operation of a
motorcycle or motortricycle as prescribed by the Director of
Revenue. The Director of Revenue may indicate such upon a valid
license issued to such person or shall issue a license restricting the
applicant to the operation of a motorcycle or motortricycle if the
actual demonstration, required by Section 302.173, RSMo., is
conducted on such vehicle;
3. Authorize or knowingly permit a motorcycle or motortricycle
owned by such person or under such person's control to be driven
upon any highway by any person whose license does not indicate
that the person has passed the examination for the operation of a
motorcycle or motortricycle or has been issued an instruction
permit therefor;
4. Operate a motor vehicle with an instruction permit or license
issued to another person; or
5. Drive a commercial motor vehicle, except when operating under an
instruction permit as provided for in Section 302.720, RSMo.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Display or to permit to be displayed, or to have in his/her
possession, any license knowing the same to be fictitious or to have
been canceled, suspended, revoked, disqualified or altered;
72.Note — Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
390.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
390.030
AO:349
Section 390.040. Exemptions From License Law.
2. Lend to or knowingly permit the use of by another any license
issued to the person so lending or permitting the use thereof;
3. Display or to represent as one's own any license not issued to the
person so displaying the same;
4. Fail or refuse to surrender to the Clerk of any Division of the Circuit
Court or the Director any license which has been suspended,
canceled, disqualified or revoked, as provided by law;
5. Use a false or fictitious name or give a false or fictitious address on
any application for a license, or any renewal or duplicate thereof, or
knowingly to make a false statement;
6. Knowingly conceal a material fact, or otherwise commit a fraud in
any such application;
7. Authorize or consent to any motor vehicle owned by him/her or
under his/her control to be driven by any person, when he/she has
knowledge that such person has no legal right to do so, or for any
person to drive any motor vehicle in violation of any of the
provisions of Sections 302.010 to 302.780, RSMo.;
8. Employ a person to operate a motor vehicle in the transportation of
persons or property with knowledge that such person has not
complied with the provisions of Sections 302.010 to 302.780,
RSMo., or whose license has been revoked, suspended, canceled or
disqualified; or who fails to produce his/her license upon demand of
any person or persons authorized to make such demand;
9. Operate a motor vehicle in any manner in violation of the
restrictions imposed in a restricted license; or
10. Fail to carry his/her instruction permit, operator's or chauffeur's
license while operating a vehicle and to display instruction permit
or said license upon demand of any Police Officer, court official or
any other duly authorized person for inspection, when demand is
made therefor. Failure to exhibit his/her instruction permit or
license as aforesaid shall be presumptive evidence that said person
is not a duly licensed operator or chauffeur.
A. The following persons are exempt from license hereunder:
1. Any person while operating any farm tractor or implement of
husbandry temporarily operated or moved on a highway;
2. A non-resident who is at least sixteen (16) years of age and who has
in his/her immediate possession a valid license issued to him/her in
his/her home State or Country;
Section
390.030
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
390.040
AO:350
3. A non-resident who is at least eighteen (18) years of age and who
has in his/her immediate possession a valid license issued to him/
her in his/her home State or Country which allows such person to
operate a motor vehicle in the transportation of persons or
property as classified in Section 302.015, RSMo.; or
4. Convicted offenders of the Department of Corrections who have not
been convicted of a motor vehicle felony as follows — driving while
intoxicated, failing to stop after an accident and disclosing his/her
identity, or driving a motor vehicle without the owner's consent —
may operate State-owned trucks for the benefit of the correctional
facilities, provided that such offender shall be accompanied by a
Correctional Officer or other staff person in such truck.
Section
390.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
390.040
AO:351

ARTICLE II
Vehicle Licensing
Section 390.050. State Vehicle License Plates Required.
No person shall operate or park any motor vehicle or trailer upon any street
or highway of this City, unless such motor vehicle or trailer has properly
displayed a valid license plate or plates or temporary permit issued to the
lawful owner of the vehicle by the Department of Revenue of the State
of Missouri, except that any person who is a non-resident of the State of
Missouri may operate or park any motor vehicle or trailer upon any street
or highway of this City, provided the motor vehicle or trailer has been duly
registered for the current year in the State, Country or other place of which
the owner is a resident, provided that at all times such motor vehicle or
trailer is being operated or parked upon the streets or highways of this City,
the valid license plate or plates or temporary permit is properly displayed
on such vehicle or trailer.
Section 390.060. Method of Displaying License Plates.
No motor vehicle or trailer shall be operated on any highway of this City
unless it shall have displayed thereon the license plate or set of license
plates issued by the Director of Revenue and authorized by Section 301.140,
RSMo. Each such plate shall be securely fastened to the motor vehicle in a
manner so that all parts thereof shall be plainly visible and reasonably clean
so that the reflective qualities thereof are not impaired. License plates shall
be fastened to all motor vehicles except trucks, tractors, truck tractors or
truck-tractors licensed in excess of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds on the
front and rear of such vehicles not less than eight (8) nor more than fortyeight
(48) inches above the ground, with the letters and numbers thereon
right side up. The license plates on trailers, motorcycles, motortricycles
and motorscooters shall be displayed on the rear of such vehicles, with the
letters and numbers thereon right side up. The license plate on buses, other
than school buses, and on trucks, tractors, truck tractors or truck-tractors
licensed in excess of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds shall be displayed on
the front of such vehicles not less than eight (8) nor more than forty-eight
(48) inches above the ground, with the letters and numbers thereon right
side up, or if two (2) plates are issued for the vehicle pursuant to Subsection
(5) of Section 301.130, RSMo., displayed in the same manner on the front
and rear of such vehicles. The license plate or plates authorized by Section
301.140, RSMo., when properly attached, shall be prima facie evidence that
the required fees have been paid.
Section 390.070. Unauthorized Plates, Tags, Stickers, Signs.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle or trailer on which there is
displayed on the front or rear thereof any other plate, tag or placard bearing
any number except the plate furnished by the Director of Revenue or the
placard herein authorized, and the official license tag of any municipality
of this State, nor shall there be displayed on any motor vehicle or trailer a
Section
390.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
390.070
AO:353
placard, sign or tag bearing the words "license lost", "license applied for",
or words of similar import, as a substitute for such number plates or such
placard.
Section 390.080. License Plates On Vehicles Displayed For Sale.
No person shall show, exhibit, display or have in possession for the purpose
of sale any motor vehicle bearing or displaying thereon any number or
license plates, except those of the dealer or owner so displaying said
motor vehicle; provided however, that where the motor vehicle is placed on
consignment with a dealer by the owner thereof, there may be displayed a
number or license plate issued to the owner thereof.
Section 390.090. Certificate of Ownership Required For Registered
Vehicle.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate in this City a motor vehicle or
trailer required to be registered as provided by law, unless a certificate of
ownership has been issued.
Section 390.100. Transfer of Certificate of Ownership Upon Sale of
Vehicle.
It shall be unlawful for any person to buy or sell in this City any motor
vehicle or trailer registered under the laws of this State unless at the
time of delivery thereof there shall pass between the parties a certificate
of ownership with an assignment thereof as provided in Section 301.210,
RSMo., as amended, and the sale of any motor vehicle or trailer registered
under the laws of this State, without the assignment of such certificate of
ownership, shall be fraudulent and void.
Section 390.110. Removal of Plates On Transfer of Vehicle — Use By
Purchaser.
Upon the transfer of ownership of any motor vehicle or trailer, the
certificate of registration and the right to use the number plates shall expire
and the number plates shall be removed by the owner at the time of the
transfer of possession, and it shall be unlawful for any person other than
the person to whom such number plates were originally issued to have the
same in his/her possession whether in use or not; except that the buyer of a
motor vehicle or trailer who trades in a motor vehicle or trailer may attach
the license plates from the trade-in motor vehicle or trailer to the newly
purchased motor vehicle or trailer. The operation of a motor vehicle with
such transferred plates shall be lawful for no more than thirty (30) days.
As used in this Section, the term "trade-in motor vehicle or trailer" shall
include any single motor vehicle or trailer sold by the buyer of the newly
purchased vehicle or trailer, as long as the license plates for the trade-in
motor vehicle or trailer are still valid.
Section
390.070
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
390.120
AO:354
Section 390.120. Sale By Dealer.
Upon the sale of a motor vehicle or trailer by a dealer, a buyer who has
made application for registration, by mail or otherwise, may operate the
same for a period of thirty (30) days after taking possession thereof, if
during such period the motor vehicle or trailer shall have attached thereto,
in the manner required by Section 301.130, RSMo., number plates issued to
the dealer. Upon application and presentation of satisfactory evidence that
the buyer has applied for registration, a dealer may furnish such number
plates to the buyer for such temporary use. In such event, the dealer shall
require the buyer to deposit the sum of ten dollars fifty cents ($10.50), to be
returned to the buyer upon return of the number plates as a guarantee that
said buyer will return to the dealer such number plates within thirty (30)
days.
Section 390.130. False Information By Dealer.
No dealer shall advise any purchaser of a motor vehicle or trailer that such
purchaser may drive such a motor vehicle or trailer without compliance
with the foregoing license requirements.
Section
390.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
390.130
AO:355

ARTICLE III
Miscellaneous Provisions
Section 390.140. Financial Responsibility Required.
A. No owner of a motor vehicle registered in this State or required to be
registered in this State shall operate the vehicle, or authorize any other
person to operate the vehicle register or maintain registration of a
motor vehicle, or permit another person to operate such vehicle, upon
the streets or the alleys of this City, unless the owner maintains the
financial responsibility as required in this Section which conforms to
the requirements of the laws of this State. Furthermore, no person shall
operate a motor vehicle owned by another with the knowledge that the
owner has not maintained financial responsibility unless such person
has financial responsibility which covers the person's operation of the
other's vehicle. However, no owner shall be in violation of this
Subsection if he/she fails to maintain financial responsibility on a motor
vehicle which is inoperable or being stored and not in operation.
B. For purposes of this Section, the term "financial responsibility" shall
mean the ability to respond in damages for liability on account of
accidents occurring after the effective date of proof of said financial
responsibility, arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of a
motor vehicle, in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) because of bodily injury to or death of one (1) person in
any one (1) accident, and, subject to said limit for one (1) person, in the
amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) because of bodily injury
to or death of two (2) or more persons in any one (1) accident, and in the
amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) because of injury to or
destruction of property of others in any one (1) accident.
C. Proof of financial responsibility may be shown by any of the following:
1. An insurance identification card issued by a motor vehicle insurer
or by the Director of Revenue of the State of Missouri for selfinsurance.
A motor vehicle liability insurance policy, a motor
vehicle liability insurance binder, or receipt which contains the
name and address of the insurer, the name and address of the
named insured, the policy number, the effective dates of the policy
and a description by year and make of the vehicle, or at least five
(5) digits of the vehicle identification number or the word "Fleet" if
the insurance policy covers five (5) or more motor vehicles shall be
satisfactory evidence of insurance in lieu of an insurance
identification card.
2. A certificate of the State Treasurer of a cash or security deposit
according to Section 303.240, RSMo.
3. A surety bond according to Section 303.230, RSMo.
Section
390.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
390.140
AO:357
Section 390.150. Conviction For Failure To Maintain Financial
Responsibility or Court-Ordered Supervision, Court To Forward To
Director of Revenue.
Section 390.160. Display of False Evidence of Insurance, Penalty,
Confiscation of False Evidence, Misdemeanor.
No person shall display evidence of insurance to a Law Enforcement Officer
knowing there is no valid liability insurance in effect on the motor vehicle
as required pursuant to this Article, or knowing the evidence of insurance is
illegally altered, counterfeit or otherwise invalid as evidence of insurance.
D. Proof of financial responsibility shall be carried at all times in the
insured motor vehicle or by the operator of the motor vehicle if the
proof of financial responsibility is effective as to the operator rather
than to the vehicle. The operator of an insured motor vehicle shall
exhibit the insurance identification card on the demand of any Peace
Officer, commercial vehicle enforcement officer or commercial vehicle
inspector who lawfully stops such operator or investigates an accident
while that officer or inspector is engaged in the performance of the
officer's or inspector's duties.
E. However, no person shall be found guilty of violating this Section if the
operator demonstrates to the court that he/she met the financial
responsibility requirements of Section 303.025, RSMo. at the time the
peace officer wrote the citation.
F. Any person who violates any provisions of this Section shall be guilty of
an ordinance violation and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished
by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than three
hundred dollars ($300.00) for each and every violation.
A. Whenever a court convicts a person of a violation of Section 303.025,
RSMo., or enters an order of court-ordered supervision, the Clerk of the
court shall within ten (10) days forward a report of the conviction or
order of supervision to the Director of Revenue in a form prescribed by
the Department of Revenue. In any case where the person charged with
the violation fails to appear in court, the procedures provided in Section
302.341, RSMo., shall apply. For the purposes of this Section, the term
"court-ordered supervision" is used to indicate where a court of record
may, upon a plea or finding of guilt, defer further proceedings of a
sentence and enter an order for supervision of the defendant if the
defendant is charged with a violation, in which case no points shall be
assessed.
B. The Department of Revenue shall keep records of such reports.
However, reports of court-ordered supervision shall not be released to
any outside source, except the affected operator and those entities
provided for in Subsection 4 of Section 32.091, RSMo., and shall be
used only to inform the Director and the courts that such operator has
previously been assigned court supervision.
Section
390.140
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
390.160
AO:358
If the Law Enforcement Officer issues a citation to a motor vehicle operator
for displaying invalid evidence of insurance, the officer shall confiscate the
evidence for presentation in court. Any person convicted of violating this
Section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
Section 390.170. Alteration, Production or Sale of Invalid
Insurance Card, Misdemeanor.
No person shall alter an invalid insurance card to make it appear valid. No
person knowingly shall make, sell or otherwise make available an invalid or
counterfeit insurance card. Any person who violates this Section is guilty of
a misdemeanor.
Section
390.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
390.170
AO:359
Schedule I
SPEED ZONES
Table I-A. General Speed Zones. [Ord. No. 09-25 §1, 7-13-2009; Ord.
No. 09-36 §1, 10-12-2009; Ord. No. 11-32 §1, 1-9-2012; Ord. No.
12-36 §1, 5-14-2012; Ord. No. 13-02 §1, 1-28-2013; Ord. No. 14-30
§1, 10-13-2014; Ord. No. 16-13 §1, 8-8-2016]
No person shall operate or drive any motor vehicle in any of the zones
hereinafter specified at a greater speed than designated for such zone. Any
speed in excess of that posted shall be considered prima facie evidence of
driving at a rate of speed which is not reasonable, careful, prudent and
lawful and shall be considered dangerous to the persons and property of
others:
Location Speed Limit
Eastbound lanes of Hwy. 60
From the western City limits to two hundred fifty
(250) feet east of Colorado Avenue.
55 mph
From two hundred fifty (250) feet east of
Colorado Avenue to West Avenue.
45 mph
From West Avenue to one thousand seven
hundred thirty-five (1,735) feet west of the
intersection of N. Oakwood and Hwy. 60.
40 mph
From one thousand seven hundred thirty-five
(1,735) feet west of the intersection of N.
Oakwood and Hwy. 60 to one thousand two
hundred (1,200) feet east of the intersection of N.
Oakwood and Hwy 60.
50 mph
From one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet east
of the intersection of N. Oakwood and Hwy. 60 to
the eastern City limits.
60 mph
Westbound lanes of Hwy. 60
From the eastern City limits to one thousand two
hundred (1,200) feet east of the intersection of N.
Oakwood and Hwy. 60.
60 mph
From one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet east
of the intersection of N. Oakwood and Hwy. 60 to
one thousand seven hundred ninety-five (1,795)
feet west of the intersection of N. Oakwood and
Hwy. 60
50 mph
From one thousand seven hundred ninety-five
(1,795) feet west of the intersection of N.
Oakwood and Hwy. 60 to four hundred eighty-five
(485) feet west of West Avenue.
40 mph
Section
390.170
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Table I-A
AO:360
Location Speed Limit
From four hundred eighty-five (485) feet west of
West Avenue to two hundred eighty-six (286) feet
east of Colorado Avenue.
45 mph
From two hundred eighty-six (286) feet east of
Colorado Avenue to western City limits.
55 mph
Main Street (P Hwy.)
From the southern City limits to six hundred sixty
(660) feet south of Lombardy.
55 mph
From six hundred sixty (660) feet south of
Lombardy to two hundred twenty-five (225) feet
north of Lombardy.
45 mph
From two hundred twenty-five (225) feet north of
Lombardy to Elm Street.
30 mph
From Elm Street to Anderson Street. 20 mph
From Anderson to the northern City limits. 30 mph
Sawyer Road
From the eastern City limits to James River
Freeway (State Route 360)
45 mph
From the western City limits to State Route MM 40 mph
Other Highway and Roads
Atlantic Avenue 20 mph
Benton Street 20 mph
Farm Road 97 45 mph
Farm Road 107 45 mph
Farm Road 115 45 mph
Farm Road 148 45 mph
Farm Road 150 45 mph
Farm Road 160 45 mph
Haile Street 20 mph
Hwy. 174: From the western City limits to its
terminus at Hwy. 60
45 mph
James River Freeway (State Route 360) 70 mph
Pacific Avenue 20 mph
State Route M (Republic Road) 55 mph
State Route MM (Brookline Boulevard) 55 mph
State Route ZZ 55 mph
Williamsburg Walk 35 mph
York Avenue 20 mph
Table I-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table I-B
AO:361
Table I-B. School Zones. [Ord. No. 05-44 § 2, 6-16-2005; Ord. No.
10-46 § 1, 9-27-2010; Ord. No. 16-13 §1, 8-8-2016]
Location Speed Limit
The following speed zones are from 7:00 A.M. — 9:00 A.M. and 2:00 P.M.
— 4:00 P.M. when school is in session:
Hines Street: From Pine Avenue to four hundred
twenty (420) feet west of Hwy. 60.
20 mph
The following speed zones are from 8:00 A.M. — 9:00 A.M. and 3:00 P.M.
— 4:00 P.M. when school is in session:
Anderson Street: From eighty-five (85) feet east of
Main Street to Hampton Avenue.
20 mph
Hampton Avenue: From two hundred thirty (230) feet
south of Anderson to two hundred eighty-five (285)
feet south of Hwy. 174.
20 mph
Main Street: From one hundred eighty-five (185) feet
north of State Highway 174 to sixty (60) feet north of
North Street.
20 mph
The following speed zones are in effect when warning flashing beacons
are activated and when school is in session:
State Highway 174: From five hundred sixty (560) feet
east of Main Street to one thousand (1,000)feet west
of Boston Lane.
35 mph
State Highway M: From five hundred eighty (580) feet
west of State Highway ZZ to one thousand three
hundred twenty (1,320) feet east of Farm Road 103.
45 mph
State Highway ZZ: From State Highway M to one
hundred twenty (120) feet north of Farm Road 174.
45 mph
Schedule II
STOP SIGNS
As authorized by and in accordance with Sections 335.020 and 335.030 of
this Title when signs are erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles
shall stop at every intersection or other location designated herein.
Table II-A. One-Way Stops. [Ord. No. 03-12 §1, 2-10-2003; Ord. No.
07-55 §1, 8-27-2007; Ord. No. 08-11 §1, 1-28-2008; Ord. No. 08-53
§1, 7-14-2008; Ord. No. 08-64 §1, 8-25-2008]
At the following described intersections or locations, a one-way stop sign is
installed:
Table I-B REPUBLIC CITY CODE Table II-A
AO:362
Location
Alexander Avenue, northbound at Hines Street
Allen Avenue, southbound at Charles Street
Allen Street, northbound at Wynwood Avenue
Amanda Avenue, northbound at Hines Street
Anderson Street, westbound at State Highway 174
Bailey Avenue, northbound at Elm Street
Bailey Avenue, northbound at Hines Street
Basswood Avenue, southbound at Elm Street
Basswood Avenue, northbound at Hines Street
Basswood Avenue, northbound at Lee Street
Basswood Avenue, southbound at Rosewood Street
Beechwood Avenue, southbound at Ritter Street
Berry Street, westbound at College Avenue
Berry Street, eastbound at Hampton Avenue
Berry Street, westbound at Main Street
Berry Street, eastbound at Main Street
Birch Lane, eastbound at Fairwood Street
Blossom Lane, northbound at Harrison Street
Bonnie Avenue, northbound at Elm Street
Bonnie Avenue, northbound at Grant Avenue
Boston Lane, northbound at Hines Street
Bradley Court, at Lee Street
Bradley Street, eastbound at Pinewood Avenue
Branch Lane, at Rachael Drive
Branch Lane, at Valley View Street
Britian Street, westbound at Sherman Avenue
Broad Street, westbound at Kansas Avenue
Broad Street, southbound at Main Street
Broad Street, westbound at West Avenue
Brooks Street, eastbound at Hampton Avenue
Brooks Street, eastbound at Main Street
Cedarwood Avenue, northbound at Elm Street
Cedarwood Avenue, southbound at Elm Street
Cedarwood Avenue, northbound at Kentwood Street
Cedarwood Avenue, northbound at Lee Street
Cedarwood Avenue, northbound at Logan Street
Table II-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table II-A
AO:363
Location
Cedarwood Avenue, southbound at Ritter Street
Cedarwood Avenue, southbound at Rosewood Street
Charles Street, eastbound at Conroy Avenue
Charles Street, eastbound at Lynn Avenue
Charles Street, westbound at Miller Road
Charles Street, westbound at West Avenue
Cliborne Avenue, southbound at Elm Street
College Avenue, northbound at Elm Street
College Avenue, northbound at Summit Street
Colorado Avenue, southbound at Frisco Boulevard
Colorado Street, southbound at U.S. Highway 60
Concordia Avenue, southbound at Danielle Street
Concordia Avenue, northbound at Elm Street
Concordia Avenue, southbound at Forrest Lane
Conroy Avenue, southbound at Miller Road
Conroy Avenue, southbound at Primrose Street
Cottage Place, eastbound at Boston Lane
Cottonwood Avenue, northbound at Kentwood Street
Cottonwood Circle, at Oakwood Avenue
Cottonwood Avenue, northbound at Pinewood Avenue
Countryside Avenue, southbound at Lipscomb Drive
Countryside Avenue, southbound at O'Neal Road
Cox Avenue, northbound at Hines Street
Crestview Street, westbound at Kansas Avenue
Cully Avenue, southbound at Miller Road
Cully Avenue, southbound at Primrose Street
Dale Avenue, southbound at Elm Street
Dale Avenue, southbound at Rosewood Street
Dana Avenue, northbound at Summit Street
Danielle Street, westbound at Illinois Avenue
Debbie Avenue, southbound at Elm Street
Debbie Avenue, southbound at Rosewood Street
Dennis Avenue, southbound at Elm Street
Dogwood Avenue, northbound at Elm Street
Dogwood Avenue, southbound at Elm Street
Dogwood Avenue, eastbound at Rachael Drive
Table II-A REPUBLIC CITY CODE Table II-A
AO:364
Location
Dogwood Avenue, northbound at Rodgers Street
Dogwood Avenue, southbound at Rosewood Street
Dogwood Avenue, southbound at Valley View Street
Donna Street, eastbound at U.S. Highway 60
Douglas Drive, northbound at Hines Street
Douglas Drive, northbound at Hines Street
Douglas Drive, northbound at Logan Street
Douglas Drive, northbound at Moonlight Street
Drenda Avenue, northbound at Wynwood Avenue
Drenda Avenue, southbound at Rosewood Street
Eagan Street, southbound at Elm Street
Eagan Street, westbound at West Avenue
East Charles Street, eastbound at South Basswood Avenue
East Charles Street, eastbound at South Cottonwood Avenue
East Colonial Court, westbound at North White Rock Avenue
East Colonial Street, westbound at North Delaware Avenue
East Eastwood Street, eastbound at North Andre Avenue
East Eastwood Street, westbound at North Northwood Avenue
East Foxbridge Trail, southbound at East Miller Road
East Garnet Drive, westbound at North Blackstone Avenue
East Hamilton Street, westbound at North Oakwood Avenue
East Heritage Street, westbound at North Opportunity Avenue
East Jamestown Court, westbound at North Lexington Avenue
East Jamestown Street, eastbound at North Lincoln Avenue
East Jamestown Street, westbound at North Franklin Avenue
East Jester Street, westbound at North Glenwood Avenue
East Kentwood Street, westbound at North Bailey Avenue
East Keystone Drive, northbound at East Clearview Drive
East Keystone Drive, northbound at East Kentwood Street
East Lapis Street, westbound at North Main Street
East Liberty Street, westbound at North Franklin Avenue
East Logan Street, eastbound at North Century Place
East Logan Street, westbound at North Century Place
East Lombardy Drive, westbound at State Highway P
East Mission Street, westbound at North Andre Avenue
East Moonlight Street, westbound at North Century Place
Table II-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table II-A
AO:365
Location
East Morris Street, eastbound at North Mayberry Avenue
East Morris Street, westbound at North Jester Avenue
East Old Stone Avenue, eastbound at Farm Road 101
East Old Stone Avenue, westbound at State Highway M
East Peaceful Street, eastbound at North Vintage Avenue
East Prairie Ridge Street, westbound at North Andre Avenue
East Sequoia Street, eastbound at South Acorn Avenue
East Street, southbound at Rosewood Street
East Sycamore Street, eastbound at South Basswood Avenue
East Timber Lane, eastbound at South Cottonwood Avenue
East Timber Lane, westbound at South Chestnut Hills Drive
Elizabeth Street, eastbound at Lynn Avenue
Elizabeth Street, eastbound at Shuyler Lane
Elm Street, westbound at State Highway 174
Elmwood Avenue, northbound at Cottonwood Avenue
Fairwood Street, eastbound at Bailey Avenue
Fairwood Street, eastbound at Elmwood Avenue
Fairwood Street, northbound at Kentwood Street
Fairwood Street, eastbound at Pinewood Avenue
Forrest Avenue, northbound at Hines Street
Forrest Avenue, northbound at Logan Street
Forrest Lane, southbound at Mill Street
Foxborough Drive, eastbound at Cedarwood Avenue
Frisco Boulevard, westbound at Illinois Avenue
Garland Court, at Bradley Street
Garroutte Field Drive (Service Road), westbound at North Pine Avenue
George Avenue, northbound at Logan Street
Goodman Street, eastbound at Matteson Avenue
Grant Street, eastbound at Pine Avenue
Grant Avenue, westbound at State Highway 174
Grant Street, westbound at West Avenue
Hadley Street, eastbound at Main Street
Halsey Street, eastbound at Main Street
Hardy Street, eastbound at Main Street
Harmon Avenue, northbound at Kentwood Street
Harrison Street, eastbound at Kyle Avenue
Table II-A REPUBLIC CITY CODE Table II-A
AO:366
Location
Harrison Street, westbound at West Avenue
Hillside Avenue, northbound at Hines Street
Hulston Avenue, southbound at Lipscomb Drive
Hulston Avenue, southbound at O'Neal Road
Illinois Street, southbound at U.S. Highway 60
Jackson Street, southbound at Elm Street
Jasmine Court, at Jasmine Drive
Jewell Street, eastbound at Fountain Avenue
Jody Circle, at Pinewood Avenue
Julie Drive, northbound at Elm Street
Kansas Avenue, southbound at State Highway 174
Kathryn Drive, eastbound at Julie Drive
Kay Street, eastbound at Boston Lane
Kentwood Avenue, eastbound at Bailey Avenue
Kentwood Street, eastbound at Lynn Avenue
Kentwood Street, eastbound at Pinewood Avenue
Kristopher Avenue, southbound at Christine Lane
Kristopher Avenue, southbound at Melody Lane
Kyle Avenue, northbound at Allen Avenue
Kyle Avenue, northbound at Hines Street
Kyle Avenue, southbound at Rosewood Street
Kyle Avenue, northbound at Wildwood Street
Lafayette Avenue, northbound at State Highway 174
Lakeside Drive, southbound at Christine Lane
Lakeside Drive, southbound at Melody Lane
Lee Street, eastbound at Cedarwood Avenue
Lee Street, eastbound at George Avenue
Lee Street (E. of Oakwood), eastbound at Oakwood Avenue
Lee Street (w. of Oakwood), eastbound at Oakwood Avenue
Lee Street, eastbound at U.S. Highway 60
Linwood Avenue, southbound at Mill Street
Linwood Avenue, southbound at Rosewood Street
Logan Street, westbound at College Avenue
Logan Street, eastbound at Lee Street
Logan Street, westbound at Main Street
Logan Street, eastbound at Matteson Avenue
Table II-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table II-A
AO:367
Location
Logan Street, eastbound at Murphy Drive
Logan Street, eastbound at U.S. Highway 60
Logan Street, westbound at West Avenue
Lunar Street, eastbound at Bailey Avenue
Lunar Street, eastbound at Cox Avenue
Lunar Street, eastbound at Matteson Avenue
Lunar Street, eastbound at Murphy Drive
Lynette Avenue, northbound at Hines Street
Lynn Avenue, northbound at Hines Street
Lynn Avenue, northbound at Wildwood Street
Magnolia Avenue, southbound at Elm Street
Magnolia Avenue, southbound at Rosewood Street
Main Street, northbound at Berry Street
Maple Avenue, southbound at Brooks Street
Maple Avenue, northbound at Elm Street
Maple Avenue, southbound at Elm Street
Maple Street, southbound at Hadley Street
Maple Street, southbound at Hardy Street
Maple Street, southbound at Jewell Avenue
Maple Avenue, southbound at Kimberly Street
Maple Avenue, southbound at Miller Road
Maple Avenue, eastbound at U.S. Highway 60
Maplewood Avenue, northbound at Elm Street
Maplewood Avenue, northbound at Grant Avenue
Matteson Avenue, northbound at Elm Street
Matteson Avenue, northbound at Hines Street
Matteson Avenue, northbound at Kentwood Street
Matteson Avenue, northbound at Lee Street
Matteson Avenue, northbound at Virginia Street
McKee Avenue, southbound at Lipscomb Drive
McKee Avenue, southbound at O'Neal Road
Meadowview Lane, westbound at Kansas Avenue
Melody Lane, westbound at Illinois Avenue
Mill Street, westbound at Eagan Street
Mill Street, eastbound at Main Street
Mill Street, eastbound at U.S. Highway 60
Table II-A REPUBLIC CITY CODE Table II-A
AO:368
Location
Miller Road, eastbound at U.S. Highway 60
Moonlight Street, eastbound at Cox Avenue
Moonlight Street, eastbound at Matteson Avenue
Morningside Avenue, southbound at Rosewood Street
Morningside Avenue, eastbound U.S. Highway 60
North Ark Street, northbound at East Marshall Street
North Arndt Avenue, southbound at East Morris Street
North Austin Lane, westbound at North Lindsey Avenue
North Benny Avenue, southbound at West Wilson Street
North Blackstone Avenue, southbound at East Lapis Street
North Butternut Avenue, northbound at West Hines Street
North Cardinal Avenue, northbound at East Willow Street
North Century Place, northbound at East Hines Street
North Century Place, northbound at East Logan Street
North Century Place, southbound at East Lee Street
North Cherrywood Avenue, northbound at East Hines Street
North Claremont Place, northbound at East Moonlight Street
North Claremont Place, southbound at East Lee Street
North Cox Avenue, northbound at East Timber Oak Street
North Cox Avenue, northbound at Farm Road 174
North Douglas Avenue, southbound at East Kentwood Street
North Franklin Avenue, southbound at East Hines Street
North Glenwood Avenue, northbound at East Hines Street
North Harrington Drive, northbound at East Logan Street
North Harrington Drive, southbound at East Clearview Drive
North Harrington Drive, southbound at East Lee Street
North Justice Avenue, northbound at East Independence Street
North Justice Avenue, southbound at Freedom Street
North Kerr Avenue, northbound at Farm Road 170
North Kerr Avenue, southbound at East Legend Street
North Lexington Avenue, northbound at East Bradford Street
North Lexington Avenue, southbound at East Hines Street
North Lincoln Avenue, northbound at East Colonial Street
North Lincoln Avenue, southbound at East Hines Street
North Lindsey Avenue, southbound at State Highway 174
North Madison Avenue, northbound at East Hamilton Street
Table II-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table II-A
AO:369
Location
North Maple Avenue, northbound at East Lapis Street
North Mayberry Avenue, northbound at East Hines Street
North Mayberry Avenue, southbound at North Texas Avenue
North Northwood Avenue, southbound at West Farm Road 174
North Parkwood Avenue, southbound at East Timber Oak Street
North Prospect Avenue, northbound at East Meadows Street
North Sandstone Avenue, southbound at State Highway 174
North Street, westbound at College Avenue
North Street, westbound at Main Street
North Tara Drive, northbound at East Logan Street
North Tara Drive, southbound at East Lee Street
North Taylor Drive, northbound at East Logan Street
North Texas Avenue, eastbound at North Chandler Avenue
North Texas Avenue, northbound at East Hines Street
North Veterans Avenue, northbound at East Liberty Street
North Veterans Avenue, southbound at East Colonial Street
North Washington Avenue, northbound at East Jamestown Court
North Washington Avenue, southbound at East Hines Street
North Washington Court, southbound at East Jamestown Court
North Westwood Avenue, southbound at West Farm Road 174
North White Rock Avenue, southbound at East Jamestown Court
O'Neal Road, westbound at Kansas Avenue
O'Neal Road, westbound at U.S. Highway 60
Oakwood Avenue, northbound at Kentwood Street
Oakwood Avenue (E. of Oakwood), northbound at Lee Street
Oakwood Avenue (W. of Oakwood), northbound at Lee Street
Oakwood Avenue, southbound at Rosewood Street
Olive Street, westbound at Main Street
Olive Street, at westbound State Highway 174
Olive Street (E. of West Street), westbound at West Avenue
Olive Street (W. of West Street), westbound at West Avenue
Park Road, at Lynn Avenue
Park Street, eastbound at Main Street
Park Road, at Miller Road
Peachtree Lane, southbound at Elm Street
Phelps Avenue, northbound at Hines Street
Table II-A REPUBLIC CITY CODE Table II-A
AO:370
Location
Phelps Avenue, northbound at Summit Street
Pine Street, southbound at Elm Street
Pine Avenue, southbound at Jewell Avenue
Pine Avenue, southbound at Kimberly Street
Pine Avenue, northbound at Park Street
Pinewood Avenue, northbound at Elm Street
Pinewood Avenue, southbound at Elm Street
Pinewood Avenue, northbound at Hines Street
Pinewood Avenue, northbound at Oakwood Avenue
Pinewood Avenue, southbound at Rosewood Street
Primrose Street, eastbound at Basswood Avenue
Primrose Street, eastbound at Hampton Avenue
Primrose Street, eastbound at Lynn Avenue
Rachael Drive, southbound at Miller Road
Rachael Drive, southbound at Shuyler Lane
Redbud Avenue, southbound at Elm Street
Redbud Avenue, southbound at Rosewood Street
Redwood Street, eastbound at Basswood Avenue
Ridgecrest Street, westbound at Kansas Avenue
Ridgemont Avenue, northbound at Cottage Place
Ritter Street, eastbound at Basswood Avenue
Ritter Street, eastbound at Conroy Avenue
Ritter Street, eastbound at Cully Avenue
Ritter Street, eastbound at Lynn Avenue
Ritter Street, eastbound at Main Street
Sandlewood Street, eastbound at Basswood Avenue
Sandlewood Street, southbound at Rosewood Street
School Street, southbound at Elm Street
Scott Circle, at Jewell Street
Scottland Lane, westbound at Jackson Street
Sherman Avenue, southbound at Elm Street
Shuyler Lane, southbound at Miller Road
South Ashton Avenue, northbound at West Stanton Drive
South Beechwood Avenue, southbound at East Charles Street
South Bordeaux Avenue, northbound at West Corsica Street
South Bordeaux Avenue, southbound at West Grace Street
Table II-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table II-A
AO:371
Location
South Cedarwood Avenue, southbound at East Charles Street
South Cedarwood Avenue, southbound at East Miller Road
South Fountain Avenue, southbound at East Lombardy Drive
South Gardenway Avenue, eastbound at South Shuyler Lane
South Gardenway Avenue, northbound at East Miller Road
South Landen Avenue, northbound at West Miller Road
South Lorraine Avenue, northbound at West Grace Street
South Magnolia Avenue, eastbound at Shuyler Lane
South Magnolia Avenue, westbound at Shuyler Lane
South Melissa Avenue, southbound at West Lois Lane
South Normandy Avenue, northbound at West Grace Street
South Patterson Avenue, northbound at West Stanton Drive
South Prairie Lane, northbound at East Primrose Street
South Rilynn Avenue, northbound at West Miller Road
South Rilynn Avenue, southbound at West Nicholas Street
South Rome Avenue, northbound at West Corsica Street
South Sarah Avenue, northbound at West Broad Street
South Sherwood Avenue, southbound at East Charles Street
South Sicily Court, westbound at South Venice Avenue
South Teakwood Avenue, southbound at East Charles Street
Summit Street, eastbound at Boston Lane
Summit Avenue, westbound at Main Street
Summit Street, eastbound at Oakwood Avenue
Summit Street, westbound at West Avenue
Summit Street, eastbound at Windmill Place
Teakwood Avenue, northbound at Kentwood Street
Teakwood Avenue, southbound at Rosewood Street
Travis Avenue, northbound at Cottage Place
Travis Avenue, northbound at Kay Street
Valley View Street, eastbound at Cully Avenue
Valley View Street, eastbound at Rachael Drive
Valley View Street, eastbound at Rachael Drive
Valley View Street, eastbound at Shuyler Lane
Valley View Street, eastbound at Shuyler Lane
Ventura Avenue, southbound at O'Neal Road
Wade Street, westbound at Main Street
Table II-A REPUBLIC CITY CODE Table II-A
AO:372
Location
Wade Street, westbound at West Avenue
Walnut Avenue, northbound at Elm Street
Walnut Avenue, southbound at Main Street
Walnut Avenue, northbound at North Street
Walnut Avenue, northbound at Summit Street
Wayne Street, eastbound at Boston Lane
West Apache Street, westbound at South Kristopher Avenue
West Avenue, southbound at Miller Road
West Bonita Drive, eastbound at North Tierra Drive
West Brookfield Street, eastbound at State Highway 174
West Calais Street, eastbound at South Rome Avenue
West Grace Street, eastbound at South Main Street
West Grace Street, westbound at South Illinois Avenue
West Logan Street, westbound at North Butternut Avenue
West Lombardy Drive, westbound at South Venice Avenue
West Madrid Street, eastbound at South Calabria Avenue
West Madrid Street, westbound at South Lorraine Avenue
West Navajo Street, eastbound at South Kristopher Avenue
West Nicholas Street, eastbound at South Main Avenue
West Nicole Street, eastbound at South Sarah Avenue
West Nicole Street, westbound at South Caroline Avenue
West North Street, westbound at North College Avenue
West Penny Lane, eastbound at South Caroline Avenue
West Red Maple Drive, eastbound at North Butternut Avenue
West Somerset Drive, westbound at South Ashton Avenue
West Stanton Drive, eastbound at South Kansas Avenue
West Stanton Drive, westbound at South Kansas Avenue
West Stanton Drive, westbound at South Michelle Avenue
West Wilson Street, eastbound at North College Avenue
White Oak Avenue, southbound at Elm Street
White Oak Avenue, southbound at Rosewood Street
Wildwood Flower Drive, eastbound at Cully Avenue
Wildwood Flower Drive, eastbound at Fountain Avenue
Wildwood Flower Drive, eastbound at Shuyler Lane
Wilson Street, eastbound at Boston Lane
Wilson Street, westbound at Main Street
Table II-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table II-A
AO:373
Location
Wilson Street, eastbound at Main Street
Wilson Court, at Wilson Street
Woodland Street, eastbound at Boston Lane
Woodland Drive, westbound at Kansas Avenue
Wynwood Avenue, northbound at Kentwood Street
Wynwood Avenue, eastbound at Pinewood Avenue
Table II-B. Two-Way Stops. [Ord. No. 02-35 §1, 8-26-2002; Ord. No.
03-12 §2, 2-10-2003; Ord. No. 07-55 §2, 8-27-2007; Ord. No. 08-53
§2, 7-14-2008]
At the following described intersections or locations, two-way stop signs are
installed:
Location
Anderson Street, at College Avenue
Anderson Street, at Walnut Avenue
Anderson Street, at West Avenue
Buxton Lane, at Eagan Street
Cliborne Avenue, at Mill Street
College Avenue, at State Highway 174
Concordia Avenue, at O'Neal Road
Douglas Avenue, at Lee Street
East Charles Street, eastbound at South Chestnut Hills Drive
East Charles Street, westbound at South Chestnut Hills Drive
East Colonial Street, eastbound at North Franklin Avenue
East Colonial Street, westbound at North Franklin Avenue
East Hines Street, at North Lynn Avenue
East Jester Street, westbound at North Glenwood Avenue
East Kentwood Street, eastbound at North Cox Avenue
East Kentwood Street, westbound at North Cox Avenue
East Logan Street, at Claremont Place
East Logan Street, eastbound at North Glenwood Avenue
East Miller Road and East Charles Street
East Miller Road and South West Avenue
East Sequoia Street, westbound at South Shirley Avenue
Forrest Lane, at Eagan Street
Forrest Lane, at Jackson Street
Table II-A REPUBLIC CITY CODE Table II-B
AO:374
Location
Frisco Boulevard, at Illinois Avenue
Grant Street, at College Avenue
Grant Street, at Walnut Avenue
Hines Street, at Main Street
Hines Street, at State Highway 174
Jackson Street, at Buxton Lane
Jackson Street, at West Avenue
Jasmine Drive, at Foxborough Drive
Kentwood Street, at Cox Avenue
Logan Street, at Walnut Avenue
Mill Street, at West Avenue
Miller Road at West Avenue
North Casady Drive, eastbound at North Glenwood Avenue
North Chandler Avenue, northbound at North Texas Avenue
North Chandler Avenue, southbound at North Texas Avenue
North Fountain Avenue, northbound at East Grace Street
North Fountain Avenue, northbound at East Hadley Street
North Fountain Avenue, northbound at East Halsey Street
North Fountain Avenue, northbound at East Hardy Street
North Fountain Avenue, southbound at East Grace Street
North Fountain Avenue, southbound at East Hadley Street
North Fountain Avenue, southbound at East Halsey Street
North Fountain Avenue, southbound at East Hardy Street
North Revolution Avenue, northbound at East Bradford Street
North Revolution Avenue, southbound at East Bradford Street
North Sandstone Avenue, northbound at West Juan Tabo Lane
North Sandstone Avenue, southbound at West Juan Tabo Lane
North Travis Avenue, southbound at East Cottage Place
North White Rock Avenue, northbound at East Bradford Street
North White Rock Avenue, southbound at East Bradford Street
Olive Street, at College Avenue
Olive Street, at Walnut Avenue
Pine Avenue, at Anderson Street
Pine Avenue, at Hines Street
Scotland Lane, at Eagan Street
South Denton Circle, eastbound at North Travis Avenue
Table II-B ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table II-B
AO:375
Location
South Denton Circle, westbound at North Travis Avenue
South Melissa Avenue, northbound at West Broad Street
South Melissa Avenue, southbound at West Broad Street
South Rome Avenue, northbound at West Grace Street
South Rome Avenue, southbound at West Grace Street
South Shirley Avenue, northbound at East Lombardy Drive
South Shirley Avenue, northbound at East Sequoia Street
South Shirley Avenue, southbound at East Lombardy Drive
South Venice Avenue, northbound at West Grace Street
South Venice Avenue, southbound at West Grace Street
Wade Street, at College Avenue
Walnut Avenue, at State Highway 174
West Alemeda Street, eastbound at North Sandstone Avenue
West Alemeda Street, westbound at North Sandstone Avenue
West Avenue, at Hines Street
West Avenue, at State Highway 174
Table II-C. Three-Way Stops. [Ord. No. 02-35 §2, 8-26-2002; Ord.
No. 03-12 §3, 2-10-2003; Ord. No. 08-11 §2, 1-28-2008]
At the following described intersections or locations, three-way stop signs
are installed:
Location
East Charles Street, at South West Avenue
East Hamilton Street, eastbound at North Cox Avenue
East Hamilton Street, westbound at North Cox Avenue
Hampton Avenue and Anderson Street
Miller Road and Charles Street
North Cox Avenue, southbound at East Hamilton Street
Peachtree Lane and Rosewood Street
Rosewood Street and Dennis Avenue
West Avenue and Charles Street
Table II-D. Four-Way Stops [Ord. No. 02-24 §1, 6-24-2002; Ord. No.
03-12 §4, 2-10-2003; Ord. No. 08-53 §3, 7-14-2008]
At the following described intersections or locations, four-way stop signs
are installed:
Table II-B REPUBLIC CITY CODE Table II-D
AO:376
Location
East Independence Street and North Liberty Avenue
East Miller Road and South Lynn Avenue
Elm Street and Lynn Avenue
Hampton Avenue and Hines Street
Lee Street and Pinewood Avenue
Lynn Avenue and Logan Street
Main Street and Anderson Street
Main Street and Grant Street
Miller Road and Lynn Avenue
Oakwood Avenue and Hines Street
South Calabria Avenue, northbound at West Grace Street
South Calabria Avenue, southbound at West Grace Street
State Highway 174 and Main Street
West Avenue and Elm Street
West Grace Street, eastbound at South Calabria Avenue
West Grace Street, westbound at South Calabria Avenue
Schedule III
(RESERVED)
Editor's Note — Ord. No. 08-69 §2, adopted September 8, 2008, repealed
this "Schedule III No Truck Zones". At the editor's discretion, this schedule
has been left reserved for future use.
Schedule IV
EMERGENCY SNOW REMOVAL ROUTES
Table IV-A. Emergency Snow Removal Routes. [Ord. No. 03-84 §1,
12-22-2003; Ord. No. 14-32 §1, 11-10-2014]
The following streets within the corporate limits of the City of Republic,
Missouri, shall be known as "Snow Routes" with the following priority
levels:
Primary Snow Routes
Anderson Street, from State Highway 174 to Hampton Avenue
Bailey Avenue, from Elm Street to Hines Street
Beale Road, from Farm Road 194 to City limits
Basswood Avenue, from Miller Road to Elm Street
Table II-D ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table IV-A
AO:377
Primary Snow Routes
Boston Lane, from Missouri Highway 174 to the north City limits
Civic Boulevard, from Illinois Avenue to Colorado Avenue
Colorado Avenue, from U.S. Highway 60 to Civic Boulevard
Commercial Avenue, from Orr Street to U.S. Highway 60
Cottonwood Avenue, from Charles Street to Kentwood Street
Elm Street, from Missouri Highway 174 to the east City limits
Farm Road 89, from Williamsburg Walk to Farm Road 194
Farm Road 97, from Farm Road 144 to Sawyer Road
Farm Road 115, from Farm Road 146 to City limits
Farm Road 148, from State Highway MM to Farm Road 115
Farm Road 150, from Farm Road 115 to City limits
Farm Road 156, from Sawyer Road to City limits
Farm Road 160, from City limits to Brookline Avenue
Farm Road 164, from U.S. Highway 60 to City limits
Farm Road 170 from U.S. Highway 60 to City limits
Farm Road 174, from Oakwood Avenue to City limits
Freedom Street, from Lynn Avenue to Liberty Avenue
Haile Street, from Brookline Avenue to Orr Street
Hamilton Avenue, from Oakwood Avenue to end
Hampton Avenue, from U.S. Highway 60 to Missouri Highway 174
Hines Street, from the west City limits to the east City limits
Illinois Avenue, from U.S. Highway 60 to Farm Road 194
Independence Street, from U.S. Highway 60 to Liberty Avenue
Kansas Avenue, from Missouri Highway 174 to the south City limits
Kentwood, from Cottonwood Avenue to Oakwood Avenue
Liberty Avenue, from Freedom Street to Independence Street
Lynn Avenue, from Williamsburg Walk to Freedom Street
Main Street, from U.S. Highway 60 to the north City limits
Miller Road, from West Avenue to the east City limits
Oakwood Avenue, from Kentwood to the north City limits
O'Neal Road, from west City limits to U.S. Highway 60
Orr Street, from Haile Street to Commercial Avenue
Sawyer Road, from Farm Road 97 to Farm Road 156
West Avenue, from Miller Road to its northern terminus
Williamsburg Walk, from Farm Road 194 to Lynn Avenue
Table IV-A REPUBLIC CITY CODE Table IV-A
AO:378
Secondary Snow Routes
Allen Avenue, from Lee Street to Logan Street
Antietam Road, from Furlough Drive to Cumberland Street
Appomattox Avenue, from Williamsburg Walk to New Madrid Drive
Austin Lane, from Colter Drive to Lindsey Avenue
Berry Street, from Walnut Avenue to Main Street
Bradford Street, from Lexington Avenue to Delaware Avenue
Carnahan Street, from State Highway MM to end
College Avenue, from Elm Street to North Street
Colonial Street, from Delaware Avenue to Lincoln Avenue
Colter Drive, from Lindsey Avenue to Austin Lane
Concordia Avenue, from O'Neal Road to Forest Lane
Conroy Avenue, from Miller Road to Primrose Lane
Countryside Avenue, from Lipscomb Drive to O'Neal Road
Cox Avenue, from Hines Street to Timber Oak Street
Cox Avenue, from Kentwood Street to Lee Street
Cully Avenue, from Valley View Drive to Miller Road
Cumberland Avenue, from Antietam Road to New Madrid Drive
Delaware Avenue, from Bradford Street to Colonial Street
Eagan Street, from West Avenue to Elm Street
Forest Lane, from Concordia Avenue to Mill Street
Fountain Avenue, from Grace Street to Valley View Drive
Furlough Drive, from Shiloh Street to Antietam Road
Glenwood Avenue, from Logan Street to Hines Street
Grace Street, from Illinois Avenue to Fountain Avenue
Hamilton Street, from Oakwood Avenue to Oak Court Place
Hampton Avenue, from Primrose Street to U.S. Highway 60
Harrison Street, from Maple Street to Lynn Avenue
Jester Avenue, from Glenwood Avenue to Texas Avenue
Kentwood Street, from Cox Avenue to Bailey Avenue
Kings Boulevard, from State Highway MM to Empire Avenue
Lee Street, from Allen Avenue to Pinewood Avenue
Lee Street, from Murphy Drive to Taylor Drive
Lee Street, from Oakwood Avenue to Cox Avenue
Lexington Avenue, from Hines Street to Bradford Street
Lincoln Avenue, from Colonial Street to Hines Street
Lindsey Avenue, from State Highway 174 to Colter Drive
Table IV-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Table IV-A
AO:379
Secondary Snow Routes
Linwood Avenue, from Rosewood Street to Mill Street
Lipscomb Drive, from O'Neal Road to Country Side Avenue
Logan Street, from Taylor Drive to Glenwood Avenue
Logan Street, from U.S. Highway 60 to Allen Avenue
Lunar Street, from Bailey Avenue to Murphy Drive
Madison Avenue, from Timber Oak Street to Hamilton Street
Maple Street, from Elm Street to Harrison Street
Mill Street, from U.S. Highway 60 to Linwood Avenue
Mill Street, from West Avenue to Forest Lane
Murphy Drive, from Lunar Street to Lee Street
New Madrid Drive, from Cumberland Avenue to Appomattox Avenue
North Street, from College Avenue to Walnut Avenue
Oak Court Place, from Hamilton Street to Farm Road 174
Pinewood Avenue, from Elm Street to Lee Street
Primrose Lane, from Hampton Avenue to Conroy Avenue
Rosewood Street, from Linwood Avenue to Basswood Street
Shiloh Street, from Williamsburg Walk to Furlough Drive
Taylor Drive, from Lee Street to Logan Street
Texas Avenue, from Jester Avenue to Hines Street
Timber Oak Street, from Cox Avenue to Madison Avenue
Valley View, from Fountain Avenue to Cully Avenue
Walnut Avenue, from North Street to Berry Street
York Avenue, from Haile Street to Sawyer Road
Schedule V
ONE WAY STREETS
Table V-A. One Way Streets. [Ord. No. 02-37 §1, 9-9-2002; Ord. No.
07-81 §1, 11-26-2007]
The following streets within the corporate limits of the City of Republic,
Missouri, by authority of Section 330.020 of this Title shall be known as
"One-Way Streets":
Location
Schedule VI
PARKING PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS
Table IV-A REPUBLIC CITY CODE Table VI-A
AO:380
Table VI-A. Parking Prohibited On Certain Streets. [Ord. No. 04-07
§ 2, 1-26-2004]
Pursuant to Section 365.030, parking shall be prohibited at all times on
the following streets within the corporate limits of the City of Republic,
Missouri:
Location
Bailey Avenue
Boston Lane
Colorado Avenue
Elm Street
Freedom Street
Frisco Boulevard
Hines Street
Illinois Avenue
Independence Street
Justice Avenue
Kansas Avenue
Liberty Avenue
Lynn Avenue
Main Avenue
Missouri Highway 174
Missouri Route P
North Oakwood Avenue
U.S. Highway 60
Title IV Notes
NOTES AND APPENDIXES
Appendix IV-A, Fee/Fine/Forfeiture, is included as an attachment to this
Title.
Chapter 400
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND CITY PLANNING AND ZONING
COMMISSION
Table VI-A ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.010
AO:381
Section 400.010. Created — Composition — Appointment —
Qualifications. [CC 1999 §2-110; Ord. No. 00-38 §1, 11-27-2000;
Ord. No. 04-71 §1, 12-27-2004]
The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Republic shall consist
of seven (7) citizens appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority
of the members of the City Council. The Mayor, or Mayor Pro Tempore, as
designated by the Mayor; a member of the City Council, selected by the City
Council; the Planning and Development Director, or his/her designee, shall
attend all meetings of the Planning and Zoning Commission for the purpose
of providing such assistance and advice as may be needed; provided
however, such persons shall not be members of the Planning and Zoning
Commission and shall not be entitled to vote upon any issue which may
come before the Planning and Zoning Commission. All members of the
Commission shall serve without compensation.
Section 400.020. Term of Office. [CC 1999 §2-111; Ord. No. 00-38
§1, 11-27-2000]
Members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be appointed for
terms of four (4) years each. All members of the Commission shall be
residents of the City, and the membership of the Commission shall consist of
at least one (1) representative from each ward within the City. Any vacancy
in the membership of the Commission shall be filled for the unexpired term
thereof by appointment and approval as provided in Section 400.010. The
Mayor, with the consent of the majority of the City Council, may remove any
member of the Commission for cause stated in writing and after a public
hearing.
Section 400.030. Organization — Election of Officers, Etc. [CC 1999
§2-112]
Immediately after the appointment and qualification of the City Planning
and Zoning Commission, the members shall meet and elect one (1) of their
number Chairman and one (1) of their number Secretary, which officers
shall be elected from among the citizen members and shall hold office for
one (1) year or until their successors are elected and qualified.
Section 400.040. Power To Prescribe Rules of Procedure —
Meetings. [CC 1999 §2-113; Ord. No. 3007 §4]
The City Planning and Zoning Commission shall prescribe rules of
procedure governing the transactions of business before it. Meetings shall
be held at least once each month on such day as shall be prescribed in the
rules of procedure adopted. Special meetings may be called at any time by
the Chairman of the Commission.
Section 400.050. Duties Generally. [CC 1999 §2-114; Ord. No. 3007
§5]
Section
400.010
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
400.050
AO:382
Section 400.060. Powers. [CC 1999 §2-115; Ord. No. 3007 §6]
Section 400.070. Comprehensive City Plan — Contents Generally.
[CC 1999 §2-116]
A. The City Planning and Zoning Commission shall have power and shall
be required to:
1. Make, amend, extend and add to the Comprehensive Plan for the
physical development of the City as defined in this Chapter.
2. Exercise control over platting or subdividing land within the City as
set forth in this Chapter.
3. Make and adopt a zoning plan and recommend or disapprove
proposed changes in such plan.
4. Promote public interest in and understanding of the
Comprehensive Plan and of zoning and planning.
A. The City Planning and Zoning Commission shall have power to:
1. Require information which shall be furnished within a reasonable
time from other departments of the City Government in relation to
its work.
2. Within its budget appropriation, contract with City planners and
other consultants for such services as it may require.
3. In the performance of its functions, enter upon any land and make
examinations and surveys.
A. The City Planning and Zoning Commission shall make and adopt a
Comprehensive City Plan for the physical development of the City. In
preparing the City plan, the Commission shall make careful and
comprehensive surveys and studies of the existing conditions and
probable future growth of the City. The plan shall be made with the
general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated
development of the City which will, in accordance with existing and
future needs, best promote the general welfare, as well as efficiency
and economy in the process of development.
B. The Comprehensive Plan for the physical development of the City, with
the accompanying maps, plats, charts, descriptive and explanatory
matter, shall show the Commission's recommendations for the
development of City territory and may include, among other things:
1. The general location, character and extent of streets, bridges,
parks, waterways and other public ways, grounds and spaces;
2. The general location of public buildings and other public property;
Section
400.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.070
AO:383
Section 400.080. Comprehensive City Plan — Adoption.
The Commission may adopt the plan as a whole by a single resolution, or,
as the work of making the whole City plan progresses, may from time to
time adopt a part or parts thereof, any part to correspond generally with
one or more of the functional subdivisions of the subject matter of the plan.
Before the adoption, amendment or extension of the plan or portion thereof
the commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon. Fifteen (15)
days notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in at
least one (1) newspaper having general circulation within the municipality.
The hearing may be adjourned from time to time. The adoption of the plan
requires a majority vote of the full membership of the planning commission.
The resolution shall refer expressly to the maps, descriptive matter and
other matters intended by the commission to form the whole or part of the
plan. Action taken shall be recorded on the adopted plan or part thereof by
the identifying signature of the secretary of the commission and filed in the
office of the commission, identified properly by file number. A copy of the
plan or part thereof shall be certified to the City Council and the City Clerk.
It shall be available in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds and at the
City Clerk's office for public inspection during normal office hours.
Section 400.090. Commission To Approve Improvements —
Disapproval, Overruled, How.
No street or other public facilities, or no public utility, whether publicly
or privately owned, and, the location, extent and character thereof having
been included in the recommendations and proposals of the plan or portions
thereof, shall be constructed or authorized in the municipality until the
location, extent and character thereof has been submitted to and approved
by the Planning Commission. In case of disapproval the Commission shall
communicate its reasons to the City Council, and the City Council, by vote
of not less than two-thirds of its entire membership, may overrule the
3. The general location and extent of public utilities, whether publicly
or privately owned;
4. The removal, relocation, widening, extension, narrowing, vacation,
abandonment or change of use of such existing or future public
ways, grounds, spaces, building, property or utilities;
5. The general location, character and extent of residential,
commercial, industrial and other uses of land;
6. The extent and layout of the planning of blighted districts and slum
areas.
7. The regulation of the height, area, bulk, location and use of private,
non-profit and public structures and premises, and of population
density, but the adoption, enforcement and administration of the
zoning plan shall conform to the provisions of Sections 89.010 to
89.250, RSMo.
Section
400.070
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
400.090
AO:384
disapproval and, upon the overruling, the City Council or the appropriate
board or officer may proceed, except that if the public facility or utility is
one the authorization or financing of which does not fall within the province
of the City Council, then the submission to the Planning Commission shall
be by the board having jurisdiction, and the Planning Commission's
disapproval may be overruled by that board by a vote of not less than
two-thirds of its entire membership. The acceptance, widening, removal,
extension, relocation, narrowing, vacation, abandonment, change of use,
acquisition of land for, sale or lease of any street or other public facility is
subject to similar submission and approval, and the failure to approve may
be similarly overruled. The failure of the Commission to act within sixty (60)
days after the date of official submission to it shall be deemed approval.
Section 400.100. Functions As To Zoning. [CC 1999 §2-122; Ord.
No. 3007 §13]
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall exercise the authority vested
in a zoning commission by the State zoning enabling acts. It shall prepare
and recommend to the City Council a comprehensive zoning ordinance,
or propose amendments or revisions thereof, with such provisions as the
Commission shall deem necessary or desirable for the promotion of the
health, safety, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City. Such
provisions may include regulations as to the location, width, height and bulk
of buildings and other structure; the size of the yards, courts and other
open spaces surrounding buildings and structures; the use of buildings
and structures and land. The Commission shall hear applications for
amendments, modifications or revision of the zoning ordinance and shall
forward such applications to the City Council with its recommendations
thereon. The recommendations of the Commission shall not be binding
on the City Council, which may approve or disapprove the Commission's
findings; however, no general City plan, or zoning ordinance, or any
modification, amendment or revision thereof, shall be considered by the City
Council unless the same shall have been first submitted to the Commission
for its examination and recommendation.
Section 400.110. Subdivisions — Generally.73 [CC 1999 §2-119; Ord.
No. 3007 §10]
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall be the platting commission of
the City and, as such, shall have the control of the platting or subdivision
of land within the City and within three (3) miles thereof when permitted
by State enabling legislation; provided however, that such control shall not
apply to land outside of the City over which platting or subdivision control
is reposed by law in some authority other than this City or any of its officers
or departments.
73.Cross Reference — As to subdivision regulations, see ch. 410 of this Code.
Section
400.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
400.120
AO:385
Section 400.120. Subdivisions — Regulations.
The regulations or practice of the City Council may provide for the tentative
approval of the plat previous to the improvements and utility installations;
but any tentative approval shall not be entered on the plat. The regulations
may provide that, in lieu of the completion of the work and installations
previous to the final approval of a plat, the City Council may accept a bond
or escrow in an amount and with surety and other reasonable conditions,
providing for and securing the actual construction and installation of the
improvements and utilities within a period specified by the City Council and
expressed in the bond; provided that, the release of such escrow by the
City, shall be as specified in this Section. The City Council may enforce the
bond by all appropriate legal and equitable remedies. The regulations may
provide, in lieu of the completion of the work and installations previous to
the final approval of a plat, for an assessment or other method whereby
the City Council is put in an assured position to do the work and make the
installations at the cost of the owners of the property within the subdivision.
The regulations may provide for the dedication, reservation or acquisition of
lands and open spaces necessary for public uses indicated on the city plan
and for appropriate means of providing for the compensation, including
reasonable charges against the subdivision, if any, and over a period of time
and in a manner as is in the public interest.
Chapter 405
ZONING REGULATIONS
Cross References — As to sign regulations, see ch. 415; as to adoption the
international building and other technical codes, see ch. 500, art. i.
Section
400.120
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
400.120
AO:386
ARTICLE I
In General
Section 405.010. Title. [CC 1999 §26-1]
This Chapter shall be known, referred to and recited as the Zoning Code of
the City of Republic, Missouri.
Section 405.020. Definitions.74 [CC 1999 §§26-2 — 26-3, 26-132;
Ord. No. 03-56 §1, 8-25-2003; Ord. No. 03-80 §1, 11-24-2003; Ord.
No. 05-82 §1, 10-10-2005; Ord. No. 05-83 §1, 11-14-2005; Ord. No.
05-96 §1, App. A §1, 12-12-2005; Ord. No. 11-20 §1, 8-8-2011; Ord.
No. 19-21, 11-5-2019]
A. For the purposes of this Chapter, certain terms and words are hereby
defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the
singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular; the
word "building" shall include the word "structure" and the word "shall"
is mandatory and not directory.
B. For the purpose of this Chapter, certain terms and words are to be used
and interpreted as defined below:
AGRICULTURAL PROCESSING — The initial processing of crop-based
agricultural products that is reasonably required to take place in close
proximity to the site where such products are produced. Typical uses
include grain mills.
AGRICULTURAL SALES AND SERVICE — A use primarily engaged in
the sale or rental of farm tools and implements, feed and grain, tack,
animal care products and farm supplies. This definition excludes the
sale of large implements, such as tractors and combines, but includes
food sales and farm machinery repair services that are accessory to the
principal use.
AGRICULTURE, GENERAL — The use of land for the production of
livestock, dairy products, poultry or poultry products.
AGRICULTURE, LIMITED — The use of land for the production of row
crops, field crops, tree crops or timber.
ALLEY — All property dedicated or intended for public or private
street purposes or subject to public easements therefore, and less than
sixteen (16) feet in width from property line to property line.
BASEMENT — That enclosed part of a building having at least two (2)
feet of its height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
BERM — An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest, screen
undesirable views, and/or decrease noise.
BOARDING HOUSE or LODGING HOUSE — A building, other than
a hotel or apartment hotel, where, for compensation and by pre-
74.Cross Reference — As to definitions concerning landscaping, see §405.820 of this chapter.
Section
405.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.020
AO:387
arrangement for definite periods, lodging, meals, or lodging and meals
are provided for three (3) or more persons, but not exceeding twenty
(20) persons.
BUFFER — Land area typically containing trees, shrubs and other
plants, berms, fences or walls and used to visibly separate one (1) use
from another or to block noise, lights or other nuisances.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or
walls for the shelter or enclosure of persons or property.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF — The vertical distance from the grade to the
highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard
roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip
and gambrel roofs.
BULK PLANE — A theoretical plane beginning at a lot line, or other
locations as set forth in the Code and rising over an acute slope
determined by an acute angle measured up from the horizontal point.
The bulk plane defines the relationship between the height of a
structure and the structure's setback from the lot line.
CARPORT — A structure open on at least two (2) sides used for the
purpose of providing vehicular protection. Carports shall not be located
within side or front yard setbacks.
CLINIC — An establishment where patients are not lodged overnight
but are admitted for examination and treatment by a group of
physicians or dentists practicing medicine together.
CO-LOCATION — Locating wireless communications equipment for
more than one (1) provider at a single communications facility.
Section
405.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.020
AO:388
CONIFER — Evergreen trees and shrubs that bear both seeds and
pollen on dry scales arranged as a cone.
CULTIVATED LANDSCAPE AREA — Planted areas that are frequently
maintained by mowing, irrigating, pruning, fertilizing, etc.
DAY CARE —
DAY CARE CENTER — Is either:
DECIDUOUS — A plant with foliage that is shed annually.
DISTRICT — A section or sections in the City of Republic within which
the zoning regulations are uniform.
DROPLINE — A vertical line extending from the outermost branches of
a tree to the ground.
DWELLING — A building or portion thereof designed or used
exclusively for residential occupancy, but not including home trailers,
mobile homes, hotels, motels, boarding houses and lodging houses,
tourist courts or tourist homes.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE — A building designed for or occupied
exclusively by more than two (2) families.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A building designed for or occupied
exclusively by one (1) family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building designed for or occupied
exclusively by two (2) families.
ECOSYSTEM — A characteristic assemblage of plant and animal life
within a specific physical environment, and all interactions among
species, and between species and their environment.
FAMILY DAY CARE HOME: A family home, occupied by the day
care provider, in which family-like care is given to six (6) children
or less, not related to the provider, for any part of the twenty-four
(24) hour day. The maximum number of children under two (2)
years of age shall be three (3).
1.
GROUP DAY CARE HOME: A family home, occupied by the day
care provider, in which family-like care is given to seven (7) but
not more than ten (10) children, not related to the provider, for
any part of the twenty-four (24) hour day. The maximum number of
children under two (2) years of age shall be two (2) unless there is
a full-time adult assistant, in which case the maximum number of
children under two (2) years shall be four (4).
2.
A family home where more than ten (10) children are cared for, not
related to the provider, for any part of the twenty-four (24) hour
day, or
1.
A building other than a family home in which more than four (4)
children are cared for, not related to the provider, for any part of
the twenty-four (24) hour day.
2.
Section
405.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.020
AO:389
EVERGREEN — A plant with foliage that persists and remains green
year-round.
EXTERIOR STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in the
supporting members of a building or structure such as bearing walls or
partitions, columns, beams or girders that is visible from the exterior
of a building or structure or any substantial change in the roof or in
exterior walls of a building or structure.
FAMILY — The following living arrangements shall constitute a family
for the purposes of this Chapter:
FILLING STATION — Any building, structure or land used for the
dispensing, sale or offering for sale at retail of any automobile fuels, oils
or accessories, including lubrication of automobiles and replacement
or installation of minor parts and accessories but not including major
repair work such as motor replacement, body and fender repair or
spray painting.
FLOOR AREA — The square feet of floor space within the outside line
of walls and including the total of all space on all floors of a building. It
does include porches, garages, or space in a basement or cellar when
said basement or cellar space is used for storage or incidental uses.
FRONTAGE — The distance along a street line from one (1) intersecting
street to another or from one (1) intersecting street to the end of a
dead-end street.
FURNISH — To issue, sell, give, provide, lend, mail, deliver, transfer,
circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit or otherwise provide.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A detached building or portion of a main building
housing the automobiles of the occupants of the premises.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building or portion thereof, other than a private
or storage garage, designed or used for equipping, servicing, repairing,
hiring, selling, storing or parking motor-driven vehicles. The term
"repairing" shall not include an automotive body repair shop nor the
rebuilding, dismantling or storage of wrecked or junked vehicles.
GARAGE, STORAGE — A building or portion thereof designed or used
exclusively for term storage by pre-arrangement of motor-driven
vehicles, as distinguished from daily storage furnished transients, and
at which motor fuels and oils are not sold, and motor-driven vehicles
are not equipped, repaired, hired or sold.
One (1) or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or
custodial relationship living as a single housekeeping unit; or
1.
Three (3) or less unrelated persons living as a single housekeeping
unit; or
2.
Two (2) unrelated persons, plus their biological, adopted or foster
children or other minors for whom they have legally established
custodial responsibility, living as a single housekeeping unit.
3.
Section
405.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.020
AO:390
GRADE — The average level of the finished surface of the ground for
buildings more than five (5) feet from a street line. For buildings closer
than five (5) feet to a street line, the grade is the sidewalk elevation
at the center of the building. If there is more than one (1) street, an
average sidewalk elevation is to be used. If there is no sidewalk, the
City Engineer shall establish the sidewalk grade.
GROUND COVER — Plants, other than turf grass, normally reaching an
average maximum height of not more than twenty-four (24) inches at
maturity.
GROUP HOME — Any home in which eight (8) or fewer unrelated
mentally or physically handicapped person reside and may include two
(2) additional persons acting as house parents or guardians who need
not be related to each other or to any of the mentally or physically
handicapped persons residing in the home.
GUYED TOWERS — A communication tower that is supported, in whole
or in part, by guy wires and ground anchors.
HEDGE — A landscape barrier consisting of a continuous, dense
planting of shrubs.
HOME OCCUPATION — Any occupation or activity which is clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the premises for dwelling
purposes and which is carried on wholly within a main building or
accessory building by a member(s) of a family residing on the premises.
HOTEL — A building in which lodging, or boarding and lodging are
provided and offered to the public for compensation, and in which
ingress and egress to and from all rooms are made through an inside
lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all times. As such, it
is open to the public in contradistinction to a boarding house, lodging
house, or an apartment house which are herein separately defined.
IMPERVIOUS, PERVIOUS SURFACE — Any part of a lot that is covered
by buildings, structures, parking areas, driveways and any other
surfaces which reduce or prevent absorption of stormwater, likewise,
a pervious surface is any surface that allows for the absorption of
stormwater.
INSTITUTION — A non-profit establishment for public use.
Section
405.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.020
AO:391
IRRIGATION SYSTEM — A permanent, artificial watering system
designed to transport and distribute water to plants.
LATTICE TOWER — A guyed or self-supporting three (3) or four (4)
sided, open, steel frame structure used to support telecommunications
equipment.
LOADING SPACE — A space within the main building or on the same
lot, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks, having
a minimum dimension of twelve (12) feet by thirty-five (35) feet and a
vertical clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet.
LODGING HOUSE or ROOMING HOUSE — Same as "Boarding House."
LOT — A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use
permitted in this Chapter, including one (1) main building together with
its accessory buildings, the open spaces and parking spaces required by
the ordinance, and having its principal frontage upon a street or upon
an officially approved place.
LOT OF RECORD — A lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of
which has been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of the
County of Greene, Missouri, or a parcel of land, the deed of which was
recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds prior to the adoption of
this Chapter.
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their
intersection.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE — A lot having a frontage on two (2) nonintersecting
streets as distinguished from a corner lot.
MANUFACTURED HOMES — Factory-built structures; transportable
in one (1) or more sections which are twenty-four (24) feet or more
in width and forty-two (42) feet or more in length when assembled;
designed to be occupied as a permanent single-family residential
dwelling; not constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or other
device intended for the purpose of moving the structure from one place
to another, other than for moving to a permanent site from the factory
or distributor; has no permanently attached wheels or axles; installed
on a permanent foundation; equipped with the necessary service
connections; designed, manufactured, and certified to conform to the
National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act
of 1974 (42 U.S.C. Section 5401).
MATERIAL — Anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing,
photograph, motion picture film, videotape or videotape production,
or pictorial representation, or any recording or transcription, or any
mechanical, chemical, or electrical reproduction, or stored computer
data, or anything which is or may be used as a means of
communication. "Material" includes undeveloped photographs, molds,
printing plates, stored computer data and other latent representational
objects.
Section
405.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.020
AO:392
MOBILE HOME — Transportable, factory-built homes more than eight
(8) feet in width and more than thirty-six (36) feet in length; designed
to be occupied as a single-family residential dwelling; not placed on
a permanent foundation; equipped with the necessary service
connections; designed and manufactured to be transportable on its own
running gear; and conforming to the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. Section
5401).
MODULAR HOME — Factory-built, transportable dwelling unit
designed to be used by itself or to be incorporated with similar units
at a point of use into a modular structure to be used for single-family
housing, bearing the seal of the Missouri Public Service Commission
indicating compliance with the State of Missouri Standards and
Regulations for Modular Homes.
MONOPOLE TOWER — A communication tower constructed without
the use of guy wires and ground anchors and consisting of only a single
pole (also known as self-supporting tower).
MOTEL — A building in which lodging or boarding and lodging are
provided and offered to the public for compensation. As such, it is open
to the public in contradistinction to a boarding house, a lodging house
or an apartment house which are herein separately defined.
MULCH — Non-living organic and synthetic materials customarily used
in landscaping design to retard erosion and retain moisture.
NON-CONFORMING USE — The use of land or a building, or portion
thereof, which use does not conform with the use regulations of the
district in which it is situated.
OPEN SPACE — Open space shall be interpreted to mean:
ORNAMENTAL TREE — A deciduous tree planted primarily for its
ornamental value or for screening purposes.
OVERNIGHT SHELTER — A facility providing temporary lodging on
a daily basis, with or without meals, for primarily indigent, needy,
homeless or transient persons.
PARKING AREA — That portion of the vehicle accommodation area set
aside for the parking of one (1) vehicle.
PARKING SPACE — A surfaced area, enclosed in the main building or
in an accessory building, or unenclosed, having an area of not less
than one hundred eighty (180) square feet exclusive of driveways,
permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one (1) automobile
All areas of natural plant communities or area replanted with
vegetation after construction, such as revegetated natural areas;
tree, shrub, hedge or ground cover planting areas; and lawns; and
1.
Other areas allowed to be counted as open space as per the City of
Republic Zoning and Design Code.
2.
Section
405.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.020
AO:393
and connected with a street or alley by a surfaced driveway which
affords satisfactory ingress and egress for automobiles.
PERFORMANCE — Any play, motion picture film, videotape, dance or
exhibition performed before an audience of one (1) or more.
PERIMETER, LANDSCAPING — A five (5) foot greenspace strip which
surrounds the entire property, not including where a landscaped street
buffer is required.
PERVIOUS SURFACE — See "Impervious Surface."
PLANT COMMUNITY — A natural association of plants that are
dominated by one (1) or more prominent species, or a characteristic
physical attribute.
PLANT SPECIES – PROHIBITED — Those plant species which are
demonstrably detrimental to native plants, native wildlife, ecosystems,
or human health, safety and welfare.
PORTABLE BUILDING — A subordinate building less than two hundred
(200) square feet, the use of which is incidental to that of the main
building, dwelling or premises, which is not erected on a permanent
foundation. Portable buildings shall be constructed, erected and located
in a manner that provides a convenient means of relocation.
PREMISE — Any tract of land, consisting of one (1) or more lots, under
single or multiple ownership, which operates as a functional unit. When
developed, a premise shall also possess one (1) or more of the following
criteria:
PRESERVE AREAS — Vegetative areas required to be preserved by law.
PROMOTE — To manufacture, issue, sell, provide, mail, deliver,
transfer, transmute, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, present,
exhibit, or advertise, or to offer or agree to do the same, by any means
including a computer.
SCREEN — A method of reducing the impact of noise and unsightly
visual intrusions with less offensive or more harmonious elements, such
as plants, berms, fences, walls or any appropriate combination thereof.
SETBACK — The minimum distance required between the property line
and a point of the structure nearest the property line.
1. Shared parking.
2. Common management.
3. Common identification.
4. Common access.
5. Shared circulation.
Section
405.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.020
AO:394
SETBACK, SIDE STREET — The minimum distance required between a
point of the structure nearest the right-of-way line of a street located
on the side of the structure.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult bookstore or adult video
store, an adult cabaret, an adult motion picture theater, a semi-nude
model studio, or a sexual encounter center as further defined by
reference to the definition of those terms as now or hereafter defined
in Section 573.528, RSMo., or as may be adopted in the City Code in a
manner not inconsistent with Section 573.528, RSMo.
SHADE TREE — A deciduous tree planted primarily for its high crown
of foliage or overhead canopy.
SHRUB — A self-supporting woody perennial plant of low-level woody,
perennials plant of low to medium height characterized by multiple
stems and branches continuous from the base, usually not more than
ten (10) feet in height at its maturity.
STORAGE, PERSONAL OR SELF STORAGE — A building or group
of buildings, commonly referred to as mini-storage, consisting of
individual, small, self-contained units that are available on a rental
basis for the storage of business and household goods or contractor's
supplies.
STORY — That portion of a building, other than a basement, included
between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above
it; or, if there be no floor above it, then the space between such floor
and the ceiling next above it.
STORY, HALF — A space under a sloping roof which has the line of
intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three (3) feet
above the top floor level, and in which space not more than two-thirds
(2/3) of the floor area is finished off for use. A half story containing
independent apartments or living quarters shall be counted as a full
story.
STREET — All property dedicated or intended for public or private
street purposes or subject to public easements therefore and more than
sixteen (16) feet in width from property line to property line.
STREET LINE — A dividing line between a lot and a contiguous street.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS — Any change, except those required
by law or ordinance, which would prolong the life of the supporting
members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns,
beams or girders, not including openings in bearing walls as permitted
by other ordinances.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which
requires more or less ground.
STRUCTURES, ACCESSORY — A structure that:
1. Is subordinate to and serves a principal structure,
Section
405.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.020
AO:395
TOWER or COMMUNICATION TOWER — Any structure that is
designed and constructed for the purpose of supporting one (1) or more
antennas; including lattice towers, guy towers or monopole towers. This
definition also includes any structure in which supporting the antenna
array is not the primary purpose of the structure such as a water tower
or utility pole. The term includes radio and television transmission
towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone
towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. This term is not
intended to describe buildings or other structures that have been
constructed primarily for a purpose other than supporting one (1) or
more antennas, despite the fact that such structure may currently, or in
the future, actually support one (1) or more antennas, not to exceed ten
(10) feet above the apex of the roof in residentially zoned districts such
as: satellite dishes, television antennas and radio antennas.
TRAILER OR MOBILE HOME — A vehicle used for living purposes and
standing or designed to stand on wheels or rigid supports.
TRAILER PARK — An area where one (1) or more trailers can be or
are intended to be parked, designed or intended to be used as living
facilities for one (1) or more families.
TREE — Any self-supporting woody perennial plant which has a trunk
diameter of two (2) inches or more and which normally attains an
overall height of at least fifteen (15) feet at maturity, usually with one
(1) main stem or trunk and many branches. It may appear to have
several stems or trunks as in several varieties of oak.
UNDERSTORY — Assemblages of natural low-level woody, herbaceous,
and ground cover species which exist in the area below the canopy of
trees.
USE — The purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed
or intended, or for which either land or building is or may be occupied
or maintained.
VEGETATION, NATIVE — Any plant species with a geographic
distribution indigenous to all or part of the State of Missouri. Plant
species which have been introduced by man are not native vegetation.
VEHICLE ACCOMMODATION AREA — A lot that is used by vehicles
for access, circulation, parking, loading and unloading. It comprises
the total of circulation areas, loading and unloading areas and parking
areas.
VIABLE — When referring to a tree, shrub, or other type of plant, is a
plant that, in the judgment of the City Planner, is capable of sustaining
its own life processes, unaided by man, for a reasonable period of time.
2. Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal structure,
Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of the
occupants, business or industry in the principal structure,
3.
4. Is located on the same lot as the structure.
Section
405.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.020
AO:396
Section 405.025. Violations — Penalties.
WHOLESALE PROMOTE — To manufacture, issue, sell, provide, mail,
deliver, transfer, transmute, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate,
or to offer or agree to do the same for purposes of resale or
redistribution.
WOODLANDS, EXISTING — Existing trees and shrubs of a number,
size and species that accomplish the same general function as new
plantings.
XERISCAPE — Landscape methods which conserve water through the
use of drought-tolerant plants and planting techniques.
YARD — An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining
lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure
from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. In
measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side
yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the minimum
horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be
used.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending across the front of a lot and being
the minimum horizontal distance between the right-of-way or property
line and the main building or any projections thereof other than the
projections of the usual uncovered steps, unenclosed balconies or
unenclosed porches. On corner lots, multi-frontage lots, or where the
front yard is otherwise unclear, the determination of the location of the
front yard shall be made by the Director of Community Development or
their designee.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the rear of a lot and being
the required minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line
and the rear of the main building or any projections thereof other than
the projections of uncovered steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed
porches.
YARD, SIDE — A yard between the main building and the side line of
the lot, and extending from the required front yard to the required rear
yard, and being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line
and the side of the main buildings or any projections thereof.
A. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is
used in violation of Sections 89.010 to 89.140, RSMo., or of any
ordinance or other regulation made under authority conferred hereby,
the proper local authorities of the municipality, in addition to other
remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to
prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct, or
abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of such building,
structure, or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or
use in or about such premises. Such regulations shall be enforced by an
Section
405.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.025
AO:397
Section 405.027. Stop Work.
officer empowered to cause any building, structure, place or premises
to be inspected and examined and to order in writing the remedying
of any condition found to exist therein or thereat in violation of any
provision of the regulations made pursuant to the authority of Sections
89.010 to 89.140, RSMo.
B. The owner or general agent of a building or premises where a violation
of any provision of said regulations has been committed or shall exist,
or the lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises where
such violation has been committed or shall exist, or the owner, general
agent, lessee or tenant of any part of the building or premises in which
such violation has been committed or shall exist, or the general agent,
architect, builder, contractor or any other person who commits, takes
part or assists in any such violation or who maintains any building or
premises in which any such violation shall exist shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00)
and not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each and
every day that such violation continues or by imprisonment for ten (10)
days for each and every day such violation shall continue or by both
such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 82.300, RSMo., however, for
the second and subsequent offenses involving the same violation at the
same building or premises, the punishment shall be a fine of not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each and every day that such violation shall continue or by
imprisonment for ten (10) days for each and every day such violation
shall continue or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion
of the court.
C. Any such person who having been served with an order to remove any
such violation shall fail to comply with such order within ten (10) days
after such service or shall continue to violate any provision of the
regulations made under authority of Sections 89.010 to 89.140, RSMo.,
in the respect named in such order shall also be subject to a civil
penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
A. Authority. Whenever the Community Development Director or his/her
designee finds any work regulated by this Code or the associated
regulations being performed in a manner contrary to the provisions of
this Code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, the Building Official is
authorized to issue a stop work order.
B. Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to
the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the
person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited
work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the
reason for the order, and the conditions under which the cited work will
permitted to resume.
Section
405.025
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.027
AO:398
C. Unlawful Continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after
having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that
person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition,
shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.
Section
405.027
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.027
AO:399

ARTICLE II
Destination of Districts and General District Regulations75
Section 405.030. Districts Enumerated. [CC 1999 §26-4; Ord. No.
5008; Ord. No. 03-56 §1, 8-25-2003]
In order to classify, regulate and restrict the locations of trades, industries
and the location of buildings designed for specified uses, to regulate and
limit the heights and bulk of buildings erected or structurally altered to
regulate and limit the intensity of the use of the lot areas, and to regulate
and determine the areas of yards and other open spaces within the
surrounding such buildings, the City of Republic, Missouri, is hereby
divided into districts, of which there shall be thirteen (13) in number, known
as:
"AG" Agricultural District
"R1-L" Low Density Single-Family Residential District
"R1-M" Medium Density Single-Family Residential District
"R1-H" High Density Single-Family Residential District
"R1-MH" Manufactured, Modular, and Mobile Home Residential District
"R1-Z" Zero Lot Line Residential District
"R-2" Two-Family Residential District
"R-3" Multi-Family Residential District
"C-1" Local Commercial District
"C-2" General Commercial District
"M-1" Light Industrial District
"M-2" Heavy Industrial District
"PDD" Planned Development District
Section 405.040. Official Zoning Map. [CC 1999 §26-5]
A. Boundaries of the districts are shown upon the map which is made a
part of this Chapter, which map is designated as the "District Map". The
District Map and all notations, references and other information shown
thereon are a part of this Chapter and have the same force and effect as
if the District Map and all the notations, references and other
information shown thereon were fully set forth or described herein, and
the original of said District Map is properly attested and is on file with
the Clerk of the City of Republic, Missouri.
B. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various
districts as shown on the map accompanying and made a part of this
Chapter, the following rules apply:
75.Cross Reference — As to number of dogs kept, maintained or harbored in residentially
zoned districts, see §210.170.
Section
405.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.040
AO:401
Section 405.050. through Section 405.055. (Reserved)76
Section 405.060. Regulations Generally. [CC 1999 §26-7; Ord. No.
03-56 §1, 8-25-2003; Ord. No. 05-23 §1, 3-28-2005]
1. The district boundaries are either streets or alleys unless otherwise
shown, and where the districts designated on the map
accompanying and made a part of this Chapter are bounded
approximately by street or alley shall be construed to be the
boundary of the district.
2. Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated, and
where the property has been or may hereafter be divided into
blocks and lots, the district boundaries shall be construed to be the
lot lines, and where the districts designated on the map
accompanying and made a part of this Chapter are bounded
approximately by lot lines, said lines shall be construed to be the
boundaries of the districts unless the boundaries are otherwise
indicated on the map.
C. In unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the map
accompanying and made a part of this Chapter shall be determined by
use of the scale appearing on the map.
A. Except as hereinafter specifically provided:
1. No land shall be used except for a purpose permitted in the district
in which it is located.
2. No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed,
moved or structurally altered, nor shall any building be used,
except for a use permitted in the district in which such building is
located.
3. No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or
structurally altered except in conformity with the area regulation of
the district in which such building is located.
4. No building shall be erected or structurally altered to the extent
specifically provided hereinafter except in conformity with the offstreet
parking and loading regulations of the district in which such
building is located.
5. The minimum yards, parking spaces and open spaces, including lot
area per family, required by this Chapter for each and every
building existing at the time of passage of this Chapter or for any
building hereafter erected shall not be encroached upon or
76.Editor's Note — Ord. no. 07-38 §1, adopted May 29, 2007, repealed sections 405.050
"annexation territory" and 405.055 "fire protection district" in their entirety. Former
sections 405.050 — 405.055 derived from CC 1999 §26-6; ord. no. 03-56 §1, 8-25-2003;
ord. no. 03-80 §1, 11-24-2003; ord. no. 04-19 §1, 3-8-2004. At the editor's discretion, these
sections have been reserved for the city's future use.
Section
405.040
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.060
AO:402
Section 405.070. "AG", "R1-L", "R1-M", "R1-H", "R1-MH", "R1-Z",
"R-2", "R-3" Residential Districts — Purpose For Establishment.
considered as part of the yard or parking space or open space
required for any other building, nor shall any lot area be reduced
below the requirements of this Chapter for the district in which
such lot is located.
6. Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be
located on a lot as herein defined, and in no case shall there be
more than one (1) main building on one (1) lot except as specifically
provided hereinafter.
7. A shipping container, cargo container, tractor trailer or other like
item is prohibited upon a lot within a residential district and upon a
vacant commercial or industrial lot, except where the container,
trailer or other like item provides necessary storage for an active
construction project for which a valid building permit has been
issued.
8. No fence shall be located in the front yard of any property, unless it
is less than four (4) feet in height. The requirements established by
Section 405.910 shall further regulate the location of fences and
landscaping in site triangles.
A. Each of the districts are designed and intended to secure for the
persons who reside there a comfortable, healthy, safe and pleasant
environment in which to live, sheltered from incompatible and
disruptive activities that properly belong in non-residential districts.
Other objectives of some of these districts are explained in the
remainder of this Section.
B. The following residential districts are hereby established:
"AG" Agricultural District
"R1-L" Low Density Single-Family Residential District
"R1-M" Medium Density Single-Family Residential District
"R1-H" High Density Single-Family Residential District
"R1-MH" Manufactured, Modular, and Mobile Home Residential
District
"R1-Z" Zero Lot Line Residential District
"R-2" Two-Family Residential District
"R-3" Multi-Family Residential District
Section
405.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.070
AO:403

ARTICLE III
Zoning Districts — Use and Regulations77
Section 405.075. "AG" Agricultural District.
A. Purpose. The intent of the Agriculture District is established to
accommodate single family residential development in the City Limits
that are not yet served by public water or sewer facilities and that are
not yet appropriate for development at higher densities. The
Agriculture District is also established to accommodate agriculture
uses, equestrian uses, vocational schools, and other uses appropriate
for rural areas at much lower densities than are otherwise not
permitted elsewhere in the City. Upon a zoning change to a higher
density residential district, and the installation of public water and
sewer facilities, such districts can be redeveloped at the allowable
density in that district. The regulations set forth in this Section or set
forth elsewhere in this Chapter shall be referred to as the regulations of
the "AG" Agriculture District.
B. Uses Permitted. A building or premises shall be used only for the
following purposes:
1. Single-family dwelling.
2. Agricultural processing.
3. Agriculture, general.
4. Agriculture, limited.
5. Publicly owned or operated park, playground or community
building, museum, library or art gallery.
6. Church or other place of worship including parish houses, Sunday
schools, and temporary outdoor revivals, on a minimum of two (2)
acres of land, to provide sufficient land area for off-street parking,
bufferyards and proper site design to lessen impact on adjoining
residential neighborhoods. The requirements of Article VI and X
regarding parking, loading, landscaping, and open space shall be
required. Overnight shelters shall not be permitted.
7. Public school, elementary and high, and educational institutions
having a curriculum the same as ordinarily given in public schools,
on a minimum of two (2) acres of land, to provide sufficient land
area for off-street parking, bufferyards and proper site design to
lessen impact on adjoining residential neighborhoods. The
requirements of Article VI and X regarding parking, loading,
landscaping, and open space shall be required.
8. Golf club or grounds.
77.Cross Reference — As to planned development district, see art. IV of this chapter.
Section
405.075
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.075
AO:405
Section 405.080. "R1-L" Low Density Single-Family Residential
District. [Ord. No. 04-19 §1, 3-8-2004]
9. Home occupation in accordance with the Section 405.630.
10. Subject to the provisions of this Republic City Code accessory
building or use, including a private garage customarily incident to
the above uses, but not involving the conduct of a business.
11. Group homes. The exterior appearance of the home and property
shall be in reasonable conformance with the general neighborhood
standards. No group home shall be located within two thousand
five hundred (2,500) feet of another group home.
C. General Regulations. Property and buildings in the "AG" district shall
be subject to the following regulations:
1. Street frontage. Each lot shall have a clear, direct frontage on a
dedicated City street.
2. Miscellaneous requirements. Each dwelling or use shall be located
on its own individual tract of land, the existence of which shall be
an approved legal tract of land or lot on file with the County
Recorder.
3. Permitting. All new construction or additions of residential
structures or accessory structures shall be permitted in accordance
with the latest adopted building code and all applicants for such
shall be required to submit an application, floor plan and site plan
indicating the following:
a. Structure dimensions, in relation to the lot dimensions and
setbacks.
b. Address, lot or parcel number and subdivision, in which the lot
is platted.
c. Driveway and front door location, with respect to the street.
d. The location of all existing utilities present at grade.
D. Height And Area Regulations. The height and area regulations shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements set forth in Article V of
this Chapter.
A. Purposes. The intent of the "R1-L" Low Density Single-Family
Residential District is designed for twelve thousand (12,000) square
foot single-family detached residential uses at low densities of
approximately four (4) dwelling units per acre. Internal stability,
harmony, attractiveness, order and efficiency are encouraged by
providing for adequate light, air and open space for dwellings and
related facilities and by consideration of the proper functional
relationship and arrangement of the different uses permitted in this
Section
405.075
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.080
AO:406
district which is intended for areas that have access for vehicular traffic
from collector or higher classification streets without crossing minor
streets in adjoining neighborhoods.
B. Uses Permitted.
1. Model homes in accordance with Section 410.190.
2. Single-family dwellings.
3. Accessory buildings customary, incidental and subordinate to the
main building.
4. Churches or other places of worship, including parish houses and
Sunday schools, but excluding overnight shelters and temporary
outdoor revivals, on a minimum of two (2) acres of land, to provide
sufficient land area for off-street parking, bufferyards and proper
site design to lessen impact on adjoining residential
neighborhoods. The requirements of Article VI and X regarding
parking, loading, landscaping, and open space shall be required.
5. Golf courses and country clubs.
6. Home occupations in accordance with Section 405.630.
7. Public parks and playgrounds.
8. Public school, elementary and high, and educational institutions
having a curriculum the same as ordinarily given in public schools,
on a minimum of two (2) acres of land, to provide sufficient land
area for off-street parking, bufferyards and proper site design to
lessen impact on adjoining residential neighborhoods. The
requirements of Article VI and X regarding parking, loading,
landscaping, and open space shall be required.
9. Any use conforming at the time the district is mapped.
10. Group homes. The exterior appearance of the home and property
shall be in reasonable conformance with the general neighborhood
standards. No group home shall be located within two thousand
five hundred (2,500) feet of another group home.
C. General Regulations. Property and buildings in the "R1-L" District shall
be subject to the following regulations:
1. Street frontage. Each lot shall have clear and direct frontage on a
dedicated City street.
2. Platting requirements. Each dwelling shall be located on its own
individual platted lot. If areas for common use of occupants of the
development are shown on the plat, satisfactory arrangements
shall be made for the maintenance of the common open space and
facilities, whether in the form of a neighborhood association or
Section
405.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.080
AO:407
Section 405.090. "R1-M" Medium Density Single-Family Residential
District.
public dedication. The plat shall indicate the easements and
covenants appurtenant thereto.
3. Off-street parking. As required by Article VI of this Chapter.
4. Accessory buildings and structures. As required by Section
405.640 of this Chapter.
5. Trees. There shall be a requirement of at least one (1) tree for each
platted lot in order to enhance private space. The tree shall be of a
variety that provides shade and screening and shall be at least six
(6) feet in height at the time of planting.
D. Height And Area Regulations. The height and area regulations shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements set forth in Article V.
A. Purpose. The intent of the "R1-M" Medium Density Single-Family
Residential District is designed for nine thousand (9,000) square foot
single-family detached residential uses at moderate densities of
approximately five (5) dwelling units per acre. Internal stability,
harmony, attractiveness, order and efficiency are encouraged by
providing for adequate light, air and open space for dwellings and
related facilities and by consideration of the proper functional
relationship and arrangement of the different uses permitted in this
district. This district is intended for areas that have access for vehicular
traffic from collector or higher classification streets without crossing
minor streets in adjoining neighborhoods.
B. Uses Permitted.
1. Model homes in accordance with Section 410.190.
2. Single-family dwellings.
3. Accessory buildings customary, incidental and subordinate to the
main building.
4. Churches or other places of worship, including parish houses and
Sunday Schools, but excluding overnight shelters and temporary
outdoor revivals, on a minimum of two (2) acres of land, to provide
sufficient land area for off-street parking, bufferyards and proper
site design to lessen impact on adjoining residential
neighborhoods. The requirements of Article VI and X regarding
parking, loading, landscaping, and open space shall be required.
5. Golf courses and country clubs.
6. Home occupations in accordance with Section 405.630.
7. Public parks and playgrounds.
Section
405.080
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.090
AO:408
Section 405.100. "R1-H" High Density Single-Family Residential
District. [CC 1999 §26-18]
8. Public school, elementary and high, and educational institutions
having a curriculum the same as ordinarily given in public schools,
on a minimum of two (2) acres of land, to provide sufficient land
area for off-street parking, bufferyards and proper site design to
lessen impact on adjoining residential neighborhoods. The
requirements of Article VI and X regarding parking, loading,
landscaping, and open space shall be required.
9. Any use conforming at the time the district is mapped.
10. Group homes. The exterior appearance of the home and property
shall be in reasonable conformance with the general neighborhood
standards. No group home shall be located within two thousand
five hundred (2,500) feet of another group home.
C. General Regulations. Property and buildings in the "R1-M" District shall
be subject to the following area regulations:
1. Street frontage. Each lot shall have a clear, direct frontage on a
dedicated City street.
2. Platting requirements. Each dwelling shall be located on its own
individual platted lot. If areas for common use of occupants of the
development are shown on the plat, satisfactory arrangements
shall be made for the maintenance of the common open space and
facilities, whether in the form of a neighborhood association or
public dedication. The plat shall indicate the any easements and
covenants appurtenant thereto.
3. Off-street parking. As required by Article VI of this Chapter.
4. Accessory buildings and structures. As required by Section
405.640 of this Chapter.
5. Trees. There shall be a requirement of at least one (1) tree for each
platted lot in order to enhance private space. The tree shall be of a
variety that provides shade and screening and shall be at least six
(6) feet in height at the time of planting.
D. Height And Area Regulations. The height and area regulations shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements set forth in Article V.
A. Purposes. The intent of the "R1-H" High Density Single-Family
Residential District is designed for seven thousand (7,000) square foot
single-family detached residential uses at higher densities of
approximately six (6) dwelling units per acre. Internal stability,
harmony, attractiveness, order and efficiency are encouraged by
providing for adequate light, air and open space for dwellings and
related facilities and by consideration of the proper functional
Section
405.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.100
AO:409
relationship and arrangement of the different uses permitted in this
district. This district is intended for areas that have access for vehicular
traffic from collector or higher classification streets without crossing
minor streets in adjoining neighborhoods.
B. Uses Permitted.
1. Model homes in accordance with Section 410.190.
2. Single-family dwellings.
3. Accessory buildings customary, incidental and subordinate to the
main building.
4. Churches or other places of worship, including parish houses and
Sunday Schools, but excluding overnight shelters and temporary
outdoor revivals, on a minimum of two (2) acres of land, to provide
sufficient land area for off-street parking, bufferyards and proper
site design to lessen impact on adjoining residential
neighborhoods. The requirements of Article VI and X regarding
parking, loading, landscaping, and open space shall be required.
5. Home occupations in accordance with Section 405.630.
6. Public school, elementary and high, and educational institutions
having a curriculum the same as ordinarily given in public schools,
on a minimum of two (2) acres of land, to provide sufficient land
area for off-street parking, bufferyards and proper site design to
lessen impact on adjoining residential neighborhoods. The
requirements of Article VI and X regarding parking, loading,
landscaping, and open space shall be required.
7. Golf courses and country clubs.
8. Any use conforming at the time the district is mapped.
9. Group homes. The exterior appearance of the home and property
shall be in reasonable conformance with the general neighborhood
standards. No group home shall be located within two thousand
five hundred (2,500) feet of another group home.
C. General Regulations. Property and buildings in the "R1-H" District shall
be subject to the following regulations:
1. Street frontage. Each lot shall have a clear, direct frontage on a
dedicated City street.
2. Platting requirements. Each dwelling shall be located on its own
individual platted lot. If areas for common use of occupants of the
development are shown on the plat, satisfactory arrangements
shall be made for the maintenance of the common open space and
facilities, whether in the form of a neighborhood association or
Section
405.100
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.100
AO:410
Section 405.110. "R1-MH" Single-Family Manufactured, Modular
and Mobile Home District. [CC 1999 §26-18; Ord. No. 03-56 §1,
8-25-2003]
public dedication. The plat shall indicate the easements and
covenants appurtenant thereto.
3. Off-street parking. As required by Article VI of this Chapter.
4. Accessory buildings and structures. As required by Section
405.640 of this Chapter.
5. Trees. There shall be a requirement of at least one (1) tree for each
platted lot in order to enhance private space. The tree shall be of a
variety that provides shade and screening and shall be at least six
(6) feet in height at the time of planting.
D. Height And Area Regulations. The height and area regulations shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements set forth in Article V.
A. Purposes. The intent of the "R1-MH" Single-Family Manufactured,
Modular and Mobile Home District is designed to provide a location for
manufactured and modular homes in manufactured and modular home
communities and subdivisions. The "R1-MH" Single-Family
Manufactured, Modular and Mobile Home District permits single-family
dwellings at a density of approximately six (6) dwelling units per acre.
The district provisions provide for a minimum of seven thousand (7,000)
square foot single-family detached residential uses. This district is
intended for areas that have access for vehicular traffic from collector
or higher classification streets without crossing minor streets in
adjoining neighborhoods.
B. Uses Permitted.
1. Model homes in accordance with Section 410.190.
2. Single-family dwellings, the use of which shall comply with the area
requirements of the "R1-H" High Density Single-Family Residential
District regulations.
3. Manufactured, Modular and Mobile Homes under the following
conditions:
a. Each modular home placed on an individual lot shall:
i. Bear the seal of the Missouri Public Service Commission
indicating compliance with the State of Missouri
Standards and Regulations for Modular Homes.
ii. Roof must be gable or hip of at least 3:12 pitch, covered
with material that is residential in appearance, including,
but not limited to, approved wood, asphalt composition or
fiberglass shingles, but excluding corrugated aluminum,
Section
405.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.110
AO:411
tin, fiberglass or metal. Except for permitted deck areas,
all roof structures shall provide a minimum eave projection
of six (6) inches and a maximum of thirty (30) inches.
b. Each manufactured home placed on an individual lot shall:
i. Have a minimum width of not less than twenty-four (24)
feet measured at the foundation and a minimum length of
not less than forty-two (42) feet measured at the
foundation. This standard is intended to restrict units to
the type that are transported to the site in parts, typically
two halves, and a minimum of one thousand eight (1,008)
square feet.
ii. Roof must be gable or hip of at least 3:12 pitch, covered
with material that is residential in appearance, including,
but not limited to, approved wood, asphalt composition or
fiberglass shingles, but excluding corrugated aluminum,
tin, fiberglass or metal. Except for permitted deck areas,
all roof structures shall provide a minimum eave projection
of six (6) inches and a maximum of thirty (30) inches.
c. Each mobile home placed on an individual lot shall:
i. Have a minimum width of not less than eight (8) feet
measured at the foundation and a minimum length of not
less than thirty-six (36) feet measured at the foundation.
ii. Roof must be gable or hip of at least 3:12 pitch, covered
with material that is residential in appearance, including,
but not limited to, approved wood, asphalt composition or
fiberglass shingles, but excluding corrugated aluminum,
tin, fiberglass or metal. Except for permitted deck areas,
all roof structures shall provide a minimum eave projection
of six (6) inches and a maximum of thirty (30) inches.
d. Manufactured, Modular and Mobile homes shall not be placed
or occupied on an individual lot without first obtaining a
building permit by the City of Republic, all permit, inspection
and other standard procedures and submittals shall apply,
furthermore each modular, manufactured or mobile home
shall:
i. Have been manufactured after June 15, 1976.
ii. Have the main entry door facing the street on which it is
located.
iii. Have exterior surface and window treatments that, to the
maximum extent possible, are architecturally compatible
with those of neighboring properties, excluding smooth or
ribbed corrugated metal.
Section
405.110
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.110
AO:412
iv. Be placed on a parcel according to a site plan submitted at
the time of application for a building permit. An
illustration of elevation, indicating the finished
appearance of the unit, shall be provided.
v. Be installed on a permanent footing and foundation
system, which is designed and constructed to sustain the
stress limitations and all loads specified in the building
code. The installation instructions provided by the
manufacturer of the unit shall be used to determine
permissible points of support for vertical loads and points
of attachment for anchorage systems used to resist
horizontal and uplift forces. Where manufacturers
specifications permit crawl space foundations, minimum of
eighteen (18) inches of clearance shall be maintained.
Footings and foundations, unless otherwise specifically
provided, shall be constructed of materials specified by the
building code for the intended use and in all cases shall
extend below the frost line. Footings of concrete and
masonry shall be of solid material. Foundations supporting
untreated wood shall extend at least 8 inches (203 mm)
above the adjacent finish grade. Footings shall have a
minimum depth below finished grade of 18 inches unless a
greater depth is recommended by a foundation
investigation.
vi. Piers and bearing walls shall be supported on masonry or
concrete foundations or piles, or other approved
foundation systems, which shall be of sufficient capacity to
support all loads. Under-floor spaces shall be ventilated
with openings as specified in the existing building code. If
combustion air for one or more heat-producing appliances
is taken from within the under-floor spaces, ventilation
shall be adequate for proper appliance operation. Underfloor
access openings shall be provided. Such openings
shall be not less than 18 inches in any dimension and not
less than 3 square feet in area and shall be located so that
any water supply and sewer drain connections located
under the unit are accessible.
vii. Have tongue and running gear, including axles, removed.
viii. Have permanent steps at all exits. All means of egress
shall meet the existing building code.
4. Accessory buildings customary, incidental and subordinate to the
main building.
5. Churches or other places of worship, including parish houses and
Sunday Schools, but excluding overnight shelters and temporary
outdoor revivals, on a minimum of two (2) acres of land, to provide
Section
405.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.110
AO:413
Section 405.120. "R1-Z" Zero Lot Line Residential District. [CC
1999 §§26-104 — 26-108; Ord. No. 03-56 §1, 8-25-2003]
sufficient land area for off-street parking, bufferyards and proper
site design to lessen impact on adjoining residential
neighborhoods. The requirements of Article VI and X regarding
parking, loading, landscaping, and open space shall be required.
6. Home occupations in accordance with Section 405.630.
7. 7 Golf courses and country clubs.
8. Any use conforming at the time the district is mapped.
9. Group homes. The exterior appearance of the home and property
shall be in reasonable conformance with the general neighborhood
standards. No group home shall be located within two thousand
five hundred (2,500) feet of another group home.
C. General Regulations. Property and buildings in the "R1-MH" District
shall be subject to the following regulations:
1. Street frontage. Each lot shall have a clear, direct frontage on a
dedicated City street.
2. Platting requirements. Each dwelling shall be located on its own
individual platted lot. If areas for common use of occupants of the
development are shown on the plat, satisfactory arrangements
shall be made for the maintenance of the common open space and
facilities, whether in the form of a neighborhood association or
public dedication. The plat shall indicate the easements and
covenants appurtenant thereto.
3. Off-street parking. As required by Article VI of this Chapter.
4. Accessory buildings and structures. As required by Section
405.640 of this Chapter.
5. Trees. There shall be a requirement of at least one (1) tree for each
platted lot in order to enhance private space. The tree shall be of a
variety that provides shade and screening and shall be at least six
(6) feet in height at the time of planting.
D. Height And Area Regulations. The height and area regulations shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements set forth in Article V.
A. Purpose. The intent of the "R1-Z" Zero Lot Line Residential District is to
permit and establish regulations for comprehensively planned singlefamily
tracts with zero (0) side yard building setbacks. The principal
purposes of the zero lot line concept are:
Section
405.110
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.120
AO:414
1. The more efficient use of land, as compared with the typical singlefamily
development, making available needed housing at an
affordable cost;
2. The design of dwellings to integrate and relate internal/external
living areas resulting in more pleasant and enjoyable living
facilities; and
3. By placing the dwelling against one of the property line, permitting
the outdoor space to be grouped and utilized to its maximum
benefit.
B. Uses Permitted.
1. Model homes in accordance with Section 410.190.
2. Single-family dwellings, the use of which shall comply with the area
requirements of the "R1-H" High Density Single-Family Residential
District regulations.
3. Reserved.
4. Infill housing with a minimum of two (2) side-by-side lots provided
that the Zero Lot Line side is not facing the adjacent non-Zero Lot
Line property.
5. Group homes. The exterior appearance of the home and property
shall be in reasonable conformance with the general neighborhood
standards. No group home shall be located within two thousand
five hundred (2,500) feet of another group home.
C. General Regulations. Property and buildings in the "R1-Z" District shall
be subject to the following regulations:
1. Street frontage. Each lot shall have a clear, direct frontage an a
dedicated City street.
2. Platting requirements. Each dwelling shall be located on its own
individual platted lot. If areas for common use of occupants of the
development are shown on the plat, satisfactory arrangements
shall be made for the maintenance of the common open space and
facilities, whether in the form of a neighborhood association or
public dedication. The plat shall indicate the zero (0) lot lines and
easements appurtenant thereto.
3. Zero lot line wall (common party wall). The wall of the dwelling
located on the lot line must be constructed of masonry and have no
openings. The wall must also meet the latest adopted building code
of the City of Republic for fire walls and party walls.
4. No portion of the dwelling or architectural features shall project
over any property line.
5. Off-street parking. As required by Article VI of this Chapter.
Section
405.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.120
AO:415
Section 405.130. "R-2" Two-Family Residential District Regulations.
[CC 1999 §§26-104 — 26-108; Ord. No. 03-56 §1, 8-25-2003; Ord. No.
04-64 §1, 10-11-2004]
6. Accessory buildings and structures. As required by Section
405.640 of this Chapter.
7. Trees. There shall be a requirement of one (1) tree for each platted
lot in order to enhance private space. The trees shall be of a variety
that provides shade and screening and shall be at least six (6) feet
in height at the time of planting.
D. Height And Area Regulations. The height and area regulations set forth
in Article V shall be observed.
A. Purposes. The intent of the "R-2" Two-Family Residential District is to
permit and establish regulations for two-family residential dwellings at
a density of approximately 6.7 units per acre. Internal stability,
harmony, attractiveness, order and efficiency are encouraged by
providing for adequate light, air and open space for dwellings and
related facilities and by consideration of the proper functional
relationship and arrangement of the different uses permitted in this
district. This district is intended for areas that have access for vehicular
traffic from collector or higher classification streets without crossing
minor streets in adjoining neighborhoods.
B. Uses Permitted.
1. Model homes in accordance with Section 410.190.
2. Single-family dwellings, the use of which shall comply with the area
requirements of the "R1-H" High Density Single-Family Residential
District regulations.
3. Zero lot line dwellings, the use of which shall comply with the area
regulations of the "R1-Z" district regulations.
4. Two (2) family dwelling.
5. Accessory buildings and structures. As required by Section
405.640 of this Chapter.
6. Group homes. The exterior appearance of the home and property
shall be in reasonable conformance with the general neighborhood
standards. No group home shall be located within two thousand
five hundred (2,500) feet of another group home.
C. General Regulations. Property and buildings in the "R-2" District shall
be subject to the following regulations:
1. Street frontage. Each lot shall have a clear, direct frontage an a
dedicated City street.
Section
405.120
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.130
AO:416
Section 405.140. "R-3" Multi-Family Residential District
Regulations. [CC 1999 §§26-23 — 26-26; Ord. No. 99-4 §1,
1-25-1999; Ord. No. 03-56 §1, 8-25-2003; Ord. No. 04-19 §1,
3-8-2004]
2. Platting requirements. Each two-family dwelling shall be located on
its own individual platted lot. If areas for common use of occupants
of the development are shown on the plat, satisfactory
arrangements shall be made for the maintenance of the common
open space and facilities, whether in the form of a neighborhood
association or public dedication.
3. Off-street parking. As required by Article VI of this Chapter.
4. Accessory buildings and structures. As required by Section
405.640 of this Chapter.
5. Trees. There shall be a requirement of one (1) tree for each
dwelling unit in order to enhance private space. The trees shall be
of a variety that provides shade and screening and shall be at least
six (6) feet in height at the time of planting.
D. Height And Area Regulations. The height and area regulations set forth
in Article V shall be observed.
A. Purpose. The intent of the "R-3" Multi-Family Residential District is
designed primarily to accommodate high density residential
development on properties with direct access to arterial or collector
streets.
B. Uses Permitted.
1. Model homes in accordance with Section 410.190.
2. Multi-family dwellings and apartment houses.
3. Zero lot line dwellings and townhouses, the use of which shall
comply with the area requirements of the "R-3" Multi-Family
Residential District regulations.
4. Two-family residential dwellings, the use of which shall comply
with the area requirements of the "R-3" Multi-Family Residential
District regulations.
5. Single-family dwellings, the use of which shall comply with the area
requirements of the "R1-H" High Density Single-Family Residential
District regulations.
6. Boarding, rooming and lodging houses.
7. Churches or other places of worship, including parish houses,
Sunday schools and temporary outdoor revivals, on a minimum of
two (2) acres of land, to provide sufficient land area for off-street
Section
405.130
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.140
AO:417
parking, bufferyards and proper site design to lessen impact on
adjoining residential neighborhoods. The requirements of Article
VI and X regarding parking, loading, landscaping, and open space
shall be required. Overnight shelters shall not be permitted.
8. Convalescent homes, nursing homes and residential care facilities.
9. Public parking areas, except parking designed or used for parking
of trucks having a capacity in excess of one (1) ton.
10. Home occupations in accordance with Section 405.630.
11. Private, non-commercial recreation buildings, community buildings
and athletic fields which are supplemental to residential
development.
12. Public facilities and parks.
13. Group homes. The exterior appearance of the home and property
shall be in reasonable conformance with the general neighborhood
standards. No group home shall be located within two thousand
five hundred (2,500) feet of another group home.
C. General Regulations. Each site or lot in the "R-3" District shall observe
the following design standards:
1. Off-street parking. As required by Article VI of this Chapter.
2. Accessory buildings and structures. As required by Section
405.640 of this Chapter.
3. Landscaping, screening and bufferyard requirements. As required
by Articles X and XI of this Chapter, with exception to Section
405.860 in which case a minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the
entire lot shall be dedicated open space in accordance with the
general provisions thereof.
4. Street frontage. Each multi-family structure or complex of
structures shall have a clear, direct ingress and egress to a
dedicated City street. Parking areas shall not be permitted so as to
allow the entire length of a parking area to access a dedicated City
street or public right-of-way.
5. Plan submittals. Projects with three (3) or more units and/or are
more than two stories in height shall be required to submit
architecturally sealed construction plans, in accordance with the
latest adopted building codes or as required by the Building
Inspector.
D. Height And Area Regulations. The height and area regulations set forth
in Article V shall be observed.
E. Request For An Increase In Density. A request for an increase in density
may be made to the Planning and Zoning Commission upon submission
Section
405.140
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.140
AO:418
Section 405.145. " "C-O" Commercial Office — Institutional District.
[Ord. No. 06-58 §1, 8-14-2006]
of a formal request and plan for improvements. A request for an
increase in density may be considered but not to exceed thirty-five
percent (35%) (twenty-four (24) dwelling units per acre) of the
otherwise permitted density established in Section 405.540: Height
and Area Regulations. Requests for an increase in density may be
considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission for reasons
including, but not limited to the following:
1. Off-site improvements, improved street intersections and widening,
utility upgrades, in excess of what is otherwise warranted by the
development or required.
2. Emergency service facilities, i.e., storm sirens and substations, etc.
3. Open space improvements, i.e., trails, sidewalks, greenways in
excess of what is otherwise required.
4. Creative development design, i.e., improved streetscapes, lighting,
landscaped areas and greenspace, mixed use facilities, urban
design elements, etc.
5. Dedication of land for public use, i.e., parks, buildings, etc.
A. The zoning of property as "C-O" Commercial Office District is intended
to provide for restricted commercial development limited to office uses
and certain service and retail uses compatible with offices.
1. Intent. The intent of this district is to provide a zone which will
accommodate a broad range of office uses, along with a narrow
range of retail shopping activities that are normally found in the
core area of a City and where development is allowed based upon a
site plan with off-street parking facilities required of the private
development.
2. Uses permitted. Offices for the administrative and management
functions only of businesses and civic organizations.
a. Finance and insurance offices.
b. Real estate, rental and leasing offices.
c. Professional, scientific and technical services offices.
d. Management of companies and enterprises offices.
e. Administrative and support services offices.
f. Health care and social assistance offices.
g. Personal and laundry services.
Section
405.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.145
AO:419
Section 405.148. "MSD" Main Street District. [Ord. No. 06-58 §1,
8-14-2006]
h. Religious, grantmaking, civic, professional and similar
organizations.
i. Executive, legislative and other general government services.
j. Postal services.
3. Height and area regulations. The height and area regulations set
forth in Article V shall be observed.
4. Design standards.
a. Parking and loading requirements. Off-street parking and
loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements for specific uses set forth in Article VI.
b. Landscaping and open space regulations. Landscaping and
open space regulations shall be provided in accordance with
the requirements for specific uses set forth in Article X.
c. Screening and bufferyard requirements. Screening and
bufferyard requirements shall be provided in accordance with
the requirements for specific uses set forth in Article XI.
d. Sign regulations. Sign regulations shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in
Chapter 415.
e. Additional district provisions. Additional provisions relating to
exterior lighting, accessory buildings, stormwater regulations
and access are provided in Article VII.
5. Use limitations. No outdoor storage or sale of merchandise or
material is allowed in this district.
6. Site plan review. Development in the "C-O" District shall be subject
to site plan review requirements and procedures.
A. Intent. The intent of this district is to provide a zone which will
accommodate the broad range of retail shopping activities, office and
residential uses that are normally found in the core area of a City and
where development is allowed up to the property lot line with no offstreet
parking facilities required of the private development. The
zoning of property to the "MSD" Main Street District is intended to
provide development opportunities consistent with the existing
character within the core of downtown Republic. Downtown Republic is
the original commercial district within the City. The majority of
buildings in the core of downtown have been constructed close to the
public right-of-way. Public parking lots are available and on-street
parking is present to serve the downtown businesses. The result is a
Section
405.145
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.148
AO:420
character unique to downtown that is not found elsewhere in the City.
This district provides for the majority of retail uses, while encouraging
an active streetscape with a pedestrian friendly shopping environment.
This district restricts automobile oriented uses and is intended to allow
multi-story buildings with office and residential uses above the ground
floor level. In addition, the district is intended to allow flexibility from
the conventional development standards found elsewhere in the City.
B. Uses Permitted.
1. Furniture and home furnishings stores.
2. Electronics and appliance stores.
3. Food and beverage stores.
4. Health and personal care stores.
5. Clothing and clothing accessories stores.
6. Sporting goods, hobby and music stores.
7. General merchandise stores.
8. Miscellaneous store retailers such as florists, office supplies,
stationery stores and gift stores, novelty stores, souvenir stores,
used merchandise stores, pet and pet supply stores, art dealers.
9. Publishing industries.
10. Motion picture theaters.
11. Broadcasting stations.
12. Finance and insurance offices.
13. Real estate, rental and leasing services.
14. Professional, scientific and technical services.
15. Administrative and support services.
16. Educational services.
17. Health care and social assistance.
18. Performing arts.
19. Museums, historical sites and similar institutions.
20. Food services and drinking places.
21. Personal and laundry services.
22. Religious, grantmaking, civic, professional and similar
organizations.
Section
405.148
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.148
AO:421
Section 405.150. "C-1" Local Commercial District Regulations.
[Ord. No. 03-56 §1, 8-25-2003; Ord. No. 04-19 §1, 3-8-2004]
23. Executive, legislative and other general government support.
24. Postal services.
25. Public parks and playgrounds, including public recreation or
service buildings and publicly-owned swimming pools.
C. Height And Area Regulations. The height and area regulations set forth
in Article V shall be observed.
D. Design Standards.
1. Parking and loading requirements. Off-street parking and loading
spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for
specific uses set forth in Article VI.
2. Landscaping and open space regulations. Landscaping and open
space regulations shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements for specific uses set forth in Article X.
3. Screening and bufferyard requirements. Screening and bufferyard
requirements shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements for specific uses set forth in Article XI.
4. Sign regulations. Sign regulations shall be provided in accordance
with the requirements for specific uses set forth in Chapter 415.
5. Additional district provisions. Additional provisions relating to
exterior lighting, accessory buildings, stormwater regulations and
access are provided in Article VII.
E. Use Limitations. No outdoor storage or sale of merchandise or material
is allowed in this district.
F. Site Plan Review. Development in the Main Street District shall be
subject to site plan review requirements and procedures. Building
materials will be reviewed with respect to the design guidelines in the
Main Street District. Facades and outdoor seating will be reviewed
according to the facade design guidelines and to ensure that safety and
efficient pedestrian movement on City sidewalks is maintained.
A. Purpose. The intent of the "C-1" Commercial District is to permit retail
and service related business with a compatible location adjacent to
similar uses.
B. Uses Permitted.
1. Automobile parts and accessory stores when entirely enclosed
within the building.
2. Accessory building or use.
Section
405.148
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.150
AO:422
3. Bar or tavern, provided that the premises of which is located not
less than five hundred from the boundary of any R district, a church
or similar place of worship or a public school.
4. Bowling alley; dance halls; video game arcades; billiard parlors;
roller-skating; ice-skating; or movie theaters, excluding drive-in
theaters.
5. Churches or other places of worship, including parish houses,
Sunday schools and temporary outdoor revivals, on a minimum of
two (2) acres of land, to provide sufficient land area for off-street
parking, bufferyards and proper site design to lessen impact on
adjoining residential neighborhoods. The requirements of Article
VI and X regarding parking, loading, landscaping, and open space
shall be required. Overnight shelters shall not be permitted.
6. Convenience store, filling stations.
7. Day-care center.
8. General retail businesses including pawn shops and second-hand
stores; pet stores; print shops and photocopying establishments;
restaurants including drive-in, pick-up, and drive-up facilities;
doughnut shops; package liquor; book; tobacco; furniture;
appliance; drug; grocery; flower; jewelry; clothing.
9. Government buildings and associated uses.
10. Motel, Hotel, Inn or related place of lodging.
11. Off-street parking lot.
12. Office or office buildings including health clinics, medical doctors
and dental offices; hospitals; banks; financial institutions including
automatic teller machines and drive-thru facilities; accountants;
real-estate; engineering; architecture and other professional
service offices.
13. Personal service establishments including beauty parlors;
barbershops; custom tailoring; dry cleaning and laundry pick-up;
shoe repair; self-service laundromats; express or mailing offices;
hearing aid and eye glass shops.
14. Private schools and studios for art, dance, drama, music or
photography and private and publicly funded schools, preschools
and daycare facilities.
15. Residential uses provided such uses are located above the first
floor or behind non-residential uses so as to create a continuous
non-residential facade, on the first-floor level along all street
frontages.
Section
405.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.150
AO:423
Section 405.160. "C-2" General Commercial District Regulations.
[CC 1999 §§26-27 — 26-30; Ord. No. 04-19 §1, 3-8-2004]
16. Temporary or seasonal tents or trailers pertaining to the sale of
Christmas trees, pumpkins, plants, flowers, fruits and vegetables.
The sale of merchandise from traveling vendors under tents or
other temporary facilities are not permitted except by issuance of a
special use permit.
Temporary facilities shall not be permitted beyond a three (3)
month period per year, unless permitted as a permanent structure.
17. Temporary, portable food and drink carts or stands, etc. not to
include the use of tables or dining areas for the public. Temporary
facilities shall not be permitted beyond a three (3) month period
per year and shall further be subject to the issuance of a building
permit for such uses.
18. Undertaking establishments.
19. Veterinarian, dog grooming, boarding or similar place of animal
care, provided that only treatment be given to animals kept within
the building or office. No outside cages, kennels, fences,
equipment, materials, etc. associated with livestock or other large
animals shall be stored on the premises.
C. Height And Area Regulations. The height and area regulations set forth
in Article V shall be observed.
D. Design Standards.
1. Parking and loading requirements. Off-street parking and loading
spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for
specific uses set forth in Article VI.
2. Landscaping and open space regulations. Landscaping and open
space regulations shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements for specific uses set forth in Article X.
3. Screening and bufferyard requirements. Screening and bufferyard
requirements shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements for specific uses set forth in Article XI.
4. Sign regulations. Sign regulations shall be provided in accordance
with the requirements for specific uses set forth in Chapter 415.
5. Additional district provisions. Additional provisions relating to
exterior lighting, accessory buildings, stormwater regulations and
access are provided in Article VII.
A. Purpose. The intent of the "C-2" Commercial District is to permit less
restrictive commercial and service related business with a compatible
Section
405.150
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.160
AO:424
location adjacent to similar uses, which are separated from residential
uses restricted.
B. Uses Permitted.
1. Any use permitted in the "C-1" Commercial District, without
restriction as to number of employees or location.
2. Automotive sales and service including body work; painting; frame
alignment; restoration or reconstruction, excluding the storage of
wrecked or scrap vehicles; parts and other partially dismantled
cars and trucks.
3. Automotive, moving and equipment rental.
4. Boat and marine sales and service.
5. Lumberyard, building and construction material sales, hardware
and home improvement stores.
6. Camper trailers, recreation vehicles sales, rental and service.
7. Campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks.
8. Churches or other places of worship, including parish houses,
Sunday schools and temporary outdoor revivals, on a minimum of
two (2) acres of land, to provide sufficient land area for off-street
parking, bufferyards and proper site design to lessen impact on
adjoining residential neighborhoods. The requirements of Article
VI and X regarding parking, loading, landscaping, and open space
shall be required. Overnight shelters shall not be permitted.
9. Commercial amusement centers including drive-in theaters;
baseball, softball and soccer fields or complexes; miniature golf;
archery ranges; batting cages; driving ranges; but not including gocart
or other motorized vehicle tracks.
10. Recycling collection centers.
11. Landscaping, plant nurseries, lawn and garden equipment sales
and service.
12. Boat, vehicle or self-storage facilities.
13. Swimming pool sales and displays.
14. Truck stops including fueling; sales; and service of commercial
freight hauling vehicles.
15. Commercial contracting offices including plumbing; electrical;
heating and air conditioning; general carpentry; cabinetry; siding
and soffit; guttering; roofing; concrete finishing and forming;
general masonry; except uses which require the outside storage of
materials associated with manufacturing related uses.
Section
405.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.160
AO:425
Section 405.165. "C-3" General Commercial District. [Ord. No.
06-58 §1, 8-14-2006]
16. Radio; cable; television; or other broadcasting studios.
17. Rental and service of commercial moving vehicles; including
trailers, towing equipment, construction and landscaping
equipment.
18. Car wash, quick lube or place of express auto service.
19. General automotive repair establishments, excluding auto-body
and painting establishments.
20. Hardware and home improvement stores, excluding the outside
storage of lumber, block and associated aggregate products.
21. Farm equipment and supplies, implement sales and service,
livestock and animal feed.
22. Pre-manufactured storage buildings and accessory structures
display and sales.
C. Height And Area Regulations. The height and area regulations set forth
in Article V shall be observed.
D. Design Standards.
1. Parking and loading requirements. Off-street parking and loading
spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for
specific uses set forth in Article VI.
2. Landscaping and open space regulations. Landscaping and open
space regulations shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements for specific uses set forth in Article X.
3. Screening and bufferyard requirements. Screening and bufferyard
requirements shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements for specific uses set forth in Article XI.
4. Sign regulations. Sign regulations shall be provided in accordance
with the requirements for specific uses set forth in Chapter 415.
5. Additional district provisions. Additional provisions relating to
exterior lighting, accessory buildings, stormwater regulations and
access are provided in Article VII.
A. Intent. The zoning of property as "C-3" is intended to provide for retail
and wholesale sales and services with only minor restrictions.
B. Uses Permitted.
1. Residential building construction.
2. Heavy and civil engineering construction.
Section
405.160
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.165
AO:426
3. Specialty trade contractors.
4. Merchant wholesalers, durable goods.
5. Merchant wholesalers non-durable goods.
6. Motor vehicle and parts dealers.
7. Furniture and home furnishings stores.
8. Electronics and appliance stores.
9. Building material and garden equipment and supplies dealers.
10. Food and beverage stores.
11. Health and personal care stores.
12. Gasoline stations.
13. Clothing and clothing accessories stores.
14. Sporting goods, hobby and music stores.
15. General merchandise stores.
16. Miscellaneous store retailers such as florists, office supplies,
stationery, gift stores, novelty and souvenir stores, used
merchandise stores, pet and pet supplies stores, art dealers,
manufactured home dealers, tobacco stores.
17. Non-store retailers.
18. Truck transportation.
19. Transit and ground passenger transportation.
20. Support activities for transportation.
21. Postal service.
22. Couriers and messengers.
23. Publishing industries.
24. Motion picture and sound recording industries.
25. Broadcasting.
26. Internet publishing and broadcasting.
27. Telecommunications.
28. Internet service providers.
29. Finance and insurance offices.
30. Real estate, rental and leasing.
Section
405.165
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.165
AO:427
Section 405.170. "M-1" Light Industrial District Regulations. [CC
1999 §§26-27 — 26-30]
31. Professional, scientific and technical services.
32. Management of companies and enterprises.
33. Administrative and support services.
34. Educational services.
35. Health care and social assistance.
36. Arts, entertainment and recreation.
37. Accommodation and food services.
38. Repair and maintenance.
39. Personal and laundry services.
40. Religious, grantmaking, civic, professional and similar
organizations.
41. Executive, legislative and other general government services.
C. Height And Area Regulations. The height and area regulations set forth
in Article V shall be observed.
D. Design Standards.
1. Parking and loading requirements. Off-street parking and loading
spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for
specific uses set forth in Article VI.
2. Landscaping and open space regulations. Landscaping and open
space regulations shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements for specific uses set forth in Article X.
3. Screening and bufferyard requirements. Screening and bufferyard
requirements shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements for specific uses set forth in Article XI.
4. Sign regulations. Sign regulations shall be provided in accordance
with the requirements for specific uses set forth in Chapter 415.
5. Additional district provisions. Additional provisions relating to
exterior lighting, accessory buildings, stormwater regulations and
access are provided in Article VII.
E. Site Plan Review. Development in the "C-3" District shall be subject to
site plan review requirements and procedures.
Section
405.165
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.170
AO:428
A. Purpose. The intent of the "M-1" Light Industrial District is to provide a
designated location for restricted manufacturing and related uses
which are separated from dissimilar uses.
B. Uses Permitted.
1. Any use permitted in a "C-2" Zoning District.
2. Industrial and manufacturing plants where the process of
manufacturing or the treatment of materials is such that only a
nominal amount of dust, odor, gas, smoke or noise is emitted and
not more than fifty percent (50%) of the lot is used for the open
storage of products, materials or equipment.
3. Any establishment which provides for the manufacture and/or
shipping of products or goods relating to the manufacturing of
brooms; candles; carpet; clothing; creamery or dairy products;
bottling plant, furniture; ice; insulation; various machines;
mattresses; pharmaceuticals; paper; textiles; or similar
manufacturing of preassembled parts.
4. Any establishment which provides supplies and/or services
primarily to commercial and industrial customers, such as
janitorial services, sign shops, packaging or shipping service.
5. Agriculture implements sales and service, excluding the storage of
scrap or wrecked tractors; parts; and associated agriculture
implements.
6. Auto or vehicle racing tracks, including go-carts, motorcycle or
relating events or attractions given that such use is located not
less, than two thousand (2,000) feet from any residential district.
7. Mobile home, manufactured or modular homes sales, excluding the
manufacturing of the same.
8. Communication towers. Communication towers shall be located in
accordance with the following restrictions:
a. Setbacks. The following setbacks shall apply to all
communication towers:
i. The minimum setback from all property lines shall equal to
fifty percent (50%) of the height of the tower.
ii. The minimum setback from the edge of any existing or
planned right-of-way shall be eighty (80) feet.
iii. The minimum setback from any residential district shall be
two hundred (200) feet.
iv. Peripheral supports and guy anchors for towers may be
located within required setbacks, provided that they shall
be entirely within the boundaries of the property on which
Section
405.170
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.170
AO:429
the tower is located and shall be no closer than fifty (50)
feet from any residential district.
b. Height. The principal support structure for communication
towers shall be permitted to exceed the height limit of the
zoning district in which it is located, provided that setback
standards of this section shall apply.
c. A security fence or wall of not less than seven (7) feet in height
from finished grade shall be constructed around each
communication tower and around each guy anchor and
peripheral support. The fence or wall shall comply with the
following standards:
i. Access to the tower shall be through a locked gate in the
required fence or wall.
ii. If the communication tower is adjacent to a residential
district or a lot occupied by a residential dwelling unit, the
required fencing shall consist of a masonry wall or solid
fence with trees and shrubs planted along the exterior of
the fence or wall. At least one (1) tree and two (2) shrubs
shall be required for each thirty linear feet of wall or
fencing.
iii. If high voltage is necessary for the operation of the
communication tower and it is present in ground grid or in
the tower, signs located every twenty (20) feet and
attached to the fence or wall shall display in large bold
letters the following: "HIGH VOLTAGE — DANGER"
d. Airport approach paths. Communication towers shall not
encroach into or through any public or private airport
approach path as established by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA).
e. Removal of obsolete towers. All obsolete or unused
communication towers shall be removed within twelve (12)
months of cessation of use by the legal owner of the tower, at
the expense of the owner.
f. Electromagnetic radiation. Communication towers shall
comply with all applicable Federal Communication
Commission (FCC) standards for non-ionizing electromagnetic
radiation (NIER).
g. Locating on existing towers. Telecommunication equipment
shall be permitted to be located on top of existing towers, such
as water, radio, television or other communication towers.
Minimum setbacks shall only apply to additional peripheral
support structures.
Section
405.170
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.170
AO:430
Section 405.180. "M-2" Heavy Industrial District Regulations.
h. Monopole telecommunication towers. In an effort to reduce the
visual blight and wasteful use of land, applicants requesting
zoning approval to construct telecommunication towers shall
provide justification to the City for the construction of a guyed
or lattice tower instead of installing a monopole tower.
Property not already zoned for telecommunications towers
shall be evaluated for such a use based upon the composition
and use of the land intended for the location of the tower.
Guyed or lattice tower construction may be grounds for denial
of a zoning change or special use permit.
i. Co-location. Co-location potentialy reduces visual blight and
the wasteful use of land by reducing the number of
telecommunication towers. Co-location of wireless
communications equipment for more than one (1) provider at a
single communications facility shall be provided upon
application for a change in zoning classification for the
construction of a telecommunication tower. Failure to provide
for co-location on towers may be grounds for denial of a zoning
change or special use permit.
C. Height And Area Regulations. The height and area regulations set forth
in Article V shall be observed.
D. Design Standards.
1. Parking and loading requirements. Off-street parking and loading
spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for
specific uses set forth in Article VI.
2. Landscaping and open space regulations. Landscaping and open
space regulations shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements for specific uses set forth in Article X.
3. Screening and bufferyard requirements. Screening and bufferyard
requirements shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements for specific uses set forth in Article XI.
4. Sign regulations. Sign regulations shall be provided in accordance
with the requirements for specific uses set forth in Chapter 415.
5. Additional district provisions. Additional provisions relating to
exterior lighting, accessory buildings, stormwater regulations and
access are provided in Article VII.
A. Purpose. The intent of the "M-2" Heavy Industrial District is to provide
a designated location for manufacturing and industrial related uses
which shall be separated from dissimilar uses, where the potentially
damaging aspects of such are less likely.
Section
405.170
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.180
AO:431
Section 405.185. (Reserved)78
B. Uses Permitted.
1. Any use permitted in a "M-1" Zoning district.
2. The manufacturing of industrial supplies or materials associated
with acid manufacturing; batteries; steel; tin; copper; zinc; cement;
lime; gypsum; explosives; fertilizer; lumber; asphalt shingles;
alcohol; ammonia; chemicals; glue; paint; automobiles; motors;
tires; belts; rubber; plastics; soap; tar; or associated manufacturing
facilities.
3. Any industrial or storage operation pertaining to the
manufacturing of cement; lime; gypsum; plaster; asphalt; concrete;
aggregate; masonry supply; sand; brick; tile; block; or the
production of products from similar materials.
4. Auto wrecking lots; junk yards; landfills; tank manufacturing and
storage yards; and scrap iron yards.
5. Uses relating to the rendering of fat; feed grinding and processing;
livestock auction sales; poultry raising, processing, packing or
dressing; stockyards; or slaughter houses.
C. Height And Area Regulations. The height and area regulations set forth
in Article V shall be observed.
D. Design Standards.
1. Parking and loading requirements. Off-street parking and loading
spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for
specific uses set forth in Article VI.
2. Landscaping and open space regulations. Landscaping and open
space regulations shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements for specific uses set forth in Article X.
3. Screening and bufferyard requirements. Screening and bufferyard
requirements shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements for specific uses set forth in Article XI.
4. Sign regulations. Sign regulations shall be provided in accordance
with the requirements for specific uses set forth in Chapter 415.
5. Additional district provisions. Additional provisions relating to
exterior lighting, accessory buildings, stormwater regulations and
access are provided in Article VII.
78.Editor’s Note: Former Section 405.185, “C-O” Commercial Overlay District, adopted and/
or amended 11-14-2005 by Ord. No. 05-83 § 1, and as further amended, was repealed
2-5-2019 by Ord. No. 19-01.
Section
405.180
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.185
AO:432
ARTICLE IV
A Planned Development District
Section 405.190. Authority. [Ord. No. 18-10, 2-13-201879]
Upon enactment of an ordinance by the City Council repealing and
replacing the prior Planned Development District procedures, a
development plan for a Planned Development District may be approved in
any district in the City of Republic, subject to the procedures and standards
in this Article.
Section 405.200. Application And Review Of Existing Planned
Development District. [Ord. No. 18-10, 2-13-2018]
Those Planned Development Districts that are under development at the
time of enactment of this ordinance may continue to operate and develop
under the processes in place immediately prior to enactment of this
ordinance. The legal owner(s) of the real property or a duly authorized
representative of such owner or an individual or organization with a
legitimate contractual interest in the purchase of the subject real property
may submit an application to the Community Development Department
seeking approval to proceed with future development of the Planned
Development District under the new procedures and processes contained
in this Article. The request may be approved, approved with conditions or
disapproved. General guidance in making a determination is to assure that
a change will not negatively impact the development as initially proposed;
it shall not negatively impact adjacent property; the change will comply
generally with the conditions in this Article; and the proposal will be of
benefit and be in line with development within the City. The procedure for
amendment of a plan set forth in Section 405.270(C) may be used in making
a decision on the application.
Section 405.210. Purpose And Intent. [Ord. No. 18-10, 2-13-2018]
The purpose of the planned development regulations is to allow for
unconventional and innovative arrangements of land uses and public
facilities that, but for the provisions of these regulations, would otherwise
be difficult to develop under the conventional land use and development
regulations of the City. It is not the intent of these regulations to provide
for or facilitate the circumvention of the conventional regulations for
development for the sake of mere convenience or in any other way that does
not provide for a demonstrable public benefit based on the findings of the
City's Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council.
Section 405.220. Applicability. [Ord. No. 18-10, 2-13-2018]
A. Eligibility To Submit An Application For A Planned Development. An
application for a Planned Development shall be submitted by the legal
79.Editor's Note: Former Article IV, A Planned Development District, containing Sections
405.190 through 405.530, was repealed 2-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-10.
Section
405.190
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.220
AO:433
Section 405.230. Procedure. [Ord. No. 18-10, 2-13-2018]
owner(s) of the real property subject to the application, or by a duly
authorized representative of such owner, or by an individual or
organization with a legitimate contractual interest in the purchase of
the subject real property.
B. Eligibility Requirements For Planned Developments — Generally. A
proposal for a Planned Development shall demonstrate substantial
congruence with each of the following conditions in order to be
considered eligible for approval.
1. The proposed development plan shall involve a diverse mixture or
variation of land uses or densities which cannot be accomplished by
following the requirements set forth for conventional development
and which contains aspects of development beyond mere
convenience that necessitate use of a planned development.
2. The proposed development plan shall involve the provision of all
infrastructure deemed necessary to adequately serve the potential
development.
3. The proposed development plan shall involve design elements that
promote the City of Republic's Comprehensive Plan.
4. The proposed development plan shall involve design elements
intended to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from
fire, panic and other dangers; to promote health and the general
welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the
overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population;
to preserve features of historical significance; to facilitate the
adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools,
parks, and other public requirements.
A. Planned Developments shall proceed toward the planned
improvements, subdivision, and/or marketing according to the
following process:
1. Procedure For Rezoning. The applicant shall apply to have the
property rezoned in accordance with the hearing process set forth
in Section 405.980 of this Chapter. In addition to the legal
description of the property to be rezoned, the development plan
shall be submitted with the rezoning request and shall be subject to
review, modification and approval by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and Council as allowed in this Chapter.
2. Development Plan Review. Upon application for a rezone to
Planned Development District, the Community Development
Department shall arrange for the review of the development plan
submitted in accordance with the requirements and provisions of
Section 405.240. The Community Development Department staff
shall communicate, in writing, any known deficiencies relative to
Section
405.220
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.230
AO:434
the requirements contained herein as well as a determination of
eligibility. Upon the satisfactory completion of that review, the
Community Development Department shall arrange for all
necessary legal notices and forward the application and
development plan to the Planning and Zoning Commission for
hearing and consideration. A fee in the amount of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) shall be paid to the City at the time of submittal,
to defray the cost of review.
3. Planning And Zoning Commission Consideration. The City's
Planning and Zoning Commission will hold a public hearing
concerning the application to rezone and the development plan,
such hearing having been properly publicized as required for
zoning amendments. The purpose of the hearing is for the
Commission to find certain facts pertaining to the development
plans conformity to the requirements of this Article as well the
adopted plans of the City. Upon the closing of the public hearing,
the Commission shall render their findings and vote to make a
recommendation to the City Council concerning the approval of the
proposed Planned Development District rezone and the approval of
the development plan.
4. City Council Consideration. The City Council shall receive the
findings of facts and recommendation of the Planning and Zoning
Commission and will consider whether to approve the proposed
Planned Development District rezone by ordinance. If the Planning
and Zoning Commission has not recommended approval of the
proposed Planned Development District rezone, the ordinance
approving the rezone shall not pass except upon the affirmative
votes of at least three-quarters (3/4) of the total membership of the
City Council.
5. Rezoning And Development Plan Approval. Upon approval of the
rezoning to Planned Development District, the development plan
submitted with the rezoning request shall become the general
guiding document for the uses to be established in the Planned
Development District. The final plat shall be in substantial
conformance with the development plan.
6. Infrastructure Design And Construction. Approved Planned
Developments shall be allowed to proceed toward the design and
engineering of all necessary public improvements in accordance
with the adopted standards and specifications of the City of
Republic. All designs shall be reviewed and approved by the
Community Development Department and Public Works
Department prior to permitting and construction. No construction
shall commence except upon the issuance of a permit for the work
to be performed.
7. Platting. Upon the acceptance of the construction of all permitted
infrastructure, the Planned Development District may be
Section
405.230
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.230
AO:435
Section 405.240. Development Plans. [Ord. No. 18-10, 2-13-2018]
subdivided by the approval and recording of a final plat pursuant
to the requirements and procedures of Chapter 410 of the City of
Republic's Municipal Code of Ordinances.
8. Building Permits. Upon the approval and recording of a final plat or
else upon the securing of all necessary public infrastructure by an
appropriate financial surety, permits may be issued for the
construction of buildings within the Planned Development District,
provided that conditions pertaining to protection of life and safety
sufficiently present as determined by the various code officials of
the City, including the Building Code and Fire Code officials.
A. Minimum Requirements. Development plans accompanying an
application for a new Planned Development District will be reviewed by
City staff in order to verify satisfaction of the following minimum
requirements prior to being forwarded to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for consideration:
1. Identification Of Permitted Land Uses. All land uses to be permitted
within the Planned Development shall be identified in sufficient
detail with regard to density, intensity and location of the use. In
this context, "sufficient detail" means a description of the permitted
land use so as to explicitly limit the use of land in a way that is
meaningful for the purposes of making determinations as to
whether the particular land in question may be used for a specific
purpose. Overly vague or ambiguous land use descriptions that
evade predictability and certainty as to what sorts of land uses may
be permitted shall not be allowed.
2. Identification Of Circulation Elements. The proposed development
plan shall articulate a plan for the circulation of vehicle and
pedestrian traffic throughout the development. The circulation plan
shall include sufficient detail with regard to the general location of
these elements as well as their capacities and connections to
existing facilities of the same or similar purpose.
3. Identification Of Utility Sources. The proposed development plan
shall accurately identify the location of proposed sources and any
necessary extension or expansion of utilities to serve the identified
land uses. It is not the intent of this provision to require the specific
design or engineering of the extension or expansion of these
utilities, rather it is merely to ensure that the necessary services
are available and of adequate capacity, either presently or as a
result of planned expansion, to serve the proposed development.
4. Identification Of Transitional Elements. The proposed development
plan shall identify the general location and type of transitional
elements between dissimilar or normally incompatible land uses.
These transitional elements may include screens, bufferyards, or
Section
405.230
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.240
AO:436
Section 405.250. Infrastructure Design And Construction. [Ord. No.
18-10, 2-13-2018]
other architectural features that serve to lessen the visual,
auditory, and olfactory impacts of land uses having significant
differences in intensity.
5. Identification Of Other Amenities. The proposed development plan
shall identify the general location and type of other planned
amenities intended to serve the public interest, a sense of
community, and/or the purpose of this Article.
B. Evaluation Criteria. The development plans proposed for any Planned
Development shall be evaluated by the City staff, the Planning and
Zoning Commission, and the City Council with regard to the following
criteria:
1. Satisfaction of the purpose and intent of this Article.
2. Promotion of the public interest and a sense of community.
3. Conformity with the adopted Comprehensive Plan of the City of
Republic.
4. The ability of the available or planned infrastructure to provide
adequate service to the proposed development.
5. The estimated impact of the proposed development on surrounding
properties based on facts found pertaining to the purpose and
intent of this Article.
6. A reliable and valid estimate of the costs and benefits of the
proposed development upon the community.
7. The duly authorized partnership of the public and private sectors
for mutual benefit.
C. Rights/Privileges Conferred Upon Development Plan Approval. The
approval of a Planned Development District by ordinance of the City
Council of the City of Republic shall confer upon the applicant and any
successive owners of the real property the conditional right to develop
the land in accordance with the approved development plan.
A. Procedure. The design, review and permitting of the construction of the
infrastructure planned for the development shall proceed according to
the provisions of Chapter 410 of the City of Republic's Municipal Code
of Ordinances.
B. Evaluation Criteria. Permits for land disturbance or construction of any
improvements to the real property shall be not be issued except upon a
determination by the Community Development Department that the
designs are in substantial conformity to the approved development
Section
405.240
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.250
AO:437
Section 405.260. Platting. [Ord. No. 18-10, 2-13-2018]
plan. Substantial conformity shall be determined according to the
following criteria:
1. Conformity to the arrangement and type of land uses articulated by
the approved development plan.
2. Conformity to the circulation plan articulated by the approved
development plan.
3. Conformity to the Standards and Specifications for Public
Improvements.
4. Conformity to the transitional elements articulated by the approved
development plan.
5. Conformity to the applicable minimum requirements of the City of
Republic's Municipal Code of Ordinances or other adopted codes or
laws of the City, State, or Federal governments.
6. Conformity to any other amenities or design elements articulated
by the approved development plan.
If the Community Development Department determines the design of the
development to not be in substantial conformity, the Community
Development Director and/or their designee shall transmit such findings,
in writing, to the applicant along with a statement of the specific areas
found to be in non-conformity. A determination of non-conformity may be
appealed to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to the provisions of Article
XII of Chapter 405 of the City of Republic's Municipal Code of Ordinances.
C. Amendments To The Plan. Minor amendments to the development plan
shall be submitted for staff review and approval. If staff determines that
the changes are a substantial change to the development plan then the
matter may be referred to Council to approve, amend or deny the
proposed changes. Amendments to the approved development plan may
be forward to the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council
according to the same procedure for original adoption.
A. Tentative Plat Approval. The Development Plan approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission may serve as a preliminary plat. If a
more specific and detailed preliminary plat is required by either the
Community Development Director or the applicant, such preliminary
plat shall conform to the requirements of Article III of Chapter 410 and
shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
B. Final Plat Approval. Upon the satisfactory completion of the
construction of all required infrastructure and other site elements or
amenities, or else by the security of the same by an appropriate
financial surety, the applicant may submit a final plat document in
Section
405.250
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.260
AO:438
Section 405.270. through Section 405.530. (Reserved)
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 410 of the City of Republic's
Municipal Code of Ordinances.
Section
405.260
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.270
AO:439

ARTICLE V
Height and Area Requirements, Exceptions and Modifications
Section 405.540. Height and Area Regulations Established — Chart.
[Ord. No. 03-56 §1, 8-25-2003; Ord. No. 04-19 §1, 3-8-2004; Ord. No.
04-64 §1, 10-11-2004; Ord. No. 07-38 §1, 5-29-2007]
The required height and area regulations are established and shown on the
following chart which is part of Article V.80
Section 405.545. Height and Area Exceptions and Conditions. [Ord.
No. 03-56 §1, 8-25-2003; Ord. No. 04-19 §1, 3-8-2004; Ord. No.
07-38 §1, 5-29-2007]

[Ord. No. 17-06 § 1, 1-17-2017]

405.540 Height And Area Regulations Established -- Chart

Zone standards
Standard
AG
R-1L
R-1M
R-1H
R-1Z
R-2
R-3
C-1
C-2
M-1
M-2
R1-MH
Min. Lot Size (sq. ft.)
3
acres
12,000
9,000
7,000
5,000
10,000
2,500
-
-
-
-
6,000
Front Setback
25'
25'
25'
25'
25'
25'
25'
25' (3)
15' (1)
15' (1)
15' (1)
15' (1)
Rear Setback
25'
25'
25'
25'
25'
25'
25'
25'
15' (6)
15' (6)
15' (7)
30' (7)
Side Street Setback
25'
25' (12)
25' (12)
25' (12)
25'
25'
25'
25' (3)
15'
15'
15'
15'
Interior Side Yard
Setback
6'
6' (9)
6' (9)
6' (9)
6' (9)
0(4)
6'
15' (6)
6' (6)
6' (6)
15' (7)
15' (7)
Min. Lot Width
100'
100'
80'
70'
60'
45'
85'
70'
--
--
--
--
Min. Cul-de-sac
Lot Width
60'
80' (10)
70' (10)
60' (10)
40' (10)
40' (10)
80' (10)
60' (10)
--
--
--
--
Min. Lot Depth
200'
110'
100'
90'
80'
100'
100'
100'
--
--
--
--
Max. Lot Coverage
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
80%
90%
90%
90%
90%
Min. Distance
Between Structures
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
15'
--
--
--
--
Max. Building
Height
--
3
stories(5)
3
stories(5)
3
stories(5)
3
stories(5)
3
stories(5)
3
stories(5)
3
stories(5)
(8)
(8)
(8)
(8)
NOTES:
The coordinating notes (subscript 1-12) concerning this table are contained in Section 405.545: Height and Area Exceptions and
Conditions.

[Ord. No. 03-56 §1, 8-25-2003; Ord. No. 04-19 §1, 3-8-2004; Ord. No. 04-64 §1, 10-11-2004; Ord. No. 07-38 §1, 5-29-2007]






(1) The minimum front yard setback established in Section 405.540 shall
apply except:
a. Where a structure or dwelling is to be constructed on a lot or parcel
of land that is within one hundred (100) feet of an existing
structure or dwelling unit on both sides, the minimum front yard
setback shall be an average of the two (2) closest front corners of
the adjacent structures; or
b. Where a structure or dwelling is to be constructed on a lot or parcel
of land that is within one hundred (100) feet of an existing building
on one (1) side only, such dwelling or structure may be constructed
as close to the street as the existing adjacent building, with
exception to a corner lot, in which the exception shall not apply.
(2) (Reserved)
(3) The front yard and side street setback can be reduced to fifteen (15)
feet when off street parking is provided in the rear of the main structure
or dwelling unit(s).
(4) The dwelling unit shall be placed on one (1) interior side property line
with a zero (0) setback and the dwelling unit setback on the other
interior side property line shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet, excluding
the connecting elements such as fences, walls and trellises, but
including covered porches, patios and storage spaces which are part of
the principal structure. Non-zero lot line dwelling units shall comply
with the interior side yard setbacks of the appropriate single-family
residential district.
(5) No building shall exceed three (3) stories above grade. Upper story
(third (3rd) story) windows shall not face onto an adjacent property
owner's private space if within a less intensive zoning district, unless a
setback of fifty (50) feet is provided and a vegetative buffer is provided
in accordance with Section 405.900(C) Option 4.
80.Editor's Note: The Height and Area Regulations Table is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
Section
405.540
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.545
AO:441
Section 405.550. Generally.
(6) The minimum interior side or rear yard setback shall be as established
in Section 405.540 unless:
a. The structure is part of a planned commercial complex or center, in
which case the setback shall not apply; or
b. The premises is located adjacent to a residential zoning district, in
which case the minimum side yard setback shall be twenty-five (25)
feet.
(7) The minimum interior side or rear yard setback shall be as established
in Section 405.540 unless the premises is located adjacent to a
residential zoning district, in which case the minimum side yard
setback shall be thirty-five (35) feet in a "M-1" District; and fifty (50)
feet in a "M-2" District.
(8) No maximum building height unless the structure is adjacent to a
single-family residential district, in which case the height of the
structure shall remain below a forty-five degree (45°) bulk plane as
measured from the boundary of the adjacent residential district.
(9) The minimum interior side yard setback shall not apply to parcel
combinations or parcels where residential structures are constructed
across a common property line, in which ownership of both lots are the
same and the possibility of future subdivision is eliminated. Parcels in
which residential structures are proposed for construction across
common property lines must comply with the City's Subdivision
Regulations.
(10) The minimum lot width on a cul-de-sac shall be measured across the
front of the lot at the radius of the twenty-five (25) feet setback.
(11) The maximum density allowable may be increased in accordance with
Section 405.140(E)—Request for an increase in density.
(12) For corner lots at the intersection of two local class thoroughfares, the
side street setback shall be fifteen (15) feet. For corner lots at the
intersection of a local class thoroughfare with a collector class
thoroughfare, the side street setback shall be twenty (20) feet. For all
other intersections, the side street setback shall be twenty-five (25)
feet. [Ord. No. 17-06 § 1, 1-17-2017]
A. Where a lot of record at the time of the effective date of this ordinance
has less area or width than herewith required in the district in which it
is located, said lot may nonetheless be used for a single-family dwelling
use permitted in the district in which it is located.
B. Where a use is permitted in a less restrictive district in which the
property is zoned, the use shall be subject to the area regulations of
similar and appropriate districts. Determination of which shall be based
Section
405.545
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.550
AO:442
Section 405.560. Height Limitations. [CC 1999 §26-44]
on use and the closest lot size, without exceeding the minimum
requirements for that district. When single-family is permitted, the area
regulations for the "R1-M" shall be apply.
C. Minimum lot width on a cul-de-sac shall be measured at the building
setback as established in Section 405.540.
A. The height limitations of this Chapter shall not apply to:
1. Church spires.
2. Belfries.
3. Monuments.
4. Water towers.
5. Tanks.
6. Fire towers.
7. Stage towers
8. Cooling towers.
9. Ornamental towers and spires below fifty (50) feet in height.
10. Radio and television towers, antennae or aerials below fifty (50)
feet in height.
11. Chimneys.
12. Elevator bulkheads.
13. Smoke stacks.
14. Conveyors.
15. Flagpoles.
16. Communication towers shall comply with the regulations set forth
in Section 405.170(B)(8).
B. Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or
schools, when permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not
exceeding sixty (60) feet, and churches may be erected to a height not
exceeding seventy-five (75) feet when the required side and rear yards
are each increased by at least one (1) foot for each one (1) foot of
additional building height above the height limit otherwise provided in
the district in which the building is located.
C. Buildings that are to be used for storage purposes only may exceed the
maximum number of stories that are permitted in the district in which
Section
405.550
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.560
AO:443
they are located, but such buildings shall not exceed the number of feet
of building height permitted in such district.
Section
405.560
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.560
AO:444
ARTICLE VI
Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
Section 405.570. Generally. [CC 1999 §26-51; Ord. No. 04-19 §1,
3-8-2004]
A. At the time of erection of a new structure, or at the time of enlargement
or change in use of an existing structure within any district in the City,
the minimum off-street parking or loading spaces shall be provided as
established below:
1. Automotive sales and service; new and used motor vehicles, mobile
homes, trailers, and rental establishments. One (1) parking space
for each four hundred (400) square feet of enclosed total building
floor area, plus one (1) parking space for each three thousand
(3,000) square feet of open sales or lot area.
2. Automotive washing establishments and car washes. Queuing
spaces for waiting automobiles equal to two (2) times the maximum
capacity for each wash rack, measured by the greatest number of
automobiles undergoing some phase of laundering at the same time
plus one (1) parking space for each two (2) employees.
3. Bowling alley. Five (5) parking spaces for each alley.
4. Business, professional or public office building, studio, bank,
medical or dental clinic. Three (3) parking spaces plus one (1)
additional parking space for each four hundred (400) square feet of
floor area over one thousand (1,000) square feet.
5. Church or temple. One (1) parking space for each eight (8) seats in
the main auditorium.
6. Commercial or light manufacturing office/warehouse space, or selfstorage
for purposes solely related to dispatching work, clerical
work or personal storage not related to retail sales or other uses
indicated elsewhere. Three (3) parking spaces plus one (1) parking
space for each employee employed therein.
7. Community center, library, museum or art gallery. Ten (10) parking
spaces plus one (1) additional space for each three hundred (300)
square feet of floor area in excess of two thousand (2,000) feet.
8. Dance or gymnastics studio, dance hall, assembly or exhibition hall
without fixed seats. One (1) parking space for each five (5) persons
based upon designed maximum occupancy.
9. Dance or gymnastics studio, dance hall, assembly or exhibition hall
with fixed seats. One (1) parking space for each five (5) seats.
10. Furniture or appliance store, hardware store, wholesale
establishments, machinery or equipment sales and service,
clothing or shoe repair or service shop. Two (2) parking spaces plus
Section
405.570
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.570
AO:445
one (1) additional parking space for each three hundred (300)
square feet of floor area over one thousand (1,000) feet.
11. Gas station, convenience stores or similar retail/service
establishment. One (1) parking space for each three hundred fifty
(350) square feet of total building floor area plus one (1) parking
space for each three (3) seats of on-site seating, but not less than
ten (10) parking spaces shall be provided. Service area at gas
pumps shall not be counted as parking spaces.
12. Golf club. One (1) parking space for each five (5) members.
13. High schools, colleges, universities or trade schools. One (1)
parking space for each employee, plus two (2) parking spaces for
each three (3) commuting students during the greatest attendance
period. All parking for additional uses shall be calculated
separately.
14. Hospital. One (1) parking space for each four (4) beds.
15. Hotel. One (1) parking space for each three (3) sleeping rooms or
suites plus one (1) parking space for each two hundred (200)
square feet of commercial floor area contained therein.
16. Manufacturing or industrial establishment, research or testing
laboratory, creamery, bottling plant, warehouse or similar
establishment. One (1) parking space for every two (2) employees
on the maximum working shift plus parking space to accommodate
all trucks and other vehicles used in connection therewith.
17. Mortuary or funeral home. One (1) parking space for each fifty (50)
square feet of floor space in slumber rooms, parlors or individual
funeral service rooms.
18. Printing or plumbing shop or similar service establishment. One (1)
parking space for each three (3) persons employed therein.
19. Private club or lodge. One (1) parking space for every ten (10)
members.
20. Restaurant, nightclub, cafe or similar recreation or amusement
establishment. One (1) parking space for each one hundred (100)
square feet of floor area.
21. Retail store or personal service establishment, except as otherwise
specified herein. One (1) parking space for each two hundred (200)
square feet of floor area.
22. Rooming house or boarding house. One (1) parking space for each
two (2) sleeping rooms.
23. Sanatorium, convalescent home, nursing home or assisted care
facility, not including retirement communities. One (1) parking
Section
405.570
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.570
AO:446
Section 405.580. Computing Parking Spaces. [CC 1999 §26-52]
Section 405.590. Location. [CC 1999 §26-53]
space for each three (3) beds, plus one (1) for each two (2)
employees on the longest shift.
24. School (except high school or college). One (1) parking space for
each ten (10) seats in the auditorium or main assembly room, or
one (1) parking space for each classroom, whichever is greater.
25. Sports arena, stadium or gymnasium (except school). One (1)
parking space for each five (5) seats or seating spaces.
26. Theater or auditorium (except school). One (1) parking space for
each five (5) seats or bench seating spaces.
27. Tourist home or motel. One (1) parking space for each sleeping
room or suite.
A. In computing the number of such parking spaces required, the
following rules shall govern:
1. Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall
be construed to be the nearest whole number.
2. The parking space requirement for a use not specifically mentioned
herein shall be the same as required for a use of similar nature as
determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
3. Whenever a building or use constructed or established after the
effective date of this Chapter is changed or enlarged in floor area,
number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity
or otherwise, to create a need for an increase of ten percent (10%)
or provided on the basis of the enlargement or change. Whenever a
building or use existing prior to the effective date of this Chapter is
enlarged to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more in floor area or
in the area used, said building or use shall then and thereafter
comply with the parking requirements set forth herein.
4. In the case of mixed or joint uses, the parking spaces required shall
equal the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed
separately.
A. All parking spaces required herein shall be located on the same lot with
the building or use served, except that where an increase in the number
of spaces is required by a change or enlargement of use or where such
spaces are provided collectively or used jointly by two (2) or more
buildings or establishments, the required spaces may be located and
maintained not to exceed three hundred (300) feet from an institutional
building served and not to exceed five hundred (500) feet from any
other non-residential building served.
Section
405.570
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.590
AO:447
Section 405.600. General Access, Design, Surfacing and Loading
Standards. [CC 1999 §26-54; Ord. No. 03-56 §1, 8-25-2003; Ord. No.
04-19 §1, 3-8-2004; Ord. No. 04-64 §1, 10-11-2004; Ord. No. 05-23
§1, 3-28-2005; Ord. No. 19-21, 11-5-2019]
1. Up to fifty percent (50%) of the parking spaces required for:
a. Theaters, public auditoriums, bowling alleys, dance halls, night
clubs or cafes, and up to one hundred percent (100%) of the
parking spaces required for a church or school auditorium may
be provided and used jointly by
b. Banks, offices, retail stores, repair shops, service
establishments and similar uses not normally open, used or
operated during the same hours as those listed in (a) above
provided however, that written agreement thereto is properly
executed and filed as specified below.
2. In any case where the required parking spaces are not located on
the same lot with the building or use served, or where such spaces
are collectively or jointly provided and used, a written agreement
thereby assuring their retention for such purposes shall be
properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved
as to form and executed by the City Attorney, and shall be filed with
the application for a building permit.
3. Off-street parking space may be located within the required front
yard of any "C" or "M" District, but no off-street parking shall be
permitted in the required front yard of any "R" District except upon
a driveway providing access to a garage, carport, or parking area
for a dwelling.
A. Access. Each required off-street parking space shall open directly upon
an isle or driveway of such width and design as to provide safe and
efficient means of vehicular access to such parking spaces.
B. Design. Off-street parking and accessible parking facilities shall comply
with such design standards relating to curb length, stall depth, aisle
width and angle as established in Table 405.600(B)(1). Turnarounds
shall be provided in multi-family and non-residential parking lots to
allow vehicles to enter or exit the parking lot without backing from or
onto a street. In addition, parking lots shall be designed to
accommodate access off adjoining off-street parking areas.
1. Computing Parking Spaces.
Section
405.590
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.600
AO:448
COMPUTING PARKING SPACES
A B C D E F G H
Parking
angle
degrees
Curb
length
per car
(feet)
Curb
length
short
dimension
(feet)
Curb
length
long
dimension
(feet)
Stall to
back
rows
(feet)
Stall to
curb
(feet)
Aisle
width
(feet)
Back to
back
rows
(feet)
Total
width
(feet)
0 23.0 0.0 23.0 9.0 9.0 12.0 30.0 30.0
45 12.7 6.4 13.4 19.8 16.6 13.0 46.2 52.6
60 10.4 7.8 9.5 21.0 18.8 18.0 55.5 60.0
90 9.0 9.0 0.0 19.0 17.0 23.0 61.0 61.0
C. Surfacing. All off-street parking areas, ingress and egress and
circulation areas shall be composed of an asphaltic or concrete surface.
All off-street parking areas shall include concrete curb and gutter
surrounding the entire parking area and around all landscaped islands
within the parking lot.
1. Gravel or crushed stone parking areas may be permitted in "C-2,"
"M-1" or "M-2" Districts, but only in combination with automotive,
Section
405.600
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.600
AO:449
Section 405.610. Driveways and Off-Street Parking in Residential
Districts.
recreational, boat storage facilities or other related storage
facilities. Gravel or crushed stone parking areas shall not be
permitted to be installed for automotive, boat, marine, recreational
camper or related equipment sales or service.
2. Uses located in the General Commercial ("C-3") Zoning District or a
less restrictive zone may utilize gravel or crushed stone for the
storage of materials, equipment, or tractor trailers. All such areas
of gravel or crushed stone surface shall be prohibited in the
required front yard.
3. Automotive repair or similar uses located in the General
Commercial ("C-2") or a less restrictive zoning district may utilize
gravel or crushed stone for the parking of wrecked or inoperable
vehicles awaiting repair. Such parking areas are prohibited when
located within the required front or side yard adjacent to a public
street or adjoining a more restrictive zone. Regardless of location,
such parking areas shall be screened according to the
requirements of Section 405.855.
D. Site Distance. Site triangles shall be preserved in accordance with the
requirements of Section 405.910, Site Distance and Visibility.
E. Loading Design Standards.
1. All loading areas shall be accessed without requiring any backing
from or onto a public street and without any portion of a vehicle
projecting onto a public street while being loaded.
2. Every building or part thereof erected or occupied for retail
business, service, manufacturing, storage, warehousing, hotel,
mortuary, or any other use similarly involving the receipt or
distribution by vehicles of materials or merchandise shall provide
and maintain on the premises off-street loading space in the
amount of one (1) loading space for each ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or fraction thereof of floor area.
F. Drive-Through And Queuing Standards. Banks, car washes, express
automotive service, restaurants and fast-food establishments and
similar places of business which provide drive-through service shall
provide six (6) queuing spaces and one (1) space at each service
window.
A. Driveways. [Ord. No. 17-20 § 1, 6-6-2017]
1. All residential dwelling driveways and off-street areas used for
standing and maneuvering of vehicles shall be constructed of
concrete or asphalt surface driveways and shall be designed to
drain and avoid flow of water across sidewalks. Driveways in the
Section
405.600
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.610
AO:450
Agricultural (AG) zoning district may be composed of gravel or
crushed stone.
2. All residential dwelling driveways shall be at least sixteen (16) feet
wide from the street or curb to the garage or dwelling unit.
Driveways in the Agricultural (AG) zoning district may vary from
the minimum width requirement of this Section so long as requisite
off-street parking is available pursuant to the requirements of
Section 405.610(B)(1).
3. All residential dwellings located on a street classified as a collector
or greater shall provide an internal vehicle turn-around or a circle
driveway, so as to provide an alternative to backing out onto the
street.
4. All new driveways, curb cuts and driveway expansions shall be
reviewed for drainage impacts, grade changes, and potential
access restrictions by the City.
B. Off-Street Parking.
1. All residential dwelling units are to provide a minimum of two
parking spaces for each dwelling unit constructed. Driveways
constructed for single-family and two-family uses shall reserve
parking area for a minimum of two vehicles, in addition to garages
or carports.
2. All multi-family dwelling units shall provide parking spaces and
handicap parking design shall comply with the latest adopted
building codes and shall furthermore comply with the standards
elsewhere in Article VI.
3. Parking areas reserved for private homeowners association
playgrounds, pools, parks, etc. shall provide one parking space for
each ten dwelling units serviced by the common area. Parking
design shall comply with the latest adopted building codes.
Section
405.610
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.610
AO:451

ARTICLE VII
Additional District Provisions
Section 405.620. Exterior Lighting Standards.
Section 405.630. Home Occupations.
A. To reduce the spillover of light and glare on operators of motor vehicles,
pedestrians, and land uses in the proximity of the light source. This
section is not intended to apply to public street lighting, signs, seasonal
displays or emergency warning lights.
1. The following exterior lighting standards shall apply specifically to:
a. Outdoor recreational uses. Ball Diamonds, Playing Fields and
Tennis Courts lights shall have limited hours of operation and
the lights for said use shall not remain on continuously at all
times.
b. Private outdoor lights. Private outdoor lights installed by a
public utility on private property for security purposes,
provided the installation of is approved by all property owners
of residential property from the light source can be viewed
directly.
c. "R-3", "C-1", "C-2", "M-1" and "M-2" zoning districts. Exterior
lighting for multi-family, commercial or industrial uses are
permitted provided that direct illumination from any light
source does not cause illumination in excess of one-half (0.5)
lumens per square foot in any adjacent residential district.
2. The following exterior lighting standards are required of all
exterior lighting.
a. The light source or luminaire for all exterior lighting shall have
a cutoff so that the bare light bulb, lamp or light source is
completely shielded from the direct view of an observer at
ground level at a property line adjacent to a public right-of-way
or property zoned residential or, if a bufferyard is required, at
the interior bufferyard line.
b. No flickering or flashing lights shall be permitted.
c. Light sources or luminaires shall not be located within
bufferyard areas except on pedestrian walkways.
A. Designation. The regulations set forth in this Section or set forth
elsewhere in this Chapter shall be referred to as the regulations for
home occupations. A home occupation is an accessory use of a dwelling
unit that shall constitute either in whole or partly the livelihood of a
person living in the dwelling, subject to the following:
B. General Regulations. No home occupation shall be permitted that:
Section
405.620
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.630
AO:453
1. Changes the outwardly appearance of the dwelling or property,
either in part or whole;
2. Generates traffic, parking, sewerage or water use in excess of what
is normal for surrounding residential uses;
3. Creates a hazard to person or property, results in electrical
interference or becomes a nuisance;
4. Results in outside storage or display of anything associated with
the home occupation.
C. Permitted Home Occupations. The following are permitted home
occupations provided they do not violate any of the provisions of the
previous paragraph.
1. Barber shops and beauty parlors with only one chair.
2. Dressmaking, sewing and tailoring.
3. Direct sale product distribution (Amway, Avon, Tupperware, etc.)
provided parties for the purpose of selling merchandise or taking
orders shall not be held more than once a month, shall be limited to
ten (10 customers) and shall be held between the hours of 9:00
A.M. and 10:00 P.M.
4. Family day care home. Compliance with State law required. As a
further condition for receipt of a City business license, the provider
shall satisfy the City that he/she has complied with all licensing
regulations, health and safety regulations, and all other provisions
of Missouri State law regulating child day care facilities.
5. Home crafts, such as model making, rug weaving, lapidary work
and cabinet making.
6. Home offices for architects, engineers, lawyers, realtors, insurance
agents, brokers, ministers, rabbis, priests, salesman, sales
representatives, manufactures representatives, home builders,
home repair contractors and similar occupations.
7. Music and art teachers or other tutoring services limited to four
students at a time.
8. Office uses, such as computer programming, data processing,
telemarketing, desktop publishing.
9. Painting, sculpturing or writing.
10. Telephone answering.
D. Any proposed home occupation that is neither specifically permitted by
Subsection (C) shall be considered a special use and be granted or
denied by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council,
based upon consideration of the general regulations listed in
Section
405.630
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.630
AO:454
Section 405.640. Accessory Structures. [CC 1999 §26-50; Ord. No.
03-80 §1, 11-24-2003; Ord. No. 04-19 §1, 3-8-2004; Ord. No. 05-82
§1, 10-10-2005; Ord. No. 05-96 App. A §2, 12-12-2005; Ord. No.
07-38 §1, 5-29-2007; Ord. No. 10-24 §1, 6-14-2010]
Subsection (B) and issued in accordance with Article VIII, Section
405.670.
A. Permitted Accessory Structures. Any structure or use that meets the
definition in Section 405.020 may be allowed as an accessory structure.
1. Accessory structures shall include, but are not limited to, the
following permitted structures:
a. Structures incidental to a principal structure, such as storage
buildings, workshops, studios, carports or garages incidental
to a permitted use.
b. Barn.
c. Playhouse.
d. Greenhouse.
e. Pool and bathhouses.
B. Use Limitations. All accessory structures shall comply with the use
limitations applicable in the zoning district in which they are located
and with the following additional use limitations:
1. Accessory structure shall not be constructed and occupied on any
lot prior to the time of the completion of the construction of the
principal structure to which it is accessory, unless the property is
within the Agricultural Zoning District (AG).
2. Accessory structures shall not be permitted in any required front
yard.
3. No accessory structure allowed under this Section shall be used as
a residence unless a certificate of occupancy is issued for
residential use of that structure and so long as that structure is the
sole residence on the lot in which it is located.
C. Bulk, Setback And Spacing Regulations. All accessory structures shall
comply with the bulk, setback and spacing regulations applicable in the
zoning district in which they are located and with the following
additional regulations:
1. Accessory structures shall be set back a minimum of six (6) feet
from the rear lot lines. In all other districts, accessory structures
shall maintain the same rear yard as is required for the principal
structure located on the lot.
Section
405.630
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.640
AO:455
2. Accessory structures shall maintain the same side yard as is
required for the principal structure located on the lot.
3. Accessory structures shall otherwise comply with the bulk
regulations applicable in the zoning district in which they are
located.
4. Accessory structures shall not be constructed closer than ten (10)
feet of the principal structure on the lot.
5. On a corner lot, accessory structure shall not project beyond the
front yard setback line on the adjacent lots.
6. Accessory structures shall not be constructed with sidewalls in
excess of fifteen (15) feet in height measured from the finished
floor to the top plate of the wall on lots less than one (1) acre.
Accessory structures on lots greater than or equal to one (1) acre,
the maximum building height in the applicable zoning district in
Section 405.540 shall apply.
7. Accessory structures to a residence on a single property shall not
singularly or in total exceed the following structure sizes listed
below for the main floor level.
GRADUATED INCREASE IN ACCESSORY STRUCTURE SIZE
Lot Size Structure Size
0 — 7,000 square feet = 500 square feet
7,001 — 9,000 square feet = 780 square feet
9,001 — 12,000 square feet = 950 square feet
12,001 — 21,780 square feet = 1,080 square feet
21,781 — 43,560 square feet = 2,000 square feet
43,561 — 65,340 square feet = 2,500 square feet
65,341 — 87,120 square feet = 3,000 square feet
87,121 — 108,900 square feet = 3,500 square feet
108,901 — 217,800 square feet = 4,500 square feet
217,801 or more square feet = 6,000 square feet
for each five (5) acres of property owned
D. Additional Regulations For Accessory Structures. [Ord. No. 17-20 § 2,
6-6-2017]
1. All driveways accessing accessory structures from a public right-ofway
or alley shall obtain approval from the City of Republic prior to
installation of the driveway.
2. All driveways accessing an accessory structure shall be
constructed of a concrete or asphalt surface to the limits of the
front of the accessory structure. Driveways accessing accessory
Section
405.640
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.640
AO:456
Section 405.650. Street Lights. [CC 1999 §26-65]
Section 405.660. Sexually Oriented Business Locations. [Ord. No.
11-20 §2, 8-8-2011]
buildings within the Agricultural (AG) zoning district shall be
exempt from the requirement of this Subsection (D)(2).
A. The City shall refuse to authorize the installation of any street lights
that would be less than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the nearest
existing street light and more than three hundred (300) feet from the
nearest existing street light in any zoning district in the City.
B. Electric service to street lights in new major subdivisions shall be
buried underground.
C. All poles installed in the City of Republic for the specific purpose of
providing on-street lighting shall be composed of concrete, fiberglass,
steel, aluminum or other materials not composed of wood.
D. The developer of the subdivision shall bear the expense associated with
meeting these standards. These requirements shall apply only to the
installation of new street lights in major subdivisions platted after
approval of this Section.
A. The purpose of these regulations is to protect residential property
values by restricting the location of adult entertainment businesses.
Local and national studies indicate that such businesses are perceived
to have a negative impact on residential property values. Dispersion of
adult businesses is also required in order to avoid concentration of uses
that have a negative impact on adjoining property values.
1. No person shall establish a sexually oriented business within one
thousand (1,000) feet of any pre-existing primary or secondary
school, house of worship, State-licensed day care facility, public
library, public park, residence, or other sexually oriented business.
This Subsection shall not apply to any sexually oriented business
lawfully established prior to the effective date of this Section. For
purposes of this Subsection, measurements shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects,
from the closest portion of the parcel containing the sexually
oriented business to the closest portion of the parcel containing the
pre-existing primary or secondary school, house of worship, Statelicensed
day care facility, public library, public park, residence, or
other sexually oriented business.
2. Sexually oriented business shall not be located in the following
zoning classifications, Residential or Agricultural and the "C-1",
Commercial Office or Main Street District.
3. The following standards shall further apply to all sexually oriented
business establishments:
Section
405.640
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.660
AO:457
a. Frontage and access. Sexually oriented business
establishments shall have at least one hundred (100) feet of
street frontage on an arterial street.
b. Screening. The lot on which the use is located shall be
screened by a solid masonry wall, at least six (6) feet in height,
along all interior lot lines. A wall shall not be required in those
areas where complete visual screening already exists. All other
landscaping requirements relating to commercial and
manufacturing uses shall apply.
c. Building setback. The minimum setback from all public rightsof-
way for the building in which the establishment is located
shall be thirty (30) feet.
d. Signs. Sexually oriented business establishments shall be
limited to one (1) wall-mounted sign no greater that one (1)
square foot of sign per linear foot of wall length, not to exceed
a total of fifty (50) square feet. The sign shall not flash, blink, or
move by mechanical means and shall not extend above the roof
line of the building. No lighting that gives the impression of
motion or movement shall be permitted.
e. The building in which the sexually oriented business is located
shall be designed in such a fashion that all openings, entries,
and windows prevent views into such establishments from any
sidewalk, walkway, street or other public area. Furthermore,
no merchandise or pictures of products or entertainment on
the premises shall be displayed in window areas or any area
where such merchandise or pictures can be viewed from the
sidewalk in front of the building.
Section
405.660
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.660
AO:458
ARTICLE VIII
Special Use Regulations
Section 405.670. Generally. [Ord. No. 03-56 §1, 8-25-2003; Ord. No.
11-03 §1, 3-28-2011; Ord. No. 11-20 §3, 8-8-2011]
A. The City Council of the City of Republic may, by special permit following
a public hearing advertised as provided in Section 405.980 of the Code
of the City of Republic, authorize the location of any of the following
buildings or uses in any district except as herein qualified, from which
they are otherwise prohibited by this Chapter; provided however, that
appropriate conditions and safeguards shall be imposed to protect the
public welfare and to conserve and protect property and property
values in the neighborhood.
1. Any public building erected and used by any department of the City,
County, State or Federal Government.
2. Commercial amusement or recreational development for
temporary or seasonal periods.
3. Cemetery or mausoleum on a site of twenty (20) acres or more;
provided that any mausoleum shall be located at least two hundred
(200) feet from any street or lot line.
4. Hospitals and institutions, except institutions for criminals and for
persons who are mentally ill or have contagious diseases; provided
however, that such buildings may occupy not over twenty-five
percent (25%) of the total area of the lot or tract and will not have
any serious depreciating effect upon the value of the surrounding
property; and provided further, that the buildings shall be set back
from all yard lines heretofore established an additional distance of
not less than two (2) feet for every foot of building height, and that
adequate off-street parking space will be provided.
5. Greenhouses and plant nurseries.
6. Radio or television broadcasting tower or station over fifty (50) feet
in height.
7. (Reserved)
8. Guyed or lattice telecommunication towers located in "AG" or "C-2"
Districts, when complying with the regulations in Section
405.170(B)(8).
9. Monopole telecommunications towers located in any district, when
complying with the regulations in Section 405.170(B)(8).
10. Group day-care homes in any residential district with the permit to
have a five-year limit and the permit may be renewed following the
process set forth in Section 405.680. [Ord. No. 15-01 §1,
1-26-2015]
Section
405.670
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.670
AO:459
11. Commercial office uses located in any residential district which are
associated with low traffic volumes such as accounting,
architecture, drafting, engineering, law and associated
professional consulting services as approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and City Council.
12. Neighborhood markets, convenience stores and gasoline/fuel
stations located in residential districts.
13. (Reserved)
14. The sale of merchandise by traveling vendors, under tents or other
temporary facilities, located in "C-1", "C-2", "M-1" or "M-2"
Districts. Temporary facilities shall not be permitted beyond a three
(3) month period per year unless permitted as a permanent
structure.
15. Veterinary facility or similar establishment located in "C-2", "M-1"
or "M-2" Districts for the treatment and boarding of all animals,
large and small.
16. The temporary use of land for purposes associated with the support
of active public improvements projects. The use of the land must
comply with all applicable State and Federal regulations regarding
environmental quality and protection. Each special use permit for
this purpose shall be considered on a case-by-case basis and
considerations in reviewing and approving the application for a
special use permit shall include, but not be limited to:
a. Intensity of the use relative to the surrounding land uses,
especially in terms of noise, dust, odor, etc.
b. Volume and type of traffic generated by the use.
c. Potential impacts on water, air, and soil quality.
d. Whether more appropriate alternative sites exist.
e. The length of time requested for the special use of the land.
f. Potential impacts on public services including water supply,
wastewater treatment, fire protection, law enforcement, etc.
Section
405.670
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.670
AO:460
Section 405.680. Permit. [CC 1999 §26-62; Ord. No. 03-80 §1,
11-24-2003]
Before the issuance of any special permit for any of the above buildings
or uses, the application therefore shall be submitted to the City Planning
and Zoning Commission for study and report regarding the effect of such
proposed building or use upon the character of the neighborhood and upon
traffic conditions, public utility facilities and other matters pertaining to
the public health, public safety or general welfare. A processing fee in
the amount of one hundred seventy-five dollars ($175.00) shall be paid to
the City upon receipt of an application for a special use permit. No action
shall be taken upon any application for a proposed building or use above
referred to until and unless the report of the Commission has been filed,
but such report shall be made within sixty (60) days after the matter has
been referred to it. If the Planning and Zoning Commission recommends
against the issuance of the special permit, then it may be issued only by an
affirmative three-fourths (¾) vote of the City Council.
If Council determines to issue a special use permit for
temporary use of land under this paragraph, the permit
term will generally expire sixty (60) days after the
completion date of the contracted for services and/or
uses as set forth in the plans or the contract presented
to the City during the review process. If the documents
provided to the City do not state an end date for the
contracted for services and/or uses then Council may
establish the length of term for the special use permit.
Upon approving a special use permit, Council may
grant staff the discretion to extend the permit twice
for a period of no greater than ninety (90) days each.
Any extension beyond those described above shall be
subject to Council approval.
Section
405.670
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.680
AO:461

ARTICLE IX
Non-Conforming Uses81
Section 405.690. Non-Conforming Lots, Structures and Uses. [Ord.
No.04-64 §1, 10-11-04]
Section 405.700. Non-Conforming Lots of Record. [Ord. No. 04-64
§1, 10-11-2004; Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
A. General. Non-conformities are of three (3) types: non-conforming lots of
record, non-conforming structures and non-conforming uses. A
definition of each type is as follows:
1. Non-conforming lot of record. An unimproved lot which is part of a
recorded subdivision or a parcel of land, the deed to which was
recorded prior to the adoption of these regulations, and neither
said lot nor parcel complies with the lot width or area requirements
for any permitted use in the district in which it is located.
2. Non-conforming structure. An existing structure which does not
comply with the height or yard requirements which are applicable
to new structures in the zoning district in which it is located.
3. Non-conforming use. An existing use of a structure or of land which
does not comply with the use regulations applicable to new uses in
the zoning district in which it is located.
A. Non-Conforming Lots Of Record. The community development staff
shall issue a building permit for any non-conforming lot of record,
provided that:
1. Said lot is shown by a recorded plat or deed to have been owned
separately and individually from adjoining tracts of land at a time
when the creation of a lot of such size and width at such location
would not have been prohibited by any zoning regulations; and
2. Said lot has remained in separate and individual ownership from
adjoining tracts of land continuously during the entire time that the
creation of such lot has been prohibited by the applicable zoning
regulations; and
3. Said lot can meet all yard regulations for the district in which it is
located; and
4. Said lot can be served by municipal sewerage disposal; or can meet
minimum standards for on-site sewage treatment as required by
the County Health Office, should the City determine that the lot
cannot be served by the municipal disposal system.
81.Editor's Note — Ord. no. 04-64 §1, adopted October 11, 2004, repealed the provisions of
this Article and set out the new provisions herein. Former Sections 405.690 — 405.740
derived from CC 1999 §§26-56 — 26-60.
Section
405.690
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.710
AO:463
Section 405.710. Non-Conforming Structures. [Ord. No. 04-64 §1,
10-11-2004]
Section 405.720. Non-Conforming Uses. [Ord. No. 04-64 §1,
10-11-2004]
A. Authority To Continue. Any structure which is devoted to a use which is
permitted in the zoning district in which it is located on a lot which does
not comply with the applicable yard and height regulations may be
continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful.
B. Enlargement, Repairs, Alterations. Any non-conforming structure may
be enlarged, maintained, repaired or remodeled; provided however, no
such enlargement, maintenance, repair or remodeling shall either
create any additional non-conformity or increase the degree of existing
non-conformity of all or any part of such structure; providing further,
existing mobile home parks not meeting the requirements of this
Section shall be declared non-conforming and shall not be permitted to
add spaces or make any improvements inconsistent with the terms and
conditions of this Section.
C. Damage Or Destruction. In the event that any non-conforming structure
is damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of more than fifty
percent (50%) of its appraised value, such structures shall not be
restored unless it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the
zoning district in which it is located. When a structure is damaged to
the extent of fifty percent (50%) or less, no repairs or restorations shall
be made unless a building permit is obtained and restoration is actually
begun within one (1) year after the date of such partial destruction and
diligently pursued to completion.
D. Moving. No non-conforming structure shall be moved in whole or in
part for any distance whatsoever to any other location on the same or
any other lot unless the entire structure shall thereafter conform to the
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located after being
moved.
A. Non-Conforming Uses.
1. Authority to continue. Any lawfully existing non-conforming use or
part or all of a structure or any lawfully existing non-conforming
use of land may be continued, so long as otherwise lawful.
2. Ordinary repair and maintenance.
a. Normal maintenance and incidental repair or replacement,
installation or relocation of non-bearing walls, non-bearing
partitions, fixtures, wiring or plumbing may be performed on
any structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming
use.
Section
405.710
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.720
AO:464
b. Nothing in these regulations shall be deemed to prevent the
strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of a structure in
accordance with an order of the Building Inspector who is
charged with protecting the public safety and who declares
such structure to be unsafe and orders its restoration to a safe
condition.
3. Extension. A non-conforming use shall not be extended, expanded,
enlarged or increased in intensity. Such prohibited activities shall
include, without being limited to:
a. Extension of such use to any structure or land area other than
that occupied by such non-conforming use on the effective date
of these regulations (or on the effective date of subsequent
amendments hereto that cause such use to become nonconforming).
b. Extension of such use within a structure to any portion of the
floor area that was not occupied by such non-conforming use
on the effective date of theses regulations (or on the effective
date of subsequent amendments hereto that cause such use to
become non-conforming); provided however, that such use may
be extended throughout any part of such structure that was
lawfully and manifestly designed or arranged for such use on
such effective date.
4. Enlargement. No structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a
non-conforming use shall be enlarged or added to in any manner
unless such structure and the use thereof shall thereafter conform
to the regulations of the district in which it is located.
5. Damage or destruction. In the event that any structure that is
devoted in whole or in part to a non-conforming use is damaged or
destroyed by any means to the extent of more than fifty percent
(50%) of its appraised value, such structure shall not be restored
unless such structure and the use thereof shall thereafter conform
to all regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. When
such damage or destruction is fifty percent (50%) or less, no
repairs or restoration shall be made unless a building permit is
obtained, and restoration is actually begun within one (1) year after
the date of such partial destruction and is diligently pursued to
completion.
6. Moving. No structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming
use and no conforming use of land shall be moved in
whole or in part for any distance whatever to any other location on
the same or any other lot, unless the entire structure and the use
thereof or the use of land shall thereafter conform to all regulations
of the zoning district in which it is located after being so moved.
7. Change in use. If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming
use of a structure, or structure premises, may as a
Section
405.720
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.720
AO:465
Section 405.730. through Section 405.740. (Reserved)
special use be changed to another non-conforming use provided
that the Board of Adjustment, either by general rule or by making
findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is
equally appropriate or more appropriate82 to the district than the
existing non-conforming use. In permitting such change, the Board
of Adjustment may require appropriate conditions and safeguards
in accordance with Section 405.700(3). Once a change is made to a
more appropriate use, the use shall be returned to the original use
or a less appropriate use.
8. Abandonment or discontinuance. When a non-conforming use is
discontinued or abandoned for a period of twelve (12) consecutive
months, such use shall not thereafter be re-established or resumed,
and any subsequent use or occupancy of such land shall comply
with the zoning district in which such land is located.
9. Non-conforming accessory use. No use which is accessory to a
principal non-conforming use shall continue after such principal
use shall cease or terminate.
10. Non-conforming residential uses. Notwithstanding the provisions
of Section 405.720(A)(3) and Section 405.720(A)(4), any structure
which is devoted to a residential use and which is located in a
business or industrial district may be remodeled, extended,
expanded and enlarged; provided that after any such remodeling,
expansion or enlargement, such structure shall not be used to
accommodate a greater number of dwelling or lodging units than
such structure accommodated prior to any such work.
B. Status Of Special Uses.
1. Status of existing special uses. Where a use exists at the effective
date of these regulations and is permitted by these regulations only
as a special use in the zoning district in which it is located, such use
shall not be deemed to be a non-conforming use but shall, without
further action, be deemed a lawful conforming use in such zoning
district. Such special use shall not be enlarged or expanded unless
a special use application is approved as set out in Article VIII of
these regulations.
2. Status of future special uses. Any use for which a special permit has
been issued, as provided in these regulations, shall not be deemed
to be a non-conforming use, but shall83 without further action, be
deemed a lawful conforming use.
82.The words "or more appropriate" in Subsection (A)(7) were inadvertently left out of the
original ordinance.
83.The words "but shall" in Subsection (B)(2) were inadvertently left out of the original
ordinance.
Section
405.720
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.730
AO:466
ARTICLE X
Landscaping and Screening84
Section 405.750. Applicability. [Ord. No. 15-21 §1, 8-10-2015]
A. All new structures, buildings and parking lots must comply with the
landscaping and screening standards of this Article.
B. If an addition is proposed to a building; an additional building is
proposed for a lot; or if an expansion is proposed to an existing parking
lot, the existing and expanded parking lot shall comply with the
provisions of this Article.
C. Exceptions.
1. Previously approved developments which have been given a permit
to begin construction.
2. Additions to existing structures that are under ten percent (10%) of
the gross floor area of the existing structure or five thousand
(5,000) square feet, whichever is less.
3. Subdivisions that include a mix of commercial and industrial zoning
that were developed in a coordinated fashion with the intent to mix
uses and zoning without the need to buffer and screen between
these uses, such as a business park development. This exception
shall not apply to situations in which a local commercial,
commercial office, or residential district adjoins an industrial
district.
4. An application for alternative landscaping schemes is justified only
when one (1) or more of the following conditions apply. In such a
case, the applicant shall describe in a letter to the Community
Development Department which of the requirements set forth in
this Article will be met with modifications, which project conditions
justify using alternatives and how the proposed measures equal or
exceed normal compliance. The request will be evaluated on a caseby-
case basis. [Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
a. The site involves space limitations or unusually shaped parcels.
b. Topography, soil, vegetation, or other site conditions are such
that full compliance is impossible or impractical.
c. Safety considerations require a change.
84.Editor's Note: Former Art. X, Landscaping and Open Space Regulations, as adopted and
amended by CC 1999 §§26-127 — 26-143; Ord. No. 03-56 §1, 8-25-2003, and former Art. XI,
Screening and Bufferyard Requirements, as adopted and amended by CC 1999
§§26-146 — 26-152; Ord. No. 03-56 §1, 8-25-2003; Ord. No. 04-19 §1, 3-8-2004; Ord. No.
10-26 §1, 6-14-2010, were repealed 8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 15-21 §1.
Section
405.750
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.750
AO:467
Section 405.760. Permits. [Ord. No. 15-21 §1, 8-10-2015]
Section 405.770. Landscaped Area Requirements. [Ord. No. 15-21
§1, 8-10-2015]
5. Landscaping, screening and bufferyard standards shall apply to all
applicable situations, regardless of requests from adjoining
property owners to omit the same.
A. No permits shall be issued for the improvement of any site, the
construction of any building, or the establishment of any use for which a
landscaping plan is required by this Article until such plan has been
submitted to and approved by the Community Development
Department. [Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
B. Prior to the issuance of a permanent certificate of occupancy for any
building or structure, all screening and landscaping shall be in place in
accordance with the landscape plan required in this Article.
C. Standards have been established for installation of all plant materials
within the City of Republic. These requirements must be followed in
order to receive approval of the site work and final occupancy or
approval of the development. The Community Development
Department has the authority to deny the issuance of a final occupancy
permit until landscaping is installed according to the requirements of
this Article and to the satisfaction of the site inspector. [Ord. No.
16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
D. The Community Development Department may approve temporary
occupancy permits if occupancy is sought at a time in which it is
impractical to plant trees, shrubs or grass, or to lay turf. [Ord. No.
16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
A. Where Required. All uses must provide and maintain a landscaped area
as provided in this Section. Landscaped areas may not include rights-ofway
and accessory uses, and must be maintained as a permeable and
uncovered surface that contains living material. No more than twenty
percent (20%) of the required landscaped area may consist of porous
non-living materials.
Landscaped Area Requirements
Type of Use
Required Landscaped Area
(percent)
Single-family residential 30
Two-family residential 30
Multifamily residential 20
Commercial 10
Industrial 10
Section
405.750
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.770
AO:468
Section 405.780. Parking Area Landscaping. [Ord. No. 15-21 §1,
8-10-2015]
B. Placement Of Landscaped Areas. Landscaping in the following areas
shall be provided:
1. Landscaped area a minimum of six (6) feet in width along street
frontages; and
2. Landscaped area a minimum of six (6) feet in width along all
perimeter property lines. This required landscape area may be
utilized in conjunction with the screening requirements of this
Article. This requirement does not apply to single-family detached
dwellings.
3. Plantings shall not be placed within the required sight triangle at
the intersection of any public thoroughfare or private driveway
with a public thoroughfare according to the table below.
Sight Triangle Requirements
Intersecting
Streets Driveway Local Collector
Secondary
Arterial
Primary
Arterial
Driveway A A A A B
Local A A A A B
Collector A A A B B
Secondary
arterial
A A B C C
Primary
arterial
B B B C C
Key:
A = ten-foot-by-ten-foot sight triangle
B = thirty-foot-by-thirty-foot sight triangle
C = sixty-foot-by-sixty-foot sight triangle
4. The utility locations shall be agreed upon prior to submission of
landscape plans. Utility easements shall be provided at locations
that minimize their impact on required bufferyards and perimeter
landscaping. Plantings on utility easements shall be limited to
ornamental trees, shrubs and hedges and ground cover. Each
required canopy tree may be replaced by two (2) understory or
ornamental trees to reduce conflicts with overhead utilities.
Plantings in or adjacent to a utility easement shall be coordinated
with the utility.
A. Interior Parking Lot Landscaping.
Section
405.770
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.780
AO:469
1. Landscape islands with at least one (1) shade tree and two (2)
shrubs must be provided at a minimum of one (1) for every thirty
(30) parking spaces in all off-street parking areas. Flexibility in
placement of landscape islands may be allowed for creative parking
lot design and preservation of existing trees and vegetation.
Landscape islands that include a light pole may eliminate the
required shade tree, provided the shade tree is included elsewhere
in the required landscaped area.
2. Landscape islands include those areas that are a minimum of eight
(8) feet wide and one hundred twenty-eight (128) square feet in
area, and are open to the parking area on at least three (3) sides.
"Bump-out" landscape areas will be considered landscape islands if
they meet these criteria.
B. Perimeter Parking Lot Landscaping.
1. Applicability. All new off-street parking areas must install
perimeter parking lot landscaping. Areas counted toward interior
parking lot landscaping requirements (such as bump-outs) may not
be counted as perimeter parking lot landscaping.
2. Parking Areas Abutting Residential Districts. When a parking area
abuts a residential district, a Type A opaque landscape screen must
be provided to shield the parking area from view at any point within
the residential district, as described in Section 405.810(C)(1).
3. Parking Areas Abutting Public Streets.
a. When an off-street parking area abuts a public street, a
minimum landscape strip at least six (6) feet wide must be
provided along the length of the right-of-way, excluding
driveways. One (1) shade tree must also be provided per fifty
(50) linear feet along the portion of the parking area that abuts
a public street. These trees may be clustered or spaced
linearly.
b. When a parking area is separated from a residential district by
a public street right-of way, screening to shield vehicle
headlights shall be provided along the length of the right-ofway.
Section
405.780
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.790
AO:470
Section 405.790. Loading Areas. [Ord. No. 15-21 §1, 8-10-2015]
All loading areas abutting a residential district must be permanently
screened from view along the abutting property line(s) by a Type A opaque
landscape screen, as described in Section 405.810(C)(1).
Section 405.800. Site Trees. [Ord. No. 15-21 §1, 8-10-2015]
Section 405.810. Screening Requirements. [Ord. No. 15-21 §1,
8-10-2015]
A. One (1) tree must be planted along street frontages between the front
building line and the front lot line of each lot in a residential
subdivision. Said tree shall be of a size in accordance with Section
305.860(A)(1). On lots with two (2) street frontages one (1) site tree is
required on each frontage. Once planted, the maintenance of these
trees is the responsibility of the property owner. Required site trees
must be installed on an individual lot prior to issuance of a certificate of
occupancy.
B. To reduce the risk of disease and/or insect infestation, no more than
fifty percent (50%) of the site trees in a subdivision may be of one (1)
species.
A. Applicability. All uses must provide and maintain screening as required
by this Section. In cases where a use would be required to provide both
landscaping and screening at the same location, the two (2)
requirements may overlap; however, the most restrictive requirement
applies. Additionally, screening requirements may be counted toward
the percent of landscaped area required by Section 405.770.
B. Screening Table. The following table establishes which type of screen is
required. To determine the type required, first identify the zoning of the
subject lot (the new or expanded use). Then identify the zoning of each
adjacent lot. Types of screens are labeled A, B and C; these are
described in Section 405.810(C).
Types of Screening required
Zoning
of
Subject
Lot Zoning of Adjacent Lot
AG R1-L R1-MR1-H R1-Z R-2 R-3 MH C-0 C-1 C-2 C-3 M-1 M-2
AG n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a
R1-L n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a
R1-M n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a
R1-H n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a
R1-Z B A A A n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a
Section
405.790
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.810
AO:471
Types of Screening required
Zoning
of
Subject
Lot Zoning of Adjacent Lot
AG R1-L R1-MR1-H R1-Z R-2 R-3 MH C-0 C-1 C-2 C-3 M-1 M-2
R-2 B A A A A n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a
R-3 B A A A A A n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a
MH B A A A A A A n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a
C-0 B A A A A A A A n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a
C-1 B A A A A A A A C n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a
C-2 B A A A A A A A C C n/a n/a n/a n/a
C-3 B A A A A A A A B C C n/a n/a n/a
M-1 B A A A A A A A B B B C n/a n/a
M-2 B A A A A A A A A A A A B n/a
C. Types of Screens.
1. Opaque screen, Type A. An opaque screen is intended to exclude all
visual contact between uses and to create a strong impression of
special separation.
a. Height. Type A screens must be opaque from the ground to a
height of at least six (6) feet, with intermittent visual
obstructions to a height of at least twelve (12) feet.
b. Materials and Installation.
(1) The opaque screen may be composed of wall, vinyl/wood
fence, landscaped earth berm, planted vegetation or
existing vegetation.
(2) Compliance of planted vegetative screens or natural
vegetation will be judged on the basis of the average
mature height and density of foliage of the subject species
or field observation of existing vegetation.
(3) The opaque portion of the screen must be opaque in all
seasons of the year. At maturity, the portion of intermittent
visual obstructions may not contain any completely
unobstructed openings more than ten (10) feet wide. The
portion of intermittent visual obstructions may contain
deciduous plants.
(4) Planting areas for the placement of these screens must be
a minimum of five (5) feet wide.
Section
405.810
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.810
AO:472
c. Example. Suggested planting patterns that will achieve this
standard are included in the following diagram. See Section
430.080 for lists of suggested plant materials.
2. Semi-opaque screen, Type B. The semi-opaque screen is intended
to partially block visual contact between uses and create a strong
impression of the separation of spaces.
a. Height. Type B screens must be opaque from the ground to a
height of three (3) feet, with intermittent visual obstructions to
a height of at least twelve (12) feet.
b. Materials and installation.
(1) The semi-opaque screen may be composed of a wall, vinyl/
wood fence, landscaped earth berm, planted vegetation or
existing vegetation.
(2) Compliance of planted vegetative screens or natural
vegetation will be judged on the basis of the average
mature height and density of foliage of the subject species
or field observation of existing vegetation.
(3) At maturity, the portion of intermittent visual obstructions
may not contain any completely unobstructed openings
more than ten (10) feet wide. The zone of intermittent
visual obstruction may contain deciduous plants.
(4) Planting areas for the placement of these screens must be
a minimum of five (5) feet wide.
c. Example. Suggested planting patterns that will achieve this
standard are included in the following diagram. See Section
430.080 for lists of suggested plant materials.
Section
405.810
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.810
AO:473
3. Broken screen, Type C. The broken screen is intended to create the
impression of a separation of spaces without necessarily
eliminating visual contact between the spaces.
a. Height. Type C screens must be composed of intermittent
visual obstructions from the ground to a height of at least
twelve (12) feet.
b. Materials.
(1) The broken screen may be composed of a wall, vinyl/wood
fence, landscaped earth berm, planted vegetation or
existing vegetation.
(2) Compliance of planted vegetative screens or natural
vegetation will be judged on the basis of the average
mature height and density of the foliage of the subject
species or field observation of existing vegetation. The
screen may contain deciduous plants.
(3) Planting areas for the placement of these screens must be
a minimum of five (5) feet wide.
c. Example. Suggested planting patterns which will achieve this
standard are included in the following diagrams. See Section
430.080 for lists of suggested plant materials.
Section
405.810
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.810
AO:474
Section 405.820. Planting List. [Ord. No. 15-21 §1, 8-10-2015]
Section 405.830. Tree Preservation and Existing Vegetation. [Ord.
No. 15-21 §1, 8-10-2015]
4. Location of screens. Screening required by this Section must be
located along the common lot line(s) of adjacent uses. Where uses
are separated by an intervening right-of-way, screening is not
required. In its review of a site plan, the Community Development
Department may require the location or dimensions to be modified
to better achieve the desired level of screening on a particular site.
[Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
A. Prohibited Plants. Plants listed as nuisance species or prohibited plants
in the planting list are prohibited in required landscape areas.
Prohibited plants include those that are invasive, potentially damaging
to streets, sidewalks, utilities, drainage improvements, and
foundations.
A. The City may require the preservation of existing trees and/or
vegetation on a property as part of a rezoning, conditional use permit,
preliminary plat, final plat or site plan application.
B. Existing vegetation may be used to satisfy the landscaping and
screening requirements of this Code if protected and maintained during
site development and construction phases of work and if such trees or
plants are not otherwise prohibited.
C. Preserved trees will be credited toward satisfying the tree planting
requirements of this Article if they meet the minimum size and species
requirements of this Article. Tree credits will be granted by the
Community Development Director. Multiple credits may be given to
encourage preservation of existing mature trees. [Ord. No. 16-23 § 1,
11-28-2016]
Section
405.810
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.840
AO:475
Section 405.840. Trash Receptacle Screening. [Ord. No. 15-21 §1,
8-10-2015]
Section 405.850. Screening of Mechanical Equipment. [Ord. No.
15-21 §1, 8-10-2015]
Section 405.855. Screening Of Certain Off-Street Parking Areas
And Other Storage Yards. [Ord. No. 19-21, 11-5-2019]
Off-street parking areas containing wrecked or inoperable vehicles awaiting
repair as permitted according to Section 405.600 shall be screened from
view of any public way or adjoining property within the Local Commercial
("C-1") or more restrictive zoning district by an opaque wall or screen at
least six (6) feet in height.
A. All outdoor trash receptacles, garbage areas, grease traps and trash
compactors for multi-family residential and all non-residential uses
must be permanently screened from view on all sides by a fence of onehundred-
percent opacity and a minimum height of six (6) feet. The
fence must be constructed to prevent accidental dispersal of material
within the storage area.
B. Where commercial trash receptacles are used and where allowed by
City codes, such receptacles must be screened as follows:
1. Existing trash receptacles of any size within one hundred fifty (150)
feet of an arterial street must be screened from view of the arterial
street. The screen may not require full enclosure to accomplish
screening; and
2. Chain link and slat screening is only allowed in industrial zones.
The screen must be opaque.
C. No trash receptacle may be located in a required front or side yard
unless located in an existing enclosure or if the existing developed site
does not afford any other option; in such a case, the trash receptacle
should be located in the side yard if possible and must comply with the
screening requirements of this Section. The Community Development
Director will have the authority to grant an administrative variance
where it is demonstrated that screening is impossible. After a request
for such relief, the Community Development Director will notify the
applicant of the determination in writing within thirty (30) days. [Ord.
No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
A. Raised exterior walls or screen walls must be designed to enclose
groups of equipment. Wall material should be compatible with or
identical to the predominant opaque material on the exterior of the
building.
B. All electrical and mechanical equipment located adjacent to the
building shall be screened from view from adjacent residential
properties and any adjacent street.
Section
405.840
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.860
AO:476
Section 405.860. Plant Materials. [Ord. No. 15-21 §1, 8-10-2015]
A. Minimum Planting Sizes.
1. Trees.
a. Deciduous shade trees shall be two-and-one-half-inch to threeinch
caliper as measured six (6) inches above ground.
b. Evergreen trees shall be six (6) feet to eight (8) feet in height.
c. Ornamental trees shall be one-inch to one-and-one-half-inch
caliper as measured six (6) inches above ground and a
minimum of six (6) feet in height. The smallest trunk of multitrunk
clusters [three (3) or more trunks] shall be threequarters
(3/4) inch.
2. Shrubs and hedges.
a. Deciduous and evergreen shrubs must have a minimum
container size of three (3) gallons to five (5) gallons depending
upon species and spacing.
b. Hedges, where required, must be planted and maintained to
form a continuous, visual screen within a maximum of one (1)
year after time of planting.
3. Vines. Vines must be a minimum of thirty (30) inches in height
immediately after planting and may be used in conjunction with
fences, screens or walls to meet physical barrier requirements as
specified.
4. Ground covers. Ground covers used in lieu of grass in whole or in
part must have a finished appearance and reasonably complete
coverage within three (3) months after planting.
5. Grass.
a. Building permits. When a building permit has been issued for a
principal structure upon a lot, the lot must either have sod or
seeding installed wherever grass is required to be installed.
The seeding or sod must be installed prior to the issuance of
any permanent certificate of occupancy.
B. Installation.
1. The Building Inspector will inspect all landscaping, and no
permanent certificates of occupancy or similar authorization will be
issued unless the landscaping is completely installed in compliance
with the approved landscape plan and this Article.
2. All landscaping materials must be installed according to current
accepted good planting procedures and in compliance with all
applicable ordinances and code requirements.
Section
405.860
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.860
AO:477
Section 405.870. Right-of-Way Ground Surface. [Ord. No. 15-21 §1,
8-10-2015]
No plant material or barrier required by this Code may be located in
a public right-of-way. The ground surface within the public right-of-way
must be planted with sod or hydroseeded, with the exception of driveways,
sidewalks and paths. Materials prohibited in the public right-of-way, unless
required by this Code or specifically approved by the City, include other
ground covers, shrubs, brick pavers, gravel, stone, asphalt and concrete;
except those used for driveways, sidewalks and paths.
3. Plant materials must be free from disease and installed in a fashion
that ensures the availability of sufficient soil and water to sustain
healthy growth.
C. Maintenance.
1. All landscaping materials must be maintained in good condition so
as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance and must be
kept free from refuse and debris.
2. The owner, tenant and their agent, if any, will be jointly and
severally responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping.
Section
405.860
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.870
AO:478
ARTICLE XI
(Reserved)
Section 405.880. through Section 405.930. (Reserved)
Section
405.880
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.880
AO:479

ARTICLE XII
Board of Adjustment85
Section 405.940. Establishment. [Ord. No. 15-20 §1, 8-10-2015]
A Board of Adjustment is hereby established in accordance with Chapter 89,
RSMo., regarding the zoning of cities.
Section 405.945. Membership. [Ord. No. 15-20 §1, 8-10-2015]
Section 405.950. Meeting and Voting. [Ord. No. 15-20 §1,
8-10-2015]
Section 405.955. Powers.
A. The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five (5) members, who shall be
residents of the City. Three (3) alternate members may be appointed to
serve in the absence of or the disqualification of regular members.
B. Members shall be appointed for terms of five (5) years each.
C. All members and alternates shall be removable for cause by the
appointing authority upon written charges and after public hearing.
Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose
term becomes vacant.
D. The Board of Adjustment shall elect its own Chairperson and Acting
Chairperson who shall serve for one (1) year.
A. The meeting schedule shall be established by and maintained in the
Department of Community Development indicating meeting dates,
application submittal deadlines, and tentative public hearing schedule.
[Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
B. The Chairperson or, in his or her absence, the Acting Chairperson may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
C. The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of all meetings, showing
the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to
vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations
and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the
office of the City Clerk, and shall be public record. All testimony,
objections thereto, and rulings thereon shall be taken down by a
reporter employed by the Board for that purpose.
A. The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers:
1. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in
any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an
85.Editor's Note: Former Art. XII, Board of Adjustment, as adopted and/or amended by CC
1999 §§26-9(1) — 26-9(4), was repealed 8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 15-20.
Section
405.940
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.955
AO:481
Section 405.960. Eligible Applicants. [Ord. No. 15-20 §1, 8-10-2015]
Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person or company
aggrieved or by any officer, department, or Board of the City affected by
any decision of an administrative official in the enforcement of the zoning
regulations.
Section 405.965. Application for Board of Adjustment Review. [Ord.
No. 15-20 §1, 8-10-2015; Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
administrative official in the enforcement of the zoning regulations
or any ordinance adopted pursuant thereto;
2. To hear and decide all matters referred to it or upon which it is
required to pass under such ordinances;
3. In passing upon appeals, where there are practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardship in the way of carrying out the strict letter of
such ordinance, to vary or modify the application of any of the
regulations or provisions of such ordinance relating to the use,
construction or alteration of buildings or structures so that the
spirit of the ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare
secured and substantial justice done.
A. The procedure for requesting a hearing before the Board of Adjustment
shall be as follows:
1. Submittal requirements. The applicant shall submit the following to
the Director of Community Development:
a. Application form. Completion of an authorized application form
supplied by the Director of Community Development, including
all supplemental information required by that form.
b. Fees. Filing and review fees, as established by the City Council.
c. A site plan, written narrative, or other information required by
the Director of Planning and Development.
2. Determination of completeness for hearing.
a. Subsequent to receipt of an application and supporting
documents, the Director of Community Development shall
determine whether it is complete for purposes of conducting a
public hearing. The application is complete for hearing if it
includes all of the materials required in Section 405.965(A)(1).
b. Upon determination by the Director of Community
Development that the application is incomplete for hearing,
the Director of Community Development shall notify the
applicant. The applicant shall either resubmit or notify the
Director of Community Development of a pending resubmittal
within a period of thirty (30) days. If the resubmittal of
Section
405.955
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.965
AO:482
Section 405.970. Variances. [Ord. No. 15-20 §1, 8-10-2015]
notification of a pending resubmittal are not received within
this period, the application shall be deemed withdrawn without
prejudice.
3. Public hearing. Upon determination by the Director of Community
Development that the application is complete for a hearing, a
public hearing shall be scheduled.
a. Notice of hearing.
(1) Notice of the location, date and time of the public hearing
shall be published in a local newspaper of general
circulation at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing.
(2) Notice of the location, date and time of the public hearing
shall be sent by certified mail to all property owners within
one hundred eighty-five (185) feet of the property subject
to the hearing's purpose, that measurement excluding
rights-of-way.
(3) A sign displaying the location, date and time of the public
hearing shall be placed on the property subject to the
hearing's purpose. The sign shall be posted in a noticeable
place that is clearly visible from the right-of-way.
4. Withdrawal. An application for review may be withdrawn prior to
the public hearing upon written notice to the Director of
Community Development.
A. Non-use variances. In presenting an application for a non-use variance,
the burden of proof shall rest with the applicant to clearly establish
that, as a practical matter, the property cannot be used for a permitted
use without coming into conflict with restrictions of the zoning
regulations. The following specific criteria shall be considered:
1. How substantial the variance is in relation to the requirement;
2. The potential effect of the increased population density produced
on the available government facilities;
3. The potential to produce a substantial change in the character of
the neighborhood or a substantial detriment to adjoining property
owners;
4. The ability to obviate the difficulty by some method, feasible for the
applicants to pursue, other than the variance; and
5. In view of the manner in which the difficulty arose, and considering
all of the above factors, whether the interests of justice would be
served by granting the variance.
Section
405.965
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.970
AO:483
Section 405.975. Procedure and Decision. [Ord. No. 15-20 §1,
8-10-2015; Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
B. Use variances. In presenting any application for a variance to authorize
a use that the zoning regulations do not allow, the burden of proof shall
rest with the applicant to:
1. Demonstrate an unnecessary hardship which is defined by the
following criteria:
a. The land in question cannot yield a reasonable return if used
only for a use permitted in the zone in which it is located;
b. The owner's plight is due to unique and not to general
neighborhood considerations; and
c. The granting of the variance would not alter the essential
character of the locality.
2. Prove that the relief is necessary because of the unique character
of the property;
3. Prove that the variance will not destroy the preservation of the
Comprehensive Plan; and
4. Prove that granting the variance will result in substantial justice.
C. In presenting any application for a variance, the burden of proof shall
rest with the applicant to prove that the harm complained is not selfinflicted.
D. The requirement to show setbacks on final plats as required by Section
410.280(A)(11) can be satisfied when amendment to setback
requirements has occurred by the following methods: Such changes
may be implemented in final plats containing a provision that states the
setback is subject to change due to an amendment being made to the
zoning code, and such changes may be implemented when the
development of a lot occurs. If the final plat does not state that the
setback is subject to change due to an amendment of the zoning code,
such change may be requested by applying for a variance through the
Board of Adjustment for one or more lots. The Board of Adjustment is
authorized to determine if a variance should be granted based upon the
change in the zoning code as to setback requirements. The application
fee associated with the request for a variance related to a change in the
setback requirement during the first year after an amendment to the
setback requirement will be waived by the City, and after the first year
the City may waive the application fee upon good cause being shown for
the delay in requesting the variance. [Ord. No. 17-06 § 2, 1-17-2017]
A. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from, unless the Director of Community Development certifies to the
Board of Adjustment after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with
Section
405.970
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.975
AO:484
Section 405.976. Reapplication. [Ord. No. 15-20 §1, 8-10-2015; Ord.
No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
Section 405.977. Appeal of Board of Adjustment Decision. [Ord. No.
15-20 §1, 8-10-2015]
Any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of
the Board of Adjustment, may, within thirty (30) days of the issuance of
the decision of the Board, present to the Circuit Court of Greene County a
petition, duly verified, setting forth that such a decision is illegal, in whole
or in part, specifying the grounds on the illegality in accordance with the
appropriate State Statute.
him/her that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would,
in his or her opinion, cause immediate peril to life or property. In such
case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining
order which may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a court
of record on application or notice to the office from whom the appeal is
taken and on due cause shown.
B. The Board of Adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of
Sections 89.010 and 89.140, RSMo., reverse or affirm wholly or partly,
or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination
appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or
determination as ought to be made and to that end shall have all the
powers of the Director of Community Development. The concurring
vote of four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any
order, requirement, decision or determination of the Director of
Community Development, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any
matter upon which it is required to pass under any such circumstances
or to effect any variation in such ordinance.
A. In the event that any application is denied by the Board, a reapplication
concerning the same property or site shall not be accepted by the Board
until six (6) months following the date of final action on the original
application has elapsed, unless it can be shown to the satisfaction of the
Director of Community Development that:
1. A significantly different plan is proposed; or
2. New facts or other pertinent information have been discovered that
were not previously presented and were not reasonably capable of
discovery by the applicant prior to the previous application.
Section
405.975
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.977
AO:485

ARTICLE XIII
Changes and Amendments
Section 405.980. Procedure For Rezoning. [CC 1999 §26-8; Ord. No.
03-80 §1, 11-24-2003; Ord. No. 04-19 §1, 3-8-2004; Ord. No. 04-64
§1, 10-11-2004; Ord. No. 07-15 §1, 3-12-2007]
A. The following procedures shall be followed in all applications to rezone
property within the corporate limits of the City of Republic, Missouri:
1. Printed application blanks for rezoning shall be supplied to the
applicant by the Community Development Department. A person or
entity can file an application for rezoning only if they own the
property or are under a contract for the purchase of said property
or have an ownership interest in said property. The City shall
charge a processing fee in the amount of two hundred dollars
($200.00), plus publication cost and cost of postage for notification
of property owners within one hundred eighty-five (185) feet upon
receipt of an application for rezoning property in the City.
2. Applicant must complete an application and provide the
Community Development Department a list obtained from the
County Assessor's Office for property owners lying within one
hundred eighty-five (185) feet and must submit such application to
the Community Development Department.
3. The Community Development Department shall forthwith submit
the application to the Planning and Zoning Commission and shall
cause a notice to be published in a local newspaper of a public
hearing to be held at the next regular meeting of the Planning and
Zoning Commission for the zoning application as well as a notice of
the date on which the City Council will meet and consider such
application. Both such notices must be published at least fifteen
(15) days prior to the hearings.
4. Applicant may appear at the Planning and Zoning Commission
hearing and the meeting of the City Council to answer questions
with regard to the application and to explain his/her rezoning
proposal.
5. Such regulations, restrictions and boundaries may from time to
time be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed. In
case, however, of a protest against such change duly signed and
acknowledged by the owners of thirty percent (30%) or more,
either of the areas of the land (exclusive of streets and alleys)
included in such proposed change or within an area determined by
lines drawn parallel to and one hundred eighty-five (185) feet
distant from the boundaries of the district proposed to be changed,
such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable
vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all the members of the City Council. The
Section
405.980
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.980
AO:487
provisions of Section 89.050, RSMo., relative to public hearing and
official notice shall apply equally to all changes or amendments.
6. After the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
make its final report and recommendation to the City Council on its
findings from the public hearing and the City Council shall take no
action on the application until such report or recommendation is
submitted.
B. (Reserved)
C. Land use regulations, ordinances and restrictions may from time to
time be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed. The
provisions of Section 89.050, RSMo., relative to public hearing and
official notice shall apply equally to all changes or amendments.
D. There shall be a ninety (90) day waiting period for a rezoning request of
the same zoning district that has been previously denied by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council. The ninety (90) days
shall start from the day the request was denied by the City Council.
Section
405.980
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.980
AO:488
ARTICLE XIV
Validity
Section 405.990. Saving Clause. [CC 1999 §26-109]
If any Section, Subsection, sentence, clause or provision of this Chapter is
held invalid, the remainder of this Chapter shall not be affected by such
invalidity.
Section
405.990
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
405.990
AO:489
Chapter 410
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
405.990
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
405.990
AO:490
ARTICLE I
In General
Section 410.010. Jurisdiction. [CC 1999 §20-1]
The rules and regulations governing plats of subdivisions of land and lot
splits contained herein shall apply within the corporate limits of the City of
Republic in accordance with the provisions of Section 89.400, RSMo.
Section 410.020. Definitions. [CC 1999 §20-2; Ord. No. 04-19 §1,
3-8-2004; Ord. No. 05-56 §1, 7-25-2005]
For the purpose of interpreting these regulations, certain words and terms
are defined as follows:
ALLEY — A passage or way affording generally a secondary means of
vehicular access to the back or side of abutting properties and is not
intended for general traffic circulation.
BLOCK — A tract of land entirely surrounded by public highways, streets,
waterways or railway rights-of-way, etc., or any combination thereof.
CITY — The City of Republic, Missouri.
CITY COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of Republic, Missouri.
CITY ENGINEER — The City Engineer of Republic, Missouri, or whomever
shall be designated as engineer.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The Comprehensive or Master Plan of the
City of Republic, Missouri, whether in whole or in part, as adopted by the
Republic Planning Commission and the City Council and duly recorded by
the office of the County Recorder of Greene County.
COUNTY — Greene County, Missouri.
COUNTY CLERK — The office of the Greene County Clerk.
CUL-DE-SAC — A short street having one (1) end open to traffic and being
terminated at the other end by a vehicular turnaround.
DEVELOPER — See "Subdivider".
EASEMENT — A grant by the property owner of the use, for a specific
purpose or purposes, of a strip of land by the general public, utility
companies or private individuals.
IMPROVEMENTS — Grading, street surfacing, curbs and gutters,
sidewalks, crosswalks, culverts, bridges, water, sanitary and storm sewers,
lines, and other utilities, and other required features.
LOT — A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a building or
an integrated group of buildings and uses customarily incidental, including
such open spaces as are required by the Zoning Code.
OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC — Land which may be dedicated or reserved for
acquisition for general use by the public, including parks, recreation areas,
Section
410.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.020
AO:491
school sites, community or public building sites, and other such areas that
shall be deemed necessary.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The City Planning Commission of Republic,
Missouri.
PLANNING COMMISSION REPRESENTATIVE — The City Planner, or his/
her designee, in matters pertaining to the subdivision of land.
PLAT, FINAL — A complete and exact subdivision plat prepared for official
recording as required by Statute and ordinances of the City of Republic to
define property boundaries and proposed streets and other improvements.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — A preliminary plat for a subdivision shall be a
formal plan, drawn to scale, indicating prominent existing features of a tract
and its surroundings and the general layout of the proposed subdivision and
shall meet the requirements herein.
PRE-APPLICATION SKETCH — A general drawing or sketch and discussion
showing the general layout and characteristics of the proposed subdivision.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The land opened, reserved or dedicated for a street, walk,
drainage or other public purpose.
SUBDIVIDER — A person, firm or corporation undertaking the subdividing
or resubdividing of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots,
or other subdivisions of land for the purpose of transfer of ownership or
development, whether immediate or future, including all changes in street
or lot lines.
SUBDIVISIONS (General) — The subdivision of land shall be deemed to be
the division of any parcel or tract of land into two (2) or more parcels, sites
or lots, any one (1) of which contains less than five (5) acres for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or development,
provided however, that the following shall not constitute a subdivision:
transfer of interests by will or pursuant to court order; leases for a term not
to exceed ten (10) years; mortgages or easements; and the sale or exchange
of parcels of land between owners of adjoining property if additional lots
are not thereby created, and the lots resulting are not reduced below the
size required by law.
SUBDIVISION (Minor) — Notwithstanding other definitions of this Chapter,
a minor subdivision is defined as any division of land which creates not more
than four (4) tracts.
SUBDIVISION (Major) — Notwithstanding other definitions of this Chapter,
a major subdivision is defined as any division of land into five or more lots,
shall include the construction and dedication of public infrastructure, shall
follow the preliminary/final plat procedure and shall be regulated by the
provisions of Articles III, IV and V of this Chapter.
Section 410.030. No Contract of Sale. [CC 1999 §20-4]
Whoever, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land located within
the City of Republic, transfers or sells or agrees to sell or negotiates to sell
Section
410.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.030
AO:492
any land covered by the provisions of Articles II — V of this Chapter before
a subdivision plat has been approved by the City Council and recorded or
filed in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Greene County shall forfeit
and pay a penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each lot or parcel so
transferred or sold or agreed or negotiated to be sold. The City of Republic
enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by action for injunction brought
in any court of equity jurisdiction or may recover the said penalty by a civil
action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
Section 410.040. Interpretation and Conflict With Other Laws.
This Chapter shall not apply to any lot or lots forming a part of a subdivision
created and recorded prior to the adoption of this code, except for further
dividing of existing lots, or the addition of improvements not authorized or
approved under previous platting. This Chapter is not intended to repeal,
abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions
of other ordinances, or regulations, private agreements, or with recorded
restrictive covenants running with the land to which the City of Republic is
a party. Where this Chapter imposes a greater restriction upon land than
is imposed or required by previous ordinances of the City of Republic, the
provisions of this Chapter shall prevail.
Section 410.050. Administration.
The provisions of this Chapter shall be administered in accordance with
Chapter 89, RSMo., as amended, and shall be administered by the Planning
and Zoning Commission, the City Administrator, the City Planner or
Building Official or their delegate, the Mayor and the City Council.
Section 410.060. Fees.
The fees for the review of plans and plats and other sundry costs shall be
paid to the City by the developer upon submitting a request or application
for approval by the City.
Section 410.070. Conformity With Zoning Code.
All plats reviewed under provisions of this Chapter shall conform to all
Zoning Code provisions for the district in which the proposed plat is to be
located. All required zoning changes shall be made prior to approval of the
Record Plat.
Section 410.075. Stop Work.
A. Authority. Whenever the City Planner or his/her designee finds any
work regulated by this Code or the associated regulations being
performed in a manner contrary to the provisions of this Code or in a
dangerous or unsafe manner, the building official is authorized to issue
a stop work order.
Section
410.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.075
AO:493
Section 410.080. Denial of Utility Service, Permits and Plat
Approval. [CC 1999 §20-83; Ord. No. 03-56 §1, 8-25-2003]
Section 410.090. Compliance With Design Principles Required. [CC
1999 §20-5; Ord. No. 03-56 §1, 8-25-2003]
In planning and developing a subdivision the developer shall comply with
the general principles of design and minimum requirements for the layout
of subdivisions set forth in Article VI, and with the rules and regulations
concerning required improvements set forth in Article IV, in these
regulations, and in every case shall pursue the procedure in the following
Sections. Approval of any plat or plan by the City shall not relieve the
subdivider or developer from complying with the regulations established
herein.
Section 410.100. Platting Exceptions. [CC 1999 §20-1; Ord. No.
04-19 §1, 3-8-2004]
B. Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to
the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the
person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited
work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the
reason for the order, and the conditions under which the cited work will
be permitted to resume.
C. Unlawful Continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after
having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that
person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition,
shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.
A. Permits. No building permits shall be issued for any structure on a lot in
a subdivision for which a plat has not been finally approved and
recorded in the manner prescribed herein.
B. Denial Of Utility Service, Plat Approval And/Or Building Permits. To
promote and ensure the public health, safety and welfare, the City shall
have the authority by written order to deny the connection of utility
service, plat or plan approval and/or building permits on the grounds
that non-compliance with City regulations, adopted ordinances and/or
policies have occurred.
A. The requirements of this Chapter do not apply to the following types of
land subdivision:
1. Recording of a subdivision plat shall not be required in case of the
sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining
properties for the purpose of adjustments in boundaries, provided
that: additional lots are not thereby created; that the original lots
are not reduced below the minimum sizes required by this Chapter
or the Zoning Code; and that a survey of the adjustments of
boundaries is recorded with the County Recorder.
Section
410.075
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.100
AO:494
2. The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for use as a
right of way for railroads or other public utility facilities or other
pipe lines which do not involve any new streets or easements of
access.
3. The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes or
grants or conveyance relating to the vacation of land impressed
with a public use.
4. Conveyances made to correct description of prior conveyances.
Section
410.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.100
AO:495

ARTICLE II
Minor Subdivisions
Section 410.110. Minor Subdivisions. [Ord. No. 03-56 §1,
8-25-2003; Ord. No. 04-19 §1, 3-8-2004; Ord. No. 11-19 §1,
8-22-2011]
A. All subdivision of land not otherwise classified as a major subdivision
shall be classified as a minor subdivision and shall be subject to the
procedures described in this Article. Applications for minor subdivision
will be reviewed, considered and forwarded to the Planning and Zoning
Commission based on the following qualifications:
1. The proposed subdivision will not create more than four tracts of
land, including the remainder to be retained by the owner.
2. The proposed subdivision does not include the dedication of a new
street or other public way or change in existing streets, easements,
water, sewer or other public improvements. It is the intent of this
provision to limit approval of minor subdivisions to those cases
where the improvements required by these regulations have been
provided, with exception to the extension of service to individual
lots. It is not the intention of this provision to permit all requests,
based solely requests that meet the minimum standards.
3. The subdivision is in compliance with the Zoning Code and other
ordinances and regulations of the City of Republic and no
substandard tract, parcel or lot will be created.
4. The subdivision will not result in substantial increases in service
requirements (e.g., utilities, traffic control, parks, schools, streets,
etc.), nor interfere with the maintenance of existing service levels
(e.g., additional curb cuts, repaving, etc.).
5. The parent tract was lawful under these regulations at the time the
existing property description was recorded.
6. The configuration of the property was created by a court decree or
order resulting from testamentary or interstate provisions.
7. The configuration of the property was created by the assembly or
combination of existing tracts of record.
8. Minor subdivisions shall be limited so that no more than four (4)
new tracts or parcels of land are created by minor subdivision from
the original parent tract or parcel as that tract or parcel was at the
time of annexation or else as the parcel was platted within a major
subdivision in the interest of preventing the circumvention of the
major subdivision process. Upon a request for a second (2nd) minor
subdivision of a tract or parcel previously subdivided into fewer
than four (4) new tracts or parcels, Council may authorize staff by
Section
410.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.110
AO:497
Section 410.120. Minor Subdivisions Procedures. [Ord. No. 04-19
§1, 8-4-2003; Ord. No. 04-64 §1, 10-11-2004; Ord. No. 05-96 App. A
§3, 12-12-2005]
resolution to execute a subsequent minor subdivision that
otherwise meets the minor subdivision requirements.
A. Filing Procedures. The applicant shall submit a minimum of five (5)
copies of the proposed minor subdivision or more, as required by the
Community Development Department, a completed application form
and applicable application fees in the amount of one hundred twenty
dollars ($120.00) to the Republic Community Development
Department. A completed minor subdivision checklist shall accompany
all applications for subdivision. [Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
B. Review Criteria And Procedures. An application for minor subdivision
shall be reviewed for conformance with the City's zoning and
subdivision regulations. The Community Development Department
staff, public works staff and the City Engineer shall use the following
criteria to review the minor subdivision for its conformance and shall
ensure the development in the proposed location: [Ord. No. 16-23 § 1,
11-28-2016]
1. Will be in conformity with the Comprehensive Plan, thoroughfare
plan, zoning regulations or other plans officially adopted by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council;
C. Effect Of Minor Subdivision Approval. Minor subdivision approval shall
confer upon the developer the right that the City will not change the
general terms and conditions under which the approval was granted.
Within sixty (60) days after approval of the plat by the Community
Development Department staff, the subdivider shall file said plat with
the County Recorder. The subdivider shall pay the cost of recording the
plat, easements, right-of-way deeds and any other related
accompanying documents. If the plat is disapproved, the Community
Development Department staff shall notify the applicant in writing of
the actions and reasons therefore. If the applicant shall fail to record
the plat within sixty (60) days, then the plat shall be held for naught.
[Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
D. Information Required. The following information is required on all
minor subdivision plats submitted for approval. The required
information may be combined for presentation on one (1) or more
drawings or maps. In the interests of clarity, speed and efficiency in the
review process, Community Development staff may require that the
information be presented on separate or additional drawings or maps.
In all cases the minor subdivision plat submission shall be designed in
conformity with the Republic Zoning Code, Chapter 405, and shall
include the following information: [Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
Section
410.110
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.120
AO:498
1. The proposed subdivision name, the general location, as it is
commonly known, or by some other name by which the project may
be identified, the name and address of the present owner and sub
divider and the surveyor. The City shall supply a case number
identifying the minor subdivision prior to submission.
2. Title, scale, north arrow, date of preparation and each date, which a
revision was made.
3. Location by section, township, range, City, County, State or if a resubdivision
of an existing or approved subdivision, then by lot or
block numbers and name of original subdivision.
4. The names, location and dimensions of adjacent streets within any
adjoining subdivision.
5. The plat boundaries shall show the external bearings, distances
and internal angles with dimensions in hundredths of feet. A
minimum closure of one-tenth of a foot (0.10) or 1:20,000 for
distances greater than two thousand (2,000) feet (minimum
standards for urban class property survey) to close the traverse
within a maximum of one (1) foot in 10,000 feet. All bearings shall
be obtained by determination of true north by solar or celestial
observation.
6. The boundary lines, location and dimensions of existing and newly
created tracts, parcels or lots that are part of the minor subdivision
shall be shown on plat. The dimensions and location of all arcs,
radii, internal angles, points of curvature and tangent boundaries
and other pertinent survey information necessary to an accurate
description and location. Survey data shall meet the standards
promulgated by the State of Missouri, "Missouri Minimum
Standards for Property Boundary Surveys", Division of Geology and
Land Survey, Missouri Department of Natural Resources. All survey
datum shall be vertically and horizontally tied to the Missouri
Geographical Reference Stations (GRS).
7. Names of adjacent subdivisions and owners of adjoining parcels of
unsubdivided land.
8. The exact location and distances of all structures and other
physical improvements in relation to proposed lot lines.
9. The extent and location of floodplains, floodways, or other
waterways of record; elevations of which, shall be based on
applicable Flood Insurance Studies, Flood Insurance Rate Maps,
Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps.
10. Location of sanitary sewer, storm sewers, water mains, gas lines,
fire hydrants, electric and telephone poles and street lights.
Section
410.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.120
AO:499
11. Topography, contours at vertical intervals shall be shown as
follows:
a. Average slope less than six percent (6%)—two (2) foot interval
contour map
b. Average slope over six percent (6%)—five (5) foot interval
contour map
12. Existing zoning classification of the minor subdivision and adjacent
area.
13. Setback lines on all lots and other sites.
14. Certification by Missouri registered land surveyor as to accuracy of
survey as such:
That I, _________________________, do hereby certify that this
plat was prepared under my supervision from an actual
survey of the land herein described prepared by __________
dated __________ and signed by _______________ L.S. No.
__________ and that the corner monuments and lot corner
pins shown herein were placed under the personal
supervision of _______________ L.S. No. __________ in
accordance with the Division of Geology and Land Survey,
Missouri Department of Natural Resource's "Minimum
Standards for Property Boundary Surveys".
Date Prepared: ________________
Signature: ____________________
Missouri L.S. No. ______________
15. Certificate of Approval by the Community Development staff (to be
placed on plat) which shall be provided as follows:
In accordance with the provisions as set forth in the
Subdivision Regulations of Republic, Missouri, I
__________________________, do hereby certify that on the
___________ day of ___________________, 20___, the
Community Development Department approved the
request for a minor subdivision for
_____________________________________.
Any further subdivision of the above described land or
modifications of the land description(s) will require
reapproval in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations
of the City of Republic, Missouri.
_______________________________
Community Development
Department
_______________________________
Date
Section
410.120
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.120
AO:500
16. Statement of owner certifying that he/she had title to the land
being subdivided:
As owner I have caused the land described on this plat
to be surveyed, divided, mapped, and all access rights
reserved and dedicated as represented on the plat.
___________________________
Owner and/or Subdivider
___________________________
Date
E. Final Submittal. Final submittal of the Minor Subdivision Plat shall be
prepared on a reproducible original (mylar) twenty-four (24) inches by
thirty-six (36) inches or those dimensions required by the Greene
County Recorder of Deeds. In addition to the original the City may
require additional elements to incorporate the Minor Subdivision into
the City map. The following items shall be submitted:
1. Sixteen (16) inches x twenty-four (24) inches scaled reproducible
mylar for the City's plat book.
2. Four (4) blue line copies (24" x 36").
3. All applicable off-site easements and right-of-way deeds.
4. Copy of private and restrictive covenants to be recorded.
5. Digital copy of subdivision plat, cad file, etc. for City map upgrades.
F. Sidewalks. The Public Works Director may approve a builder, owner or
subdivider of a minor subdivision to pay the City twelve dollars ($12.00)
per linear foot of sidewalk instead of building the sidewalk. This shall
not apply to major subdivisions or to lots, which are already developed
(existing structures, houses, etc.) that are part of the minor subdivision.
Section
410.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.120
AO:501

ARTICLE III
Major Subdivisions — Preliminary Plat
Section 410.130. Major Subdivisions — Preliminary Plat.
All subdivision of land classified as a major subdivision shall be subject
to the procedures described in this Article. Approval of a Final or Record
Plat shall be subject to approval of a Preliminary Plat in accordance with
regulations contained herein.
Section 410.140. Application For Preliminary Plat. [Ord. No. 03-80
§1, 11-24-2003; Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
The developer shall submit a minimum of five (5) copies of the proposed
Preliminary Plat or more, as required by the City, a completed application
form and applicable application fees in the amount of two hundred twentyfive
dollars ($225.00) plus one dollar ($1.00) for each lot, to the Republic
Community Development Department at least twenty (20) working days
prior to the meeting at which approval is requested. A completed
Preliminary Plat checklist shall accompany all applications for major
subdivisions.
Section 410.150. Review Criteria and Procedures For Preliminary
Plat.
A. Application and Preliminary Plat shall be reviewed for conformance
with all applicable City adopted codes and regulations by the City
Planner. If the City Planner or City Engineer reviews the application
and plat and finds that it is incomplete or that the requirements of this
Chapter, the comprehensive plan or other adopted plans have not been
met, than the City Planner shall so notify the applicant in writing of any
deficiencies. Once all deficiencies have been addressed and the City
Planner and City Engineer have approved the plat, than a
recommendation for approval or denial shall be transmitted to the
Planning and Zoning Commission. After receiving comments and
recommendations from the City Planner, the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall review the Preliminary Plat for its conformance to the
following review criteria and shall ensure the development, in the
proposed location:
1. Will not endanger the public health or safety;
2. Will not injure the value of adjoining property or abutting property;
3. Will be in conformity with the Comprehensive Plan, Transportation
Plan, Zoning Code, Water System Master Plan, Wastewater System
Facility Plan or other plans officially adopted by the City Council;
and
4. Will be in harmony with the area in which it is located.
Section
410.130
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.150
AO:503
Section 410.160. Effect of Preliminary Plat Approval.
Preliminary Plat approval shall confer upon the developer, for a period of
two (2) years from date of approval, the conditional right that the City
Council will not change the general terms and conditions under which the
approval was granted. After approval of the Preliminary Plat, the developer
may proceed with the detailed construction plans for all required
infrastructure of the area planned for inclusion on the final plat. The City
Council, upon recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission,
may extend this two (2) year period if the developer has applied in writing
for such an extension and the Planning and Zoning Commission and City
Council determine a longer period should be granted due to unusual
circumstances. If an extension is not granted, the Preliminary Plat approval
is null and void. If no Final Plat of a subdivision for which preliminary
approval has been given is approved within said two (2) year period, or such
longer period as the City Council may allow, a resubmission and review by
the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall be required. It
shall not be the responsibility of the City to notify the applicant of an expired
Preliminary Plat.
Section 410.170. Phased Construction and Platting. [Ord. No. 03-56
§1, 8-25-2003]
If phased construction is planned, the construction and final platting of the
first phase shall be completed within two (2) years of the date of approval of
the Preliminary Plat. Subsequent phases of the final plat may be submitted
covering portions of the approved preliminary plat; provided, however, that
all phases of the preliminary plat must be completed within four (4) years of
the date of approval of the preliminary plat. If all phases of the preliminary
plat have not been completed within four (4) years of the date of approval
of the preliminary plat, then the preliminary plat shall be resubmitted to the
City for extension and approval in accordance with the provisions of Section
410.150 hereof. If an extension and approval is not granted, the original
preliminary plat approval shall be null and void.
Section 410.180. Existing and Proposed Features To Be Shown On
Preliminary Plat.
B. The Planning and Zoning Commission may request modifications to the
Preliminary Plat. The Commission shall then confer approval,
conditional approval or disapproval of the Preliminary Plat within fortyfive
(45) days of filing and transmit all copies of the Preliminary Plat
together with written reasons for its action to the City Council. The
approval or the refusal to approve the Preliminary Plat by the City
Council shall take place within thirty (30) days from and after the date
in which the Planning and Zoning Commission has made a
recommendation to approve or refuse to approve the Preliminary Plat.
Once the City Council have approved or refused to approve the
Preliminary Plat, the City Planner shall notify the owner or applicant of
the decision in writing.
Section
410.150
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.180
AO:504
A. The following information is required on all Preliminary Plats submitted
for approval. The required information may be combined for
presentation on one (1) or more drawings or maps. In the interests of
clarity, speed and efficiency in the review process, the City Planner may
require that the information be presented on separate or additional
drawings or maps. In all cases the Preliminary Plat submission should
include the following and shall be designed in conformity with the
Design Standards contained in Article VI.
1. Name and code. The proposed name of the subdivision, which shall
not duplicate or closely resemble the name of another, previously
recorded subdivision in the City of Republic.
2. Owners of record. The names and addresses of the owner(s) of
record, developer(s), engineer, or surveyor responsible for the
subdivision design.
3. Vicinity map. A vicinity map at a scale of four hundred (400) feet or
more to the inch shall be drawn on the preliminary plat. The map
shall indicate:
a. Section, Township, Range.
b. Adjacent City Limits, other corporation or ad hoc district lines,
such as school or sewer districts, etc.
c. The nearest existing highways or thoroughfares, streets and
alleys in neighboring subdivisions or property.
4. Abutting owners. The name of adjacent subdivisions and the names
of record owners of adjacent parcels of unplatted land.
5. Boundary lines. The boundary lines, accurate in scale, of the tract
to be subdivided.
6. Streets — other features. The location, widths and names of all
existing or platted streets or other public ways within or adjacent
to the tract, and other important features such as existing
permanent buildings; large trees and watercourses; railroad lines;
corporation and township lines, utility lines, etc.
7. Existing utilities. Existing sewer, gas, telephone, water mains,
culverts and other underground structures within the tract and
immediately adjacent thereto with pipe sizes and grades indicated.
8. Topography. Topography, contours at vertical intervals shall be
based on USGS datum or City monuments and shall be shown as
follows:
a. Average slope less than six percent (6%)—two (2) foot interval
contour map
Section
410.180
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.180
AO:505
Section 410.190. Model Home Procedure.
b. Average slope over six percent (6%)—five (5) foot interval
contour map
9. Proposed design — street, drainage, etc. The layout, names and
widths of proposed streets, alleys and easements; the location and
approximate sizes of catch basins, culverts and other drainage
structures; the location of proposed sewer lines, water lines, fire
hydrants and other related infrastructure planned to serve the
development.
10. Proposed layout and legal description. The legal description of the
entire site to be subdivided, including acreage in tract, boundary
lines, location and dimensions of newly created tracts, parcels or
lots that are part of the subdivision shall be shown on plat. The
dimensions and location of all arcs, radii, internal angles, points of
curvature and tangent boundaries and other pertinent survey
information necessary to an accurate description and location.
Survey data shall meet the standards promulgated by the State of
Missouri, "Missouri Minimum Standards for Property Boundary
Surveys", Division of Geology and Land Survey, Missouri
Department of Natural Resources. All survey datum shall be
vertically and horizontally tied to the City of Republic Geographical
Reference Stations (GRS).
11. Lot information. The plat shall indicate the area, lot size, proposed
setbacks and exact location and distance of all structures and other
physical improvements in relation to proposed lot lines.
12. Zoning. Zoning boundary lines and proposed use of property.
13. North point, etc. Title, scale, north arrow, date of preparation and
date of each successive revision.
14. Floodplains, etc. The extent and location of floodplains, floodways
or other waterways of record; elevations of which, shall be based
on applicable Flood Insurance Studies, Flood Insurance Rate Maps,
Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps.
15. Location of model home. The location of proposed model home or
spec. house and required parking.
16. Commercial and industrial subdivisions. Preliminary Plats for
industrial or commercial subdivisions shall delineate who will be
responsible for addressing open space, landscaping and bufferyard
requirements.
A. Purpose. To provide a procedure whereby the construction of a model
home or homes may begin prior to the recording of the Final Plat.
Section
410.180
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.190
AO:506
B. Procedure. After receiving approval of the Preliminary Plat of a
proposed subdivision from the Planning and Zoning Commission and
City Council and after an approved set of construction plans have been
submitted, the developer may submit an application for a model home
for review by the City Planner and Building Inspector. The application
for a model home shall include all information as routinely required. In
addition, the application shall be accompanied by a plan, which shall
show the location, street elevation, size and the number and location of
parking areas of the model home in relation to the lots, streets and
utilities proposed in the subdivision.
C. Sale Or Occupancy. No part of the proposed subdivision may be
conveyed, nor an occupancy permit issued, for any structure therein
until the display home has been located on an approved lot in a
recorded subdivision. The Building Inspector, with approval of the City
Planner, may issue a temporary occupancy permit for the use of the
home as a model, office or showroom during the duration of
development of the subdivision, home construction, etc.
D. Driveways And Off-Street Parking. Off-street areas used for standing
and maneuvering of vehicles shall have concrete or asphalt driving
surfaces adequate for all-weather use, transitioning at the appropriate
grade and so drained as to avoid flow of water across sidewalks.
Section
410.190
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.190
AO:507

ARTICLE IV
Major Subdivision — Improvements
Section 410.200. General Procedures For The Preparation and
Submission of Subdivision Improvements Plans.
After approval of the Preliminary Plat and prior to approval of the Final
Plat, Construction Plans shall be prepared for all or a specified phase of the
subdivision.
Section 410.210. Procedure For Submission of Subdivision
Improvement Plans. [Ord. No. 03-56 §1, 8-25-2003; Ord. No. 03-82
§1, 12-8-2003; Ord. No. 04-64 §1, 10-11-2004]
A. Preparation Of Plans. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to
have construction plans for streets, utilities and other required
improvements prepared and submitted to the City for review. The
Construction Plans for all aspects of the site development shall be
prepared by a qualified professional engineer, registered in the State of
Missouri. All improvements shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with requirements of Article VI. General Principles of
Design and Minimum Requirements for the Layout of Subdivisions and
in accordance with the "Construction Specifications for Public
Improvements, City of Republic", as amended from time to time, on file
with at the offices of the City of Republic Public Works Department and
incorporated herein by reference. Five (5) copies shall be submitted for
review to the Public Works Director. The Construction Plan shall be any
scale from (1 inch = 10 feet) through (1 inch = 50 feet), so long as the
scale is an increment of ten (10) feet and is sufficiently clear in
reflecting details of the proposed construction. Construction Plans shall
be prepared on exhibits 24 inches x 36 inches and shall be bound by
staple on one side. All plan sheets shall be prepared to a degree to allow
for adequate review and construction. Each page shall contain an
approval block for approval from the City of Republic Publc Works
Department. The City may require additional details to be developed to
establish clarity for review and construction. [Ord. No. 16-23 § 1,
11-28-2016]
B. Approval Of Construction Plans. The City Planner shall coordinate
review and subsequent approval, with all related City departments, the
Public Works Director and City Engineer, of the Construction Plans. If
the City Planner determines that the plans do not meet the minimum
standards and require modification, correction and are not approvable,
than the City Planner shall forward a letter to the developer and his/her
engineer stating the deficiencies. After all related deficiencies have
been addressed and approval is given by all related departments and
the City Engineer, the City Planner shall issue an appropriate letter
certifying approval and notice to proceed with an application for water
and sewer main extension and other related permits from outside
agencies.
Section
410.200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.210
AO:509
C. Review By Outside Agencies. Engineering drawings of all required
improvements shall be reviewed and approved by the City, except for
improvements to be made under the jurisdiction of other Municipal,
County or State agencies, in which case the drawings shall be
submitted to the appropriate agency for review and approval. Where
review and approval of engineering drawings is made by such agency,
the City Planner shall be given written confirmation that the necessary
reviews have been completed and approvals have been granted.
D. Review By Consultants. Expenses incurred by the City for required
reviews, inspections, and/or related testing shall be reimbursed to the
City, by the developer, for all costs incurred by it in performing such
review, inspection and/or testing, including all professional fees
incurred as a result thereof. To insure payment or reimbursement of
such costs, fees and expenses, all developers, and such other persons or
entities associated with developers, as the Community Development
Department deems appropriate, shall execute a promissory note,
payable to the order of the City on demand, in such amount as is
anticipated to cover such costs, fees and expenses. The maker or
makers of such promissory note may satisfy the same by the timely
payment of all costs, fees and expenses incurred by the City as
identified hereinabove. Such promissory note shall provide for the
payment of interest at no less than twelve percent (12%) per annum
from and after the date of demand and shall further provide for the
payment of attorney fees by the maker or makers in the event of
default.
E. Pre-Construction Meeting And Final Plan Submittal. The City Planner
shall coordinate a pre-construction meeting with the developer, Project
Engineer, Construction Inspector, Public Works Director, general
contractor, all appropriate subcontractors and department heads. All
related construction practices, policies and requirements will be
discussed and established at the pre-construction meeting. It is the
responsibility of the applicant, engineer and contractor to check and
review all City requirements relating to the construction of public
improvements. A minimum of four (4) sets of approved plans prepared
on twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches bound plan sheets
and five (5) sets prepared on twelve (12) inches by eighteen (18) inches
bound plan sheets shall be submitted at or before the pre-construction
meeting.
F. Construction Permit. No person, firm or corporation shall develop,
install, alter, grade, remove vegetation, fill or modify any tract of land,
roadway or any City-owned utility within the City of Republic or cause
the same to be undertaken without first securing the approval of the
construction plans as required by this Chapter or other City ordinances.
The City shall charge a fee as part of the construction permit, in the
amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per acre of developed
property for field inspection of all related public infrastructure
including water, sewer, streets, stormwater and related infrastructure
Section
410.210
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.210
AO:510
Section 410.215. Construction Plans. [Ord. No. 04-19 §1, 3-8-2004;
Ord. No. 05-56 §1, 7-25-2005]
to be dedicated to the City as part of the development; thirty-five
dollars ($35.00) per fire hydrant for flow classification and painting;
one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per each combination sign installed;
one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) per each individual sign
installed; thirty dollars ($30.00) for a construction specifications book;
and one dollar twenty-four cents ($1.24) per linear feet of off-site
utility(ies) installation in excess of two hundred (200) linear feet.
Furthermore, no construction permit shall be issued until the following
has been received:
1. Receipt of paid construction permit fees on file relating to
inspection, signage and water and sewer testing.
2. The minimum number of approved construction plans to the City
Planner, sealed by the Project Engineer and signed under the hand
of the Public Works Director or his/her designee.
3. Approvals and permits from other affected County, State or Federal
agencies.
4. All off-site utility easements drainage easements and right-of-way
deeds shall be recorded by the County Recorder of Deeds and
provided to the City at or before the pre-construction meeting.
G. Staging. Where a subdivision is to be developed in stages, the
provisions of this Article shall apply to each stage. However,
improvements and financial guarantees may be required to extend
beyond the boundaries of a subdivision stage if such extension is
necessary to ensure the relative self-sufficiency of the stage pending
completion of the entire subdivision. Such extensions, schedules, and
similar arrangements shall be set forth in an agreement between the
developer and the Council prior to approval of the Final Plat.
H. Modification During Construction. All installation and construction
shall conform to the approved engineering drawings. However, if the
developer chooses to make minor modifications in design and/or
specifications during construction, he/she shall make such changes at
his/her own risk, without any assurance that the City will approve the
completed installation or construction. It shall be the responsibility of
the developer to notify the City of any changes from the approved
drawings. The developer may be required to correct the installed
improvement so as to conform to the approved engineering drawings.
I. As-Built Drawings. The developer shall submit to the City Planner at
least five (5) sets of "as-built" engineering drawings of the required
improvements that have been completed. The Project Engineer shall
certify each set of drawings in accordance with the requirements of
Section 410.360.
Section
410.210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.215
AO:511
A. The construction plan for all aspects of the site development shall be
prepared by a qualified professional engineer, registered in the State of
Missouri. Five (5) copies shall be submitted for review to the Public
Works Director. The construction plan shall be any scale from one (1)
inch equals ten (10) feet through one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet, so
long as the scale is an increment of ten (10) feet and is sufficiently clear
in reflecting details of the proposed construction. Construction plans
shall be prepared on exhibits twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36)
inches and shall be bound by staple on one (1) side. All plan sheets shall
be prepared to a degree to allow for adequate review and construction.
Each page shall contain an approval block for approval from the City of
Republic Public Works Department. The City may require additional
details to be developed to establish clarity for review and construction.
The plans shall generally consist of the following: [Ord. No. 16-23 § 1,
11-28-2016]
1. Title (cover) page containing, but not limited to, the following:
owner's and developer's name, engineer of record, name of project,
table of contents, general rules of construction, phone numbers of
utility suppliers and a record of submittals and approval blocks.
2. Street plans, sidewalk plans and profile sheets containing, but not
limited to, the following:
a. Pavement installation, widening or resurfacing improvements
dimensioned and developed in accordance with the standard
typical section applicable to the project;
b. Top of pavement mathematical profile grade elevations at
twenty-five (25) feet intervals on vertical curves and fifty (50)
feet intervals on tangent sections for all roadway construction.
Top back of curb elevations at twenty-five (25) foot intervals for
all horizontal curves, at thirty degree (30°) intervals for street
intersections and cul-de-sacs. Existing vertical curve
elevations shall be shown at points of extension at intervals of
twenty-five (25) feet. Existing vertical curve elevations shall be
shown at points of extension at intervals of twenty-five (25)
feet. PC and PT elevations shall be indicated at all curves and
intersections;
c. Resurfacing profile grade elevations on existing centerline and
edges of pavement at twenty-five (25) feet intervals and breaks
in grade (i.e. irregularities in pavement) and establish new
centerline and edge of pavement profiles; and
d. Existing and proposed grades at the centerline and left and
right back of curb.
3. Pavement striping, marking and signage plan containing, but not
limited to, the following:
a. Location, type of markings and signage prescribed;
Section
410.215
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.215
AO:512
b. The type of materials used; and
c. The method for installation. The plan shall be based and
designed on the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
4. Grading, erosion and sediment control plan containing, but not
limited to, the following:
a. Finished contours shall be shown to the limits of the project,
establishing the desired (planned) flow of all on-site
stormwater in connection with planned streets, sidewalks,
stormwater ditches, pipes and structures; and
b. Location and composition of silt fences, construction
entrances, catch basins and related temporary structures and
devices to prevent erosion, siltation and nuisances to adjacent
properties, storm sewers and streets.
5. Sanitary sewer plans and profile sheets containing, but not limited
to, the following:
a. Profiles establishing the class and size of pipe, invert
elevations, grade, distance between manholes and minimum
distance from other proposed or existing utilities. Profile
sheets shall accurately depict the elevation, size and material
type of intersecting proposed or existing utilities;
b. Plans establishing the exact location, class and size of service
lines; and
c. Plan and profiles establishing lift stations and related
components of the system. Site development details and
requirements shall be provided and referenced in accordance
with the Construction Specifications for Public Improvements.
6. Water plans containing, but not limited to, the following:
a. Plan view of the proposed system, including class of pipe and
size in relation to the back of curb, including fire hydrants,
gate valves, blow-off assemblies, service lines and meter pits,
etc.; and
b. Profile drawings, submitted at the discretion of the City, shall
accurately depict the elevation, size and material type of
intersecting proposed or existing utilities.
7. Additional submittals containing, but not limited to, the following
forms, documents and exhibits intending to parallel the provisions
of the Missouri Department of Natural Resources including specific
information for determining the most efficient and cost effective
manner in which to extend public utilities:
Section
410.215
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.215
AO:513
a. A copy of the application for the Missouri Department of
Natural Resources Request for Extension of Sanitary Sewer
and Public Drinking Water. The completed and executed
document shall be retained by the City;
b. Sanitary sewer engineering report containing a letter of
transmittal from the design engineer summarizing the
facilities, a discussion on the design criteria and assumptions
used, hydraulic and BOD loading calculations, an opinion as to
the conformity of the proposed sewer extension with the City of
Republic Master Plan and discussion on facility sizing in
regards to future development. If a lift station is proposed, the
engineering report shall include a feasibility study for
alternative facilities (gravity sewer) and the potential for
retirement of the proposed lift station;
c. Water engineering report containing a letter of transmittal
from the design engineer summarizing the facilities, a
discussion on the design criteria and assumptions used, a
hydraulic analysis demonstrating domestic and fire flow
conditions, an opinion as to the conformity of the proposed
extension with the City of Republic Water Master Plan and
discussion on facility sizing in regards to future development;
d. Easements for all proposed sewer and water extensions
located outside easements, to be dedicated via a final plat,
must be accompanied by draft instruments for the formal
dedication of temporary construction and permanent
easements. Depending upon the number of land owners and
the complexity of the proposed sewer extension, the City may
require a property owner's exhibit accompanied by an opinion
of title as issued by a recognized title company; and
e. Cost estimate indicating an engineer's statement of probable
cost for the construction of the proposed main extension. If a
sewer lift station or water pressure control facilities are
proposed, estimated operating costs for ten (10) years shall be
included.
8. Storm drainage, storm sewer plan and profile sheet containing, but
not limited to, the following:
a. Drainage plans indicating all existing and proposed storm
sewer lines, inlet boxes, manholes, basins, swales,
watercourses, culverts and other underground or at-grade
structures in the vicinity of construction and immediately
adjacent thereto. Pipe classes, sizes, grades, inverts, box
openings and related structure details shall also be established
and indicated on the plan sheets; and
b. Grading details pertaining to site development shall be shown
in plan or on cross-section sheets. Details shall be shown with
Section
410.215
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.215
AO:514
Section 410.220. Inspection and Acceptance of Subdivision
Improvements. [Ord. No. 03-56 §1, 8-25-2003]
respect to existing and proposed contours, normally at two (2)
foot intervals.
9. Detention plan containing, but not limited to, the following:
detention plans, elevations, dimensions, weir elevations and crosssections,
low-flow channels, pipe sizes, discharge and dissipation
structures.
10. Record drawings. One (1) record copy of all drawings,
specifications and addenda addressing public improvements shall
be maintained by the developer's contractor and by the City's
Construction Inspector in good order and annotated to show all
changes made during construction. Upon completion of the work,
these record documents will be delivered to the engineer of record
who shall provide copies of these documents, to include
reproducible copies and electronic copies or digital CAD files of the
revised drawings, to the City at no cost.
A. Certification By Project Engineer. In accordance with the "Construction
Specifications for Public Improvements" all improvements required by
this Chapter shall be inspected by the developer's engineer, or his/her
agent, and certified in writing to the City as having been completed,
except for improvements made under jurisdiction of other public
agencies, in which case engineers or inspectors of each agency will
make the necessary inspections. Where inspections are made by other
agencies, the Engineer shall be given written reports of each final
inspection.
B. Inspection By The City. In addition to inspection and certification by the
Project Engineer, the City shall provide inspection of all phases of
construction to field verify that the location of all infrastructure
installed are in coordination with submitted as-built plans.
C. Compliance With Standards. The developer shall bear the final
responsibility for the plans, construction drawings and the installation,
construction and inspection of all required improvements according to
provisions of this Chapter and to standards and specifications of various
public agencies.
D. Acceptance. Approval of installation and construction of improvements
by the Project Engineer shall not constitute acceptance by the City of
the improvements for dedication purposes. Acceptance shall be
established by approval of all related City departments and the
approval by all outside public agencies, including, but not limited to,
County, State or Federal Governments.
E. Site Cleanup. The developer shall be responsible for removal of all
equipment, material and general construction debris from the
Section
410.215
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.220
AO:515
subdivision and from any lot, street or public way or therein or adjacent
thereto. Dumping such debris into sewers, adjacent property or other
land in the City is also prohibited. Burning of debris is prohibited unless
a permit is obtained from the MoDNR.
Section
410.220
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.220
AO:516
ARTICLE V
Major Subdivision — Final Plat
Section 410.230. Application For Final Plat. [Ord. No. 03-80 §1,
11-24-2003; Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
The developer shall submit a completed application and applicable fees in
the amount of two hundred twenty-five dollars ($225.00) plus one dollar
($1.00) for each lot, a completed Final Plat checklist and a minimum of
five (5) copies of the proposed Final Plat or more, as required by the
City Planner, to the Republic Community Development Department at least
twenty (20) working days prior to the meeting of the City Council at which
the plat is to be considered for approval. A Final Plat and application shall
not be accepted for review after the two-year anniversary date of the City
Council's Preliminary Plat approval.
Section 410.240. Review Procedures.
The City Planner shall determine if the submittal is complete, and if so,
transmit the same to the City Clerk in adequate time for inclusion on the
agenda for the Council's next meeting. If the City Planner, Community
Development Director or City Engineer reviews the application and plat and
finds that it is incomplete or that the Minimum Required Improvements are
not completed, the City Planner shall so notify the applicant in writing and
shall note any deficiencies. Once all deficiencies have been addressed and
the final plat is signed by the owner, sealed by the surveyor of record and
all others required herein, the plat will be forwarded to the City Council for
approval by general ordinance, prepared by the City Attorney.
Section 410.250. Minimum Required Improvements. [Ord. No.
06-77 §1, 11-13-2006]
A. The owner or developer is required to have all subdivision
improvements, including sidewalks, completed prior to the filing of the
final plat. In lieu of the final completion of said improvements before the
plat is recorded, the owner or developer or other person who agrees
with the City to make the public improvements on behalf of the owner
or developer may post a surety bond with one (1) or more corporate
sureties engaged in the business of signing surety bonds in the State of
Missouri, an escrow agreement, letter of credit or other appropriate
security agreement for certain improvements with the approval of the
City Attorney and the City Administrator of the City of Republic, which
surety, escrow agreement or other appropriate security agreement will
insure to the City that the improvements will be completed by the
owner or developer.
1. Improvements related to ensuring public safety within the
development must be completed and accepted prior to the filing of
the final plat. All other improvements must be completed within
one (1) year after the recording of the final plat. The Director of
Section
410.230
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.250
AO:517
Public Works may require that certain improvements such as storm
sewers, off-site improvements and basic improvements necessary
for the provision of public health and safety be made and refuse
to accept security for such improvements when he determines
the improvements are necessary for the protection of adjacent
property or of the general public. The City may, upon proof of
hardship, extend the completion date set forth in said bond or
agreements for a maximum period of one (1) additional year;
provided a request for said extension is made prior to the end of
the one (1) year following recordation and provided the amount
of said security is revised pursuant to a revised estimate by the
Department of Public Works. The City Attorney and City
Administrator, acting in conjunction, may at any time during the
period of such bond accept a substitution of principal or sureties
on the bond or a substitution of a letter of credit, escrow or other
approved security agreement. The amount of the corporate surety
bond, escrow agreement or other appropriate security agreement
shall not be less than the estimated cost of the improvements, said
estimate of cost to be made by the Department of Public Works. The
City may defer at the time of final approval, subject to appropriate
conditions, the provision of any and all such improvements as, in
its judgment, are not appropriate because of incompatible grades,
future planning, inadequate or lack of connecting facilities or other
reasons. As a condition of deferral, the owner or developer shall
pay his share of the costs of the future improvements to the City
prior to the signing of the final plat or the owner or developer
may post an appropriate security approved in the same manner
as stated above which shall insure completion of said deferred
improvements upon demand by the City. If the improvements are
not completed within the specified time, the City Council may use
the funds from said security, or any necessary portion thereof, to
complete the same.
2. The release or reduction of said corporate surety bond, escrow
agreement or other appropriate security agreement shall be in
accordance with the following:
a. When a petition for improvements by the tax bill method is
filed for the improvements of this Section and when said
petition has passed the required remonstrance petition
assuring the City that all improvements will be installed, said
bond or agreements posted by the owner or developer to
insure the City the improvements of this Section may be
released and returned to the owner or developer.
b. The Director of Public Works with the approval of the City
Administrator may release or reduce said bond or agreements
posted by the owner or developer to insure to the City the
improvements of this Section when he has determined that all
required improvements have been satisfactorily completed and
Section
410.250
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.250
AO:518
Section 410.260. Effect of Final Plat Approval.
Final Plat approval shall confer upon the developer the conditional right
that the City Council will not change the general terms and conditions
under which the approval was granted. Approval of the Final Plat, by
general ordinance, and the subsequent recording of the Final Plat shall
constitute the subdivision of the property into lots and the creation and
dedication of right-of-way and utility easements.
Section 410.270. Monuments. [Ord. No. 04-19 §1, 3-8-2004]
the owner or developer's engineer or surveyor has certified
to said Director, through submission of a detailed "as-built"
survey plat of the subdivision indicating location, dimensions,
materials and other information required by said Director, that
the layout of the line and grade of all public improvements
are in accordance with construction plans for the subdivision
and that the improvements have been completed, are ready for
dedication to the local government and are free and clear of
any and all liens and encumbrances.
c. The Director of Public Works with the approval of the City
Administrator may reduce, upon request, said bond or
agreements when he has made the findings and received the
information required in the above Subsection (b), but such
reduction shall not exceed the ratio that the cost of completed
improvements bears to the total estimated cost of total public
improvements for the plat.
3. The City, its boards, commission and agents shall withhold all City
improvements or services of whatsoever nature, including the
furnishing of sewer, water, electricity and gas, from all additions
which have not been approved as provided by these regulations;
and further, no permits shall be issued by the Community
Development Department of the City of Republic on any property
which has not been approved as provided by these regulations.
[Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
4. Provided however, the improvements and permits withheld above
shall not be withheld by reason of the conditions therein stated
when the City finds the improvements are necessary to comply with
other ordinances of the City of Republic which carry a penalty for
failure to comply.
A. All monuments shall be set in the ground at least to the depth of the
minimum length given, unless they are encased in concrete. The
precise position of corner monuments shall be marked by a point on a
cap and the cap inscribed with the registration number o f the land
surveyor responsible for placement or the corporate registration
number or name of the company. Monumentation shall comply with the
following at a minimum.
Section
410.250
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.270
AO:519
Section 410.280. Existing or Proposed Features To Be Shown On
The Final Plat. [Ord. No. 05-23 §1, 3-28-2005]
1. Permanent monuments. Two (2) permanent monuments per
subdivision block, adjacent to or located in the right-of-way.
a. Minimum diameter of five-eights (5/8) inch by twenty-four (24)
inches length, steel or coated steel rebar or similar bar.
b. Monuments shall have a permanently attached cap of the same
or of a dissimilar metal if the metals are insulated with a plastic
insert to reduce corrosion.
2. Semi-permanent monuments. Located at each lot corner of each
platted lot in the subdivision.
a. Minimum diameter of one-half (1/2) inch by eighteen (18)
inches in length, steel or coated steel rebar or similar bar.
b. Monuments shall have a plastic or aluminum cap.
3. Elevation markers. For subdivisions platted in the vicinity of
floodplains, ponds, lakes, creeks and other major drainage
features, a permanent elevation marker shall be established at
location(s) required by the City to reference and verify minimum
finished floor elevations.
A. Prior to approval of the Final Plat, the City Planner and the City
Engineer shall review the Final Plat for conformance to the Preliminary
Plat and to determine that the plat shows or establishes the following
information, which shall be in substantial conformity to the Preliminary
Plat.
1. Name and code. The name of the subdivision, phase or addition as
provided on the Preliminary Plat.
2. Date of preliminary plat approval. The date and name in which the
Preliminary Plat was approved as shall be indicated on the Final
Plat. In addition, any ordinance, resolution or other bill passed by
the City Council or Planning and Zoning Commission that relates to
the subdivision or particular phase, shall be included on the plat.
3. Owners of record. The names and addresses of the owner(s) of
record, developer(s), engineer, or surveyor responsible for the
subdivision design.
4. Vicinity map. A vicinity map at a scale of four hundred (400) feet or
more to the inch shall be drawn on the preliminary plat. The map
shall indicate:
a. Section, Township, Range.
Section
410.270
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.280
AO:520
b. Adjacent City limits, other corporation or ad hoc district lines,
such as school or sewer districts, etc.
c. The nearest existing highways or thoroughfares, streets and
alleys in neighboring subdivisions or unplatted property.
5. Abutting owners. The name of adjacent subdivisions and the names
of record owners of adjacent parcels of unplatted land.
6. Boundary lines. The boundary lines, accurate in scale, of the tract
to be subdivided.
7. Streets — other features. The location, widths and names of all
existing or platted streets, right-of-way or other public ways within
or adjacent to the tract, and other important features such as
watercourses; railroad lines; corporation and township lines, utility
lines, etc.
8. Proposed design — street, drainage, etc. The layout, names and
widths of right-of-way, streets, alleys and easements serving
stormwater, sewer, water or other utilities within the property
being subdivided.
9. Proposed layout and legal description. The legal description of the
entire site to be subdivided, including approximate acreage in
tract, boundary lines, location and dimensions of newly created
tracts, parcels or lots that are part of the subdivision shall be
shown on plat. The dimensions and location of all arcs, radii,
internal angles, points of curvature and tangent boundaries and
other pertinent survey information necessary to an accurate
description and location. Survey data shall meet the standards
promulgated by the State of Missouri, "Missouri Minimum
Standards for Property Boundary Surveys", Division of Geology and
Land Survey, Missouri Department of Natural Resources. All survey
datum shall be vertically and horizontally tied to the City of
Republic Geographical Reference Stations (GRS).
10. Curvature and radius. When a street is on a circular curve, the
main chord of the centerline shall be drawn as a dotted line in its
proper place; and either in it or in an adjoining table, the bearing
and length shall be noted; the radius of the circle of which the
curve is a part; the central angle subtended; the bearing of the
radius at the point of curve; and the chord length and deflection
angles used in staking out the survey. The lot lines on the street
sides may be shown in the same manner or by bearings and
distances. When a curve of two hundred (200) feet radius or less is
used, it is sufficient to show the length and bearing of the main
chords, the radius at one (1) end of the curve, and the central
subtended.
Section
410.280
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.280
AO:521
Section 410.290. Registered Land Surveyor's Certificate.
A certification shall be included on the plat by a registered land surveyor to
the effect that the plat represents a survey made by him/her, and that the
locations of all required survey monuments, installed or to be installed, are
correctly shown thereon. The months and year during which the survey was
made shall be shown. The certification block shall substantially conform to
the following.
11. Lot information. The plat shall indicate the area, proposed setbacks
and exact location and distance of all structures and other physical
improvements in relation to proposed lot lines.
12. Zoning. Zoning boundary lines and proposed use of property.
13. North point, etc. Title, scale, north arrow, date of preparation and
date of each successive revision.
14. Floodplains, etc. The extent and location of floodplains, floodways
or other waterways of record; elevations of which, shall be based
on applicable Flood Insurance Studies, Flood Insurance Rate Maps,
Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps.
15. Location of model home. The location of the model home or spec.
house, if applicable, as it occupies a platted lot in the subdivision.
16. Commercial and industrial subdivisions. Final Plats for industrial or
commercial subdivisions shall delineate who will be responsible for
addressing open space, landscaping and buffer yard requirements.
17. Notes and related information. Notes pertaining to particular items
such as:
a. Access limitations;
b. Total area;
c. Total number of lots;
d. Smallest/largest lot;
e. Replat information;
f. Source of title;
g. Recording information for covenants and restrictions.
Section
410.280
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.290
AO:522
That I, _____________________________do hereby declare that this plat was
prepared under my supervision from an actual survey of the land herein
described prepared by ___________________________ dated _____________ and
signed by ____________________ P.L.S. No. _____________ and that the corner
monuments and lot corner pins shown herein were placed under the
personal supervision of ____________________ P.L.S. No. _____________ in
accordance with the Division of Geology and Land Survey, Missouri
Department of Natural Resource's "Current Missouri Minimum Standards
for Property Boundary Surveys as Promulgated by the Missouri
Department of Natural Resources".
_____________________________
Date Prepared
_____________________________
Signature:
_____________________________
Missouri Professional Land Surveyor
No.
_____________________________
Date:
Section 410.300. Owner's Certificate. [Ord. No. 04-19 §1, 3-8-2004;
Ord. No. 07-38 §1, 5-29-2007]
A signed statement, substantially conforming to the following shall be
included on the plat, which certifies that he/she had title to the land being
subdivided and all access rights as represented on the plat are hereby
dedicated. This certification block shall include a notary blank.
OWNER(S) DEDICATION
As owner(s) I/We, Owner(s) Name have caused the land described on this
plat to be surveyed, divided, mapped, and all access rights reserved and
dedicated as represented on the plat. I/We hereby dedicate, grant, and
convey right-of-way and easements shown hereon to the City of Republic.
Furthermore, I/We, certify that there are no suits, actions, liens, or trusts
on the property conveyed herein, and warrant generally and specially the
property conveyed for public use and will execute such further assurances
as may be required.
________________________________
Name of Owner(s) and/or Subdivider
________________________________
Date:
Section 410.310. Certificate of Taxes Paid. [Ord. No. 07-38 §1,
5-29-2007]
The plat shall contain a certification block for the City and County Official
to the effect that there are no unpaid taxes and unpaid special assessments
due and payable at the time of plat approval. The certification block shall
substantially conform to the following:
Section
410.290
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.310
AO:523
CERTIFICATE OF TAXES PAID
There are no unpaid taxes due and payable at the time of plat approval
and no unpaid special assessments, whether or not due and payable at
the time of plat approval on any of the lands included in this plat, and all
outstanding taxes and special assessments have been paid on all property
dedicated to public use.
________________________
Parcel Number
________________________
County Collection Official
________________________
Date
Section 410.320. City Council Certificate.
A statement of approval by the City Council indicating the date and
ordinance number in which Final Plat was accepted and approved. The
certification block shall substantially conform to the following.
APPROVAL BY THE CITY COUNCIL
I, , City Clerk of the City of Republic, Greene County, Missouri, Do hereby
certify that the Plat of ____________ was presented to, accepted and
approved by the City Council of said City of Republic, and approved by
General Ordinance No. ____________on the ____________day of ____________,
20____________.
________________________
City Clerk
________________________
Date
Section 410.330. Compliance With Land Use Regulations
Certification. Certificate of Compliance With Zoning and
Subdivision Regulations86 [Ord. No. 04-19 §1, 3-8-2004]
The Plat shall include a signature block establishing conformance to the
Land Use Regulations adopted by the City of Republic.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING AND SUBDIVISION
REGULATIONS
I, ______________________________, City Planner of the City of Republic,
Missouri, do hereby certify on the ______________ day of ____________, 20____,
the Final Plat of _______ _____________________ conforms to the City of
Republic Land Use Regulations, in accordance with Title IV of the Republic
Code of Ordinances.
86.Editor's Note — Ord. no. 04-19, adopted March 8, 2004, repealed section 410.330 "city
engineer's certification" and enacted new provisions set out herein. Former section
410.330 derived from city's original code book.
Section
410.310
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.340
AO:524
Section 410.340. Recorder's Office.
A title block shall be included on the plat for the Office of the Recorder of
Deeds, Greene County, Missouri substantially conforming to the following.
IN THE RECORDER'S OFFICE
I, ________________________, Recorder of Deeds, Greene County, Missouri,
do hereby certify that the within instrument of writing was on the day
of________________________, 20 , duly filed for record and is recorded in
the records in this office in book ________________________ page
________________________in testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand
and affixed my official seal at my office in Springfield, Missouri, this
________________________day of ________________________,
20________________________.
________________________
Recorder of Deeds
________________________
Date
Section 410.350. Final Submittal. [Ord. No. 05-56 §1, 7-25-2005]
A. Final submittal of the Final Plat shall be prepared on two (2)
reproducible original (mylars) 24" X 36" or those dimensions required
by the County Recorder of Deeds. The following shall be submitted in
addition to the original.
1. Sixteen (16) inches X twenty-four (24) inches scaled reproducible
mylar for the City's plat book.
2. Six (6) blue line copies (24" X 36"). The developer may submit more
than the required minimum of blue line copies.
3. All off-site easements and right-of-way deeds.
4. As-built drawings of the phase being approved.
5. Permits, on file, from MoDNR for authorization to connect and
place the water and sewer lines in service.
6. Copy of private and restrictive covenants to be recorded.
7. Electronic copies of the subdivision plat, infrastructure or as-built
plans, etc.
8. The community development staff may require additional elements
to incorporate the final plat to the City map or to supply related
government agencies with plats and reproducible prints, as
needed. [Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
Section
410.340
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.355
AO:525
Section 410.355. Maintenance After Approval. [Ord. No. 04-19 §1,
3-8-2004; Ord. No. 05-96 App. A §4, 12-12-2005]
The developer shall maintain and keep in repair all public infrastructure and
detention areas for a period of one (1) year from the date the constructed
improvements are approved by the City. To guarantee this maintenance, an
acceptable maintenance bond, letter of credit or other acceptable security
shall be provided in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the contract price
of the improvements against defects in workmanship and materials for the
above-mentioned one (1) year period. The bond, letter of credit or security
shall be filed with the City and be from a surety company licensed to do
business in the State of Missouri and in a form to be approved by the City
Attorney.
Section
410.355
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.355
AO:526
ARTICLE VI
General Principles of Design and Minimum Requirements For The
Layout of Subdivision87
Section 410.360. Functional Classification of Streets. [Ord. No.
04-19 §1, 3-8-2004]
As defined in this Chapter, the following terms are used as follows:
EXPRESSWAY — A limited-access highway with some grade crossings and
signals at major intersections intended for high-volume, moderate to high
speed traffic across the metropolitan area with minimal access to adjacent
land.
FREEWAY — A fully controlled access highway with grade-separated
interchanges at major thoroughfares. Intended for high-volume, high-speed
traffic movement between cities and across the metropolitan area and not
intended to provide direct access to adjacent land.
PRIMARY ARTERIAL — A street primarily intended to provide for highvolume,
moderate-speed traffic from one part of the City to another or
between major activity centers. Providing access to abutting property is a
secondary function and access points should be controlled.
SECONDARY ARTERIAL — A street which supplements and feeds the
principal arterial system and is intended for moderate-volume, moderatespeed
traffic. Access to abutting property is a secondary function and access
points should be partially controlled.
COLLECTOR — A street which collects and distributes traffic to and from
Local Streets and Arterial Streets. Collector Streets are intended for
moderate volume, low speed and short length through trips. The main
function of a Collector Street is to move traffic from Local Streets to the
Arterial System. A secondary function of a Collector Street is to provide
access to Local Streets.
LOCAL STREET — A street intended to provide access to abutting property
while its secondary function is to provide traffic flow and movement. Local
87.Editor's Note — Ord. no. 04-19, adopted March 8, 2004, repealed sections 410.360,
"construction plans"; 410.370, "record drawings"; 410.380, "maintenance after approval";
410.390, "street and block layout"; 410.400, "continuous streets"; 410.410, "street to
extend to boundary lines"; 410.420, "right angle intersections"; 410.430, "half-width
streets prohibited"; 410.440, "federal and state highways"; 410.450, "collector streets";
410.460, "private roads prohibited"; 410.470, "dead-end streets"; 410.480, "subdivision
blocks"; 410.490, "size of blocks"; 410.500, "access and connection to existing and future
streets; 410.510, "minimum rights-of-way of streets, alleys and easements for utilities";
410.520, "easements to be granted to the city"; 410.530, "minimum pavement and
sidewalk width"; 410.540, "street grades and curves"; 410.550, "water supply"; 410.560,
"bridges and culverts — closed storm sewers"; 410.570, "public sanitary sewer"; 410.580,
"subdivision sanitary sewer", 410.590, "private sewage collection"; 410.600, "planting";
410.610, "streetname signs"; 410.620, "utility service"; 410.630, "stakes"; 410.640, "final
cleanup of developed lots" and 410.645, "minimum distance between street lights and
enacted new provisions set out herein. Former sections 410.360 — 410.645 derived from
CC 1999 §§20-47 — 20-57, 20-59, 20-61 — 20-62, 20-66 — 20-69, 20-80 — 20-81; ord. no.
99-43 §§2(20-66), 2(20-67), 2(20-80), 9-27-1999; ord. no. 03-56 §1, 8-25-2003. At the
editor's discretion, sections 410.590 — 410.645 have been reserved for the city's future
use.
Section
410.360
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.360
AO:527
Streets, which comprise the largest percentage of total City street mileage,
are designed for low-volume, low-speed traffic. During the platting process
a Local Street may be designated as a Local-Commercial, Local-Highdensity
residential or Local-Low-density residential street, depending upon
the predominant land use it will serve.
Section 410.370. Design Standards — Streets and Sidewalks.88 [Ord.
No. 04-19 §1, 3-8-2004]
Section 410.380. Street Grades and Curves. [Ord. No. 04-19 §1,
3-8-2004]
Section 410.390. Easements To Be Granted To The City. [Ord. No.
04-19 §1, 3-8-2004]
A. The grades of streets shall not exceed the following except that, where
unusual or exceptional conditions exist, the Planning Commission may
modify these requirements:
1. Arterials. Five percent (5%) maximum.
2. Collector streets. Seven percent (7%) maximum.
3. Local streets, service drives and alleys. Ten percent (10%).
4. Pedestrian ways or crosswalks. Twelve percent (12%), unless steps
of an acceptable design are to be constructed.
5. Minimum grade. In no event shall the minimum grade of any street
be less than seventy-five hundredths percent (.75%) with lengths
not to exceed two hundred (200) feet.
6. Changes in street grades. All changes in street grades in excess of
one percent (1%) shall be connected by vertical curves of a
minimum length equal to fifteen (15) times the algebraic difference
in the rate of grade for highways, thoroughfares and parkways; and
one-half (½) of this minimum for all other streets.
7. Curvature of centerline. The radii of curvature on the centerline
shall not be less than the following:
a. Highways, etc. Highways, thoroughfares and parkways: four
hundred (400) feet.
b. Local streets, etc. Local streets, minor streets and service
drives: one hundred (100) feet.
A. Utility easements shall be provided adjacent to all lots and rights-ofway,
the following minimum utility easements are required.
88.Editor's Note: The Design Standards for Streets and Sidewalks Table is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
Section
410.360
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.390
AO:528
Section 410.400. Access Management. [Ord. No. 04-19 §1,
3-8-2004]
1. Utility easements adjacent to right-of-way: ten (10) feet.
2. Easements for off-site utilities: fifteen (15) feet.
3. Easements for all other utilities: fifteen (15) feet.
4. Temporary construction easements: sixty (60) feet.
A. Freeways, Expressways, Primary Arterials.
1. When subdividing land, all parcels shall have direct frontage on a
dedicated street to obtain access. Access to property via ingress/
egress easements shall not be allowed.
2. When subdividing land adjacent to Freeways, Expressways and
Primary Arterials, direct access from parcels to the arterial shall be
prohibited. Access shall be provided to Freeways, Expressways and
Primary Arterials via Local Streets, Collector Streets and
Secondary Arterial Streets.
3. If the land adjacent to the Freeway, Expressway or Primary Arterial
is zoned for commercial land uses, a Secondary Circulation System
shall be constructed according to the Major Thoroughfare Plan to
control access and maintain traffic flow. The Secondary Circulation
System shall be located at least four hundred forty (440) feet from
the highway and run parallel to the highway thus creating reverse
frontage lots.
4. In the case of infill development along Freeways, Expressways and
Primary Arterials, where direct access cannot be prevented
because of prior platting or existing development patterns, joint
access driveways shall be constructed.
5. In the Site Plan review process, commercial property along
Freeways, Expressways and Primary Arterials shall be required to
construct Internal Circulation Systems between parcels to provide
access management to the Arterial Street.
B. Collector Streets And Secondary Arterial Streets.
1. When subdividing land adjacent to Secondary Arterial Streets and
Collector Streets, direct access from parcels to the arterial or
collector shall be prohibited.
2. If the land adjacent to the Collector Street or Secondary Arterial
Street is zoned for commercial land uses, a Secondary Circulation
System shall be constructed according to the Major Thoroughfare
Plan to control access and maintain traffic flow. The Secondary
Circulation System shall be located at least two hundred twenty
(220) feet from a Secondary Arterial and one hundred twenty (120)
Section
410.390
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.400
AO:529
Section 410.410. Street Layout. [Ord. No. 04-19 §1, 3-8-2004]
The street layout of the subdivision shall be in conformity with the adopted
Transportation Plan. The design and arrangement of streets in the
subdivision shall provide for the continuation of streets in adjacent
subdivisions, where such extension is not prohibited by topographic
conditions. Local Streets shall be laid out so as to discourage their use by
through traffic. Streets shall be arranged in proper relation to topography
so as to result in usable lots and safe and reasonable grades, both for the
streets and driveways intersecting therewith.
Section 410.420. Intersections. [Ord. No. 04-19 §1, 3-8-2004]
Proposed Collector Streets and Secondary Arterial Streets shall intersect
one another at ninety degrees (90°). The street centerline shall never be
less than eighty-five degrees (85°) when a Collector Street or Secondary
Arterial Street is involved. The street centerline should never be less than
eighty degrees (80°) when a Local Street is involved. Four-way intersections
shall be created for minor interior streets. Street jogs with centerline offsets
of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall be prohibited on all
types of streets.
Section 410.430. Private Roads and Gated Developments. [Ord. No.
04-19 §1, 3-8-2004]
Section 410.440. Blocks. [Ord. No. 04-19 §1, 3-8-2004]
feet from a Collector and shall run parallel to the highway thus
creating reverse frontage lots.
3. In the case of infill development where direct access cannot be
prevented because of prior platting or existing development
patterns, the construction of turnaround drives shall be provided.
A. The Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council may
approve a plan or plat for a gated/private development if the proposal is
found to meet acceptable planning and design guidelines and shall
furthermore meet the following:
1. The proposed development shall not adversely affect existing or
planned neighborhoods, rights-of-way and public infrastructure.
2. The proposal must provide adequate information relating to
restrictive covenants, bylaws and contingencies to ensure the
development will be sustainable and self sufficient.
3. Private or gated developments shall meet the general principles of
design and minimum requirements for the layout of subdivision in
the City of Republic; all improvements shall be constructed to City
standards.
Section
410.400
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.440
AO:530
Section 410.450. Dead-End Streets and Cul-De-Sacs. [Ord. No.
04-19 §1, 3-8-2004; Ord. No. 04-71 §1, 12-27-2004]
Section 410.460. Street To Extend To Boundary Lines. [Ord. No.
04-19 §1, 3-8-2004]
A. The length of blocks in a subdivision shall be designed to be more than
five hundred (500) feet and shall not exceed one thousand five hundred
(1,500) feet as measured from centerlines of streets.
B. The width of blocks in a subdivision shall be designed to provide two (2)
tiers of lots, except where the lots back onto a major street, natural
feature, subdivision boundary or other feature or facility that requires
reverse frontage.
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, temporary dead-end streets shall
be approved where the layout of the subdivision requires streets to be
built to property lines for future development of the street system. A
temporary cul-de-sac will be required on roads more than one hundred
fifty (150) feet in length. When the staging of development allows the
developer to stage the construction of streets in the development.
B. Dead-end streets of reasonable length (normally not over five hundred
(500) feet) may be approved where necessitated by topography or
where, in the opinion of the Planning and Zoning Commission, they are
appropriate for the type of development contemplated. At the end of all
said streets, cul-de-sacs shall be built.
C. Cul-de-sac streets may be allowed if the street does not exceed five
hundred (500) feet in length measured from the centerlines and the
closed end shall have a turnaround encompassing a minimum right-ofway
diameter of one hundred (100) feet.
D. Sidewalks constructed on dead-end streets shall be extended to the end
of the street and around the entire radius of the cul-de-sac.
A. Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to
be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical
conditions or unless, in the opinion of the Planning and Zoning
Commission, such extension is not necessary or desirable for the future
development of adjacent tracts.
B. Where appropriate to the design, proposed streets shall be continuous
and in alignment with existing, planned or platted streets with which
they are to connect. It is not the intent of these regulations to require
that streets be designed in a grid-fashion. Streets shall be designed to
accommodate natural obstacles, such as known sinkholes, floodplains,
pipelines, streams or other waterways.
C. Local streets shall connect with surrounding streets where necessary to
permit the convenient movement of traffic between residential
neighborhoods or to facilitate access to neighborhoods by emergency
Section
410.440
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.460
AO:531
Section 410.470. Sidewalks and Greenways. [Ord. No. 04-19 §1,
3-8-2004]
Section 410.480. Water Supply. [Ord. No. 04-19 §1, 3-8-2004; Ord.
No. 05-82 §1, 10-10-2005]
service vehicles or for other sufficient reasons, but connections shall
not be permitted where the effect would be to encourage the use of
such streets by substantial through traffic.
A. Unless otherwise approved, sidewalks shall be required on both sides of
all existing and new Secondary Arterial Streets and Collector Streets
and one (1) side of all existing and new Local Streets, with the following
exception:
1. The Planning and Zoning Commission may deem it unnecessary to
require sidewalks on interior streets in industrial subdivisions.
2. The Director of Public Works may allow a developer, owner or
subdivider of a subdivision to pay the City twelve dollars ($12.00)
per linear foot of required sidewalk in lieu of constructing the
sidewalk.
B. The Planning and Zoning Commission may require greenways along
Secondary Arterials according to the City's Transportation Plan.
A. Where a public water supply main is reasonably accessible, in the
judgment of the Planning and Zoning Commission, the subdivision shall
be provided with a looped water distribution system adequate to serve
the area being platted, including a connection for each lot and
appropriately spaced fire hydrants, in accordance with requirements
set out below and in conformance with "Construction Specifications for
Public Improvements, City of Republic" on file at the offices of the City
of Republic Public Works Department and incorporated herein by
reference. All water system plans shall be designed and installed in
accordance with the City's Water System Master Plan. Main extensions,
upgrades and related looping required by the plan shall be done so at
the expense of the developer. [Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
B. The minimum size of a water main providing fire protection and serving
fire hydrants shall be six (6) inches in diameter. Larger mains shall be
required, if necessary, to allow withdrawal of the required fire flow
while maintaining the minimum residual pressure of twenty (20)
pounds per square inch throughout the distribution system or to
conform to the City's Water System Master Plan. Mains not providing
fire protection shall be no smaller than two (2) inches in diameter. All
mains shall be extended to adjacent property lines for future extension
and looping.
C. Fire Hydrants.
Section
410.460
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.480
AO:532
Section 410.490. Bridges and Culverts — Closed Storm Sewers.
[Ord. No. 04-19 §1, 3-8-2004]
Section 410.500. Public Sanitary Sewer. [Ord. No. 04-19 §1,
3-8-2004]
Where a public sanitary sewer main is reasonably accessible, in the opinion
of the Planning Commission, the subdivision shall be provided with a
complete sanitary sewer system connected with such sewer mains, at a
grade not less than one-half of one percent (.5%), including a lateral
connection for each lot. The sewer system shall be designed to extend
to adjacent property lines for future development. Such system and
connection shall comply with the regulations of the Missouri Department
of Natural Resources and to the regulations established by the City of
Republic.
1. Fire hydrants should be located in accordance with National Fire
Protection guidelines in reference to fire flow requirements in
heavy use areas and residential but shall be placed not more than
five hundred (500) feet apart in heavy residential areas and not
more than three hundred (300) feet apart in heavy business areas.
2. Fire hydrants located in heavy traffic areas, such as alleys or
parking lots, shall be provided with protection against collision.
A. Bridges And Culverts. Bridges, box culverts or concrete pipe culverts
shall be provided where continuous streets or alleys cross watercourses
in accordance with the design requirements of Section 410.650. Each
structure shall be designed to carry H-20 loadings using construction
materials and installation procedures conforming with "Construction
Specifications for Public Improvements, City of Republic" on file at the
offices of the City of Republic Public Works Department and
incorporated herein by reference. [Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
B. Closed Storm Sewers.
1. Closed storm sewers shall be designed for H-20 loadings and shall
conform with "Construction Specifications for Public
Improvements, City of Republic" on file at the offices of the City of
Republic Public Works Department and incorporated herein by
reference. [Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
2. Closed storm sewers shall be designed at and constructed to
grades such that the velocity therein shall not be less than three (3)
feet per second nor greater than twelve (12) feet per second.
3. Closed storm sewers shall extend to the furthest downstream point
of development with consideration given to velocities and to
providing discharge energy dissipaters to prevent erosion and
scouring along downstream properties.
Section
410.480
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.510
AO:533
Section 410.510. Subdivision Sanitary Sewer. [Ord. No. 04-19 §1,
3-8-2004]
Where a public sanitary sewer system is not reasonably accessible, in
the opinion of the Planning and Zoning Commission, but where plans for
the installation of sanitary sewers in the vicinity of the subdivision have
been prepared and approved by the Missouri State Water Pollution Board,
the developer shall install sewers in conformity with such plans. Where
immediate connection is not possible and until such connection with the
sewer system in the district can be made, the use of private sewage
treatment facilities may be permitted, provided such disposal facilities are
installed and maintained in accordance with the regulations and
requirements of the State Water Pollution Board and approved by the City
of Republic.
Section 410.520. Private Sewage Collection. [Ord. No. 04-19 §1,
3-8-2004]
Where no sewers are accessible and no plans for a sewer system have
been prepared and approved, the developer shall either install a sewage
collection and disposal system in accordance with the requirements of Title
VII: Utilities and/or the latest adopted Building Code.
Section 410.530. Planting. [Ord. No. 04-19 §1, 3-8-2004]
All landscaped strips, parkways and screening areas dedicated to the public
shall be graded, seeded and planted and maintained in accordance with
City regulations. Where shrubs are required for the purpose of screening,
location, specimen, density and other pertinent features shall be in
accordance with the City's regulations.
Section 410.540. Street Name Signs. [Ord. No. 04-19 §1, 3-8-2004]
All informational and regulatory signs, including, but not limited to, street
name signs, stop signs, etc., shall be installed in accordance with the
regulations of the City of Republic at the expense of the developer.
Section 410.550. Utility Service. [Ord. No. 04-19 §1, 3-8-2004]
Where practical, easements for underground conduits for utility lines shall
be provided along front, rear and side lot lines. All utilities, including, but
not limited to, electricity, telephone and cable television, shall be buried
underground for all major subdivisions.
Section 410.560. Property Corner and Boundary Monumentation.
[Ord. No. 04-19 §1, 3-8-2004]
Property monumentation and for permanent and semi-permanent
monuments shall comply with the Missouri Minimum Standards for
Property Boundary Surveys.
Section
410.510
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.570
AO:534
Section 410.570. Final Cleanup of Developed Lots. [Ord. No. 04-19
§1, 3-8-2004]
The owners and/or developers of all new homes, duplexes, apartments or
businesses constructed shall have thirty (30) days from the date of the
completion of the structure to get all yards and lots graded and all items
of construction removed from said yards and lots within thirty (30) days
from the completion of said structure. If the owner and/or developer fails
to properly grade and clean the lot and have its approval by the Building
Inspector for the City of Republic, then each and every day after the thirty
(30) day period shall be a separate violation of this Chapter and the owner
and/or developer shall be subject to a fine of up to one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for the violation of this Chapter. The Building Inspector shall
have, in accordance with the latest adopted Building Code, the authority to
extend this requirement at his or her discretion.
Section 410.580. Street Lights. [Ord. No. 04-19 §1, 3-8-2004; Ord.
No. 11-06 §1, 4-11-2011]
Section 410.590. through Section 410.645. (Reserved)
A. Public street lights on residential streets shall be spaced between two
hundred fifty (250) feet and three hundred fifty (350) feet apart, at
street intersections and cul-de-sacs. Street light spacing on all roads
with a classification of collector or above shall be determined on a caseby-
case basis.
B. Wires connecting street lights in new subdivisions shall be buried
underground at the expense of the developer and in accordance with
Chapter 410 Subdivision Regulations.
C. All poles installed in new subdivisions for the specific purpose of
providing on-street lighting shall be composed of concrete, fiberglass,
steel, aluminum or other materials not composed of wood.
D. The developer of the subdivision shall bear the expense associated with
meeting these standards. These requirements shall apply only to the
installation of new street lights in major subdivisions platted after
approval of this Code.
E. Once constructed and dedicated to the City, the Director of Public
Works is authorized to temporarily de-energize any street light until
such time as construction is initiated on a new inhabitable structure
within one hundred sixty (160) feet of the location of the street light.
Street lights at street intersections and cul-de-sacs shall not be deenergized
under this provision.
Section
410.570
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.590
AO:535

ARTICLE VII
Stormwater Management For Public and Private Improvements89
Section 410.650. General Provisions. [Ord. No. 02-47 §§1 — 2,
11-25-2002]
A. Scope. These design criteria set forth the minimum standards for
design of storm drainage facilities on public right-of-way and private
property in the City of Republic.
B. Authority.
1. These design criteria and standards set forth herein have been
adopted by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City
Council in accordance with the procedures and authority set forth
in the City of Republic.
2. Any development or grading begun after the date of passage of
these criteria and standards which does not comply with the
requirements set forth herein shall be deemed to be in violation of
the requirements established herein; and shall be subject to
enforcement measures and penalties set forth in Section 100.220 —
General Penalty.
C. Interpretations.
1. Where any of the provisions contained herein may be unclear or
ambiguous as they pertain to a particular site or situation,
interpretations of the policies, criteria and standards set forth
herein shall be made in writing by the Community Development
Director.
2. Such written interpretations shall be kept on file for future
reference for use in similar situations and shall be incorporated in
subsequent revisions for the standards, if deemed necessary for
general reference.
D. Appeals.
1. Where disagreements may arise over the interpretation of the
requirements set forth herein, appeals may be made to the City
Planner upon written request.
2. Information and supporting documentation for the appeal shall be
submitted with the request. The City Planner shall forward the
information to the Public Works Director, Community Development
Director or the City Engineer within three (3) calendar days
following receipt of the information.
89.Editor's Note — Ord. no. 02-47 §§1 — 2, adopted November 25, 2002, repealed sections
410.650 — 410.800 and enacted the new provisions set out herein. Former sections
410.650 — 410.800 derived from CC 1999 §20-66; ord. no. 88-1230, exhibit 1.
Section
410.650
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.650
AO:537
E. Approvals And Permits Required.
1. Grading permit. Storm drainage facilities may not be constructed
or altered without review and approval of the plans by the City and
issuance of a Grading Permit by the City for subdivisions or for
commercial or other sites.
2. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
stormwater permit.
a. Provisions of the 1987 Clean Water Act require that certain
stormwater discharges obtain an NPDES stormwater permit.
In Missouri, these permits are administered by the Missouri
Department of Natural Resources.
b. Federal rules for NPDES stormwater discharges are contained
in 40 CFR Parts 122, 123 and 124 of the Code of Federal
Regulations. State NPDES stormwater regulations are
contained in 10 CSR 20-6.200 of the Code of State Regulations.
Additional provisions for NPDES stormwater permits for land
disturbance activities and information regarding the City of
Republic General Permit for land disturbance activities are
contained in Section 410.710 of these Criteria.
c. "404" Permit.
(1) For certain activities, which involve the discharge of
dredged or fill materials into the waters of the United
States a Department of the Army permit may be required
as set forth Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. Rules for
404 permits are contained in 33 CFR Parts 320 through
330 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
(2) Determination of applicability for Section 404
requirements are generally made by the Kansas City or
Little Rock District office of the Corps of Engineers.
(3) A brochure regarding the Corps of Engineers regulatory
program may be obtained from the Corps offices.
F. Coordination With Other Jurisdictions.
1. Where proposed storm drainage facilities are located on property
adjoining to other local government jurisdictions design of storm
drainage facilities shall include provisions to receive or discharge
storm water in accordance with the requirements of the adjoining
jurisdiction, in addition to meeting City requirements.
2. In these cases two (2) additional sets of plans shall be submitted
and will be forwarded to the adjoining jurisdiction for review and
comment.
Section
410.650
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.650
AO:538
Section 410.660. Stormwater Planning and Design. [Ord. No. 02-47
§§1 — 2, 11-25-2002]
3. No grading or construction of storm drainage facilities may
commence without prior notification of the Missouri One Call utility
warning system at 1-800-DIG-RITE, as required by law.
G. Communications And Correspondence. Communications and
correspondence regarding stormwater plan review, policies, design
standards, criteria or drainage complaints shall be directed to the City
Planner at the City of Republic, 213 N. Main, Republic, Missouri 65738,
Phone: 417-732-3354.
H. Ownership And Maintenance.
1. Improvements on public road right-of-way. Storm drainage
improvements on public right-of-way shall, upon acceptance of the
constructed improvements, become the property of; and shall be
maintained by the City of Republic.
2. Improvements on private property.
a. Storm drainage improvements on private property shall be
maintained by the owner of the lot upon which the
improvements are located or by the Homeowners' Association
for improvements located in common areas.
b. All such improvements, which serve a drainage area, shall be
located in drainage easement and the public shall have such
rights of access to repair or maintain such facilities as set forth
in Section 410.680(E)(4).
A. Stormwater Management Goals. In order to ensure protection of the
general health and welfare of the citizens of the City of Republic,
planning and design of stormwater management measures shall meet
the following goals:
1. Prevent damage to residential dwellings and other building
structures from floodwaters.
2. Maintain emergency vehicle access to all areas during periods of
high water.
3. Prevent damage to roads, bridges, utilities and other valuable
components of the community's infrastructure from damage due to
flood waters and erosion.
4. Prevent degradation of surface and groundwater quality from
storm water runoff; preserve and protect quality of the
environment; and promote conservation of the City's natural
resources.
Section
410.650
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.660
AO:539
5. Minimize floodwater and erosion damage to lawns, recreational
facilities and other outdoors improvements.
6. Minimize traffic hazards from runoff carried in streets and roads.
7. Comply with applicable State and Federal laws and regulations.
8. Meet the foregoing goals in a manner which is cost effective and
which minimizes the cost of housing and development while
encouraging sound development practices.
9. Encourage innovative and cost effective planning and design of
stormwater management facilities.
10. Encourage multiple purpose design of stormwater management
facilities, to provide opportunities for recreational use and other
benefits to the community wherever possible.
The standards and criteria set forth herein provide the minimum
standards for planning and design of stormwater facilities. Where
a particular plan or design may be found to be in conflict with
a specific standard, achievement of the goals set forth above will
have precedence.
B. General Planning And Design Principles.
1. The City of Republic recognizes that stormwater management is an
important component of overall land use planning.
2. The City of Republic further recognizes that proper stormwater
planning significantly reduces the long-term costs to the
community both in terms of infrastructure cost and property losses
due to flood damage. It is much more cost effective to prevent flood
damage by proper design and construction, than to repair and
remediate problems, which have occurred through poor planning
and design.
3. The following general principles must be followed in preparing the
grading and storm drainage plans for all development sites:
a. Recognize the existing drainage system. The storm drainage
system differs from other utility systems in very important
ways:
(1) There is an existing natural drainage system.
(2) It is only needed when runoff occurs.
(3) The capacity of the system varies greatly depending upon
how much it rains.
(4) The system does not have to be constructed of man-made
components in order to function.
Section
410.660
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.660
AO:540
b. Because of these characteristics there has been a historic
inclination for fragmented planning and design of storm
drainage facilities.
c. Proper planning of storm drainage facilities must begin with
the recognition of the existing system, and include necessary
provisions for preserving or altering the existing system to
meet the needs of proposed development or construction.
d. Methods of delineating existing watercourses are outlined in
Section 410.670.
4. Allow for increase in runoff rates due to future urbanization.
a. As areas urbanize, peak rates of runoff increase significantly.
The City of Republic may require temporary detention and
storage of increased volumes of urban runoff in order to
minimize increases in flow rates as urbanization occurs.
However, the cumulative effects of on-site detention are
difficult to predict and control and development of
comprehensive basin-wide runoff models to determine these
effects does not appear likely in the foreseeable future.
b. For this reason, design of storm drainage improvements must
be based upon the assumption of fully urbanized conditions in
the area under consideration. No reduction in peak flow rates
due to detention, unless an approved runoff model has been
developed for the drainage basin under consideration. Any
detention storage facilities whose effects are considered must
be located within approved drainage easements.
5. Provide for acceptance of runoff from upstream drainage areas.
a. It is critical that provisions be made to receive runoff from
upstream drainage areas. Drainage easements or public rightof-
way must extend to a point where the upstream drainage
area is no greater than five (5) acres.
b. Drainage easements or public right-of-way must extend to the
point where existing watercourses enter the site. Where the
upstream drainage area is five (5) acres or greater, but does
not discharge onto the site through a defined watercourse, the
drainage easement shall extend to the point of lowest
elevation.
6. Provide a means to convey runoff across the site. Stormwater shall
be conveyed across the site in a system of overland drainage ways
and storm sewers. Overland drainage ways consists of streets, open
channels, swales and overland flow within drainage easements.
7. Discharge of runoff to downstream properties.
Section
410.660
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.660
AO:541
Section 410.670. Stormwater Runoff Calculations. [Ord. No. 02-47
§§1 — 2, 11-25-2002]
a. Concentrated runoff shall be discharged only into existing
watercourses, drainage easements or public road rights-ofway.
Where none of these exist, a drainage easement which
extends to the nearest watercourse, drainage easement or
public road right-of-way must be obtained from the
downstream property owner and proper provisions made for
conveyance of the peak flow from the one percent (1%) annual
probability (100-year) storm within the drainage easement.
b. One of the typical results of urbanization is that diffuse surface
flow or "sheet flow" is replaced with concentrated points of
discharge. Where concentrated flows are discharged to
downstream properties proper provisions must be made to:
(1) Allow the flow to spread over the same area as would have
occurred for the same rate of flow prior to the
development, and
(2) Reduce the rate of velocity to rates at least equal to the
pre-development values at the same rate of flow.
8. Assess potential downstream flooding problems.
a. It is important that a determination be made of conditions in
the watershed downstream of each development site.
Specifically it is important to determine whether there are
existing structures, which are subject to an unacceptable
flooding hazard.
b. If areas having an unacceptable flooding hazard occur
downstream of a development site, either on-site detention for
peak flow control or mutually agreed off-site improvements will
be required, as set forth in Section 410.680.
9. Assess potential water quality impacts on receiving waters.
Sediment, erosion and other water quality controls are required as
set forth in Section 410.700 and Section 410.710.
C. Drainage Easements. All areas subject to inundation during the major
storm must be included in drainage easements. Specific standards for
drainage easements to be provided for storm sewers, open channels
and detention facilities are set forth in Section 410.680.
A. This Section outlines acceptable methods of determining stormwater
runoff.
1. General guidelines.
a. For watersheds with a total tributary area less than two
hundred (200) acres and a one percent (1%) annual probability
Section
410.660
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.670
AO:542
(100-year) fully developed discharge less than three hundred
(300) cfs, the design storm runoff may be analyzed using the
rational formula.
b. For watersheds with a total tributary area greater than two
hundred (200) acres or with a one percent (1%) annual
probability (100-year) fully developed discharge greater than
three hundred (300) cfs, the design storm runoff shall be
analyzed using an approved hydrograph method.
2. Rational formula.
a. The rational formula, when properly understood and applied,
can produce satisfactory results for urban storm sewer design.
The rational formula is as follows:
Q
=
CIA
Where:
Q
=
Peak discharge in cubic feet per
second.
C
=
Runoff coefficient which is the ratio of
the maximum rate of runoff from the
area to the average rate of rainfall
intensity for the time of concentration.
I = Average rainfall intensity in inches per
hour for a duration equal to the time of
concentration.
A
=
Contributing watershed area in acres.
b. The basic assumptions made when applying the rational
formula are:
(1) The rainfall intensity is uniform over the basin during the
entire storm duration.
(2) The maximum runoff rate occurs when the rainfall lasts as
long or longer than the basin time of concentration.
(3) Runoff response characteristics are relatively uniform over
the entire basin.
(4) The time of concentration is the time required for the
runoff from the most hydraulically remote part of the basin
to reach the point of interest.
c. The drainage basin should be divided into sub-basins of a size
where all of the basic assumptions apply.
3. Time of concentration.
Section
410.670
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.670
AO:543
a. Time of concentration, etc., is calculated by:
tc = ti + tt (5 minutes, minimum);where
ti = initial, inlet or overland flow time in minutes,
tt = shallow channel and open channel flow time in
minutes.
b. Overland flow (sheet flow) time shall be calculated as:
ti = (n x L)0.8/(4.64 x S0.4) where
ti = initial, inlet or overland flow time in minutes,
n = Manning's n for sheet flow (from the following
table),
L = Overland flow length in feet, (maximum of
three hundred (300) feet),
S = Slope in feet per foot.
ROUGHNESS COEFFICIENTS (Manning's n) FOR
SHEET FLOW
SURFACE DESCRIPTION
Smooth surfaces (concrete, asphalt, gravel
or bare soil)
0.011
Fallow (no residue) 0.050
Cultivated soils:
Residue cover less than or equal to 20%
Residue cover greater than or equal to 20%
0.060
0.170
Grass:
Short grass prairie
Dense grasses1
Bermuda grass
0.150
0.240
0.410
Range (natural) 0.130
Woods:2
Light underbrush
Dense underbrush
0.400
0.800
NOTES:
1 Includes species such as weeping lovegrass, bluegrass,
buffalo grass, blue grama grass and native grass mixtures.
Section
410.670
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.670
AO:544
2 When selecting n, consider cover to a height of about 0.1
feet. This is the only part of the plant cover that will obstruct
sheet flow.
Shallow channel velocities may be estimated from Figure 3-1
in reference 11.
Open channel flow velocities may be estimated from
Manning's equation. Open channel velocities are generally
estimated under bank full conditions.
The basin time of concentration calculation techniques are
described in detail in TR-55, Chapter 3 (reference 11).
4. Hydrograph methods.
a. Methodologies.
(1) The most common hydrograph techniques are those
developed by the Corps of Engineers and the Soil
Conservation Service. These methods are preferred,
however other proven techniques will be accepted.
(2) The Corps of Engineers HEC-1 Flood Hydrograph Package
and Soil Conservation Service TR-55 computer models are
the preferred runoff models. Other models may be used
with approval from the City.
(3) The runoff model must include the entire drainage basin
upstream of the proposed development. The model shall
be prepared in sufficient detail to ensure that peak runoff
rates are reasonably accurate.
(4) The runoff model shall be developed for the following
cases:
(a) Case 1: Existing conditions in the drainage basin prior
to development of the applicant's property.
(b) Case 2: Existing conditions in the drainage basin with
developed conditions on the applicant's property.
(c) Case 3: Fully developed conditions in the entire
drainage basin.
b. Rainfall.
(1) Rainfall depth-duration-frequency and intensity-durationfrequency
curves for the Republic area are included in the
standard drawings. The design rainfall intensities were
developed from the U.S. Department of Commerce,
National Weather Service, Technical Paper 40 (reference
19) and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration publication "HYDRO-35" (reference 9).
Section
410.670
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.670
AO:545
Section 410.680. Stormwater Drainage Structures. [Ord. No. 02-47
§§1 — 2, 11-25-2002; Ord. No. 04-19 §1, 3-8-2004]
(2) Rainfall depths for use with hydrograph techniques shall
be taken from "Rainfall Frequency atlas of the Midwest,
Bulletin 71" (reference 23).
(3) Rainfall shall be distributed in time using Huffs
Distribution or the Pilgrim-Cordery Distribution adapted
to local rainfall data (references 20 and 21) as shown in
the following table. Other distributions may be used upon
approval from the City.
Pilgrim-Cordery Method Synthetic Rainfall Mass
Curves
Cumulative Fraction of Storm Duration
Cumulative
Fraction
of
Depth 1-Hour 2-Hour 3-Hour 4-Hour 6-Hour
.00 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00
.05 .03 .03 .03 .02 .05
.10 .07 .05 .05 .03 .09
.15 .11 .10 .06 .05 .14
.20 .14 .17 .09 .06 .20
.25 .17 .22 .11 .08 .28
.30 .23 .25 .13 .14 .35
.35 .29 .27 .19 .20 .41
.40 .35 .29 .31 .27 .43
.45 .41 .30 .39 .33 .46
.50 .47 .31 .44 .38 .49
.55 .56 .41 .47 .47 .60
.60 .65 .51 .54 .56 .70
.65 .73 .60 .64 .64 .80
.70 .82 .69 .70 .74 .86
.75 .91 .78 .73 .83 .89
.80 .93 .82 .81 .87 .93
.85 .95 .87 .89 .90 .96
.90 .97 .92 .94 .93 .97
.95 .99 .96 .98 .97 .98
1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
Section
410.670
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.680
AO:546
A. Inlets.
1. Inlet locations. Inlets shall be provided at locations and intervals
and shall have a minimum inflow capacity such that maximum
flooding depths set below are not exceeded for the specified storm;
at all sump locations where ponding of water is not desired and
where drainage cannot be released at the ground surface.
2. Inlet interception capacities.
a. Inlet capacities shall be determined in accordance with the
Federal Highway Administration HEC-12 Manual (reference
5).
b. Nomographs and methods presented in the Neenah Inlet Grate
Capacities report (reference 12) may also be used where
applicable.
c. The use of commercial software utilizing the methods of
HEC-12 is acceptable. It is recommended that software be preapproved
for use by the City.
3. Clogging factors. The inlet capacities determined as required in
this Section must be reduced as follows, in order to account for
partial blockage of the inlet with debris:
Inlet Type And Location Clogging Factor
Type SS Curb Opening Inlets:
on grades
in sumps
0.9
0.8
Grated Inlets:
on grades
in sumps
0.6
0.5
Inlet lengths or areas shall be increased as required to account
for clogging.
4. Interception and bypass flow. It is generally not practical for inlets
on slopes to intercept one hundred percent (100%) of the flow in
gutters. Inlets must intercept sufficient flow to comply with street
flooding depth requirements. Bypass flows shall be considered at
each downstream inlet, until all flow has entered approved storm
sewers or drainage ways.
5. Allowable street depths. Urban streets are a necessary part of the
City drainage system. The design for the collection and conveyance
of storm water runoff is based on a reasonable frequency and
degree of traffic interference. Depending on the street
classification, (i.e. local, collector, etc.) portions of the street may
be inundated during storm events. Drainage of streets are
Section
410.680
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.680
AO:547
controlled by both minor and major storm events. The minor
system is provided to intercept and convey nuisance flow. Flow
depths are limited for the major storm to provide for access by
emergency vehicles during most flood events. When the depths of
flow exceed the criteria presented in this Section a storm sewer or
open channel system is required.
a. General design guidelines.
(1) Allowable flow depths: Flow in the street is permitted with
allowable depths of flow as follows:
(2) Local streets: Crown of the street for the runoff from a
5-year rainfall, top of curb for runoff from a 25-year
rainfall. Runoff from a 100-year rainfall should be
contained within the right-of-way.
(3) Collector streets: The equivalent of one (1) ten (10) foot
driving lane must remain clear of water during a 5-year
rainfall, top of curb for runoff from a 25-year rainfall.
Runoff from a 100-year rainfall should be contained within
the right-of-way.
(4) Arterials and parkways: Two (2) ten (10) foot lanes must
remain clear of water, one (1) in each direction, during a
5-year rainfall. Top of curb for runoff from a 25-year
rainfall. Runoff from a 100-year rainfall should be
contained within the right-of-way.
Where allowable depths are exceeded a storm sewer
system must remove the excess water.
(5) Arterials and parkways: Two (2) ten (10) foot lanes must
remain clear of water, one (1) in each direction for the
25-year storm. For the 100-year storm, a maximum of six
(6) inches at the crown, depth at the gutter shall not
exceed eighteen (18) inches.
Where allowable depths are exceeded a storm sewer
system must remove the excess water.
b. Cross flow. Cross flow at intersections is permitted up to the
following depth.
Street
Classification
5-year Storm
Allowable Depth
25-year Storm
Allowable Depth
Local 6" in cross pan flow
line
12" at gutter
Collector No cross flow
permitted
6" at gutter
Section
410.680
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.680
AO:548
Street
Classification
5-year Storm
Allowable Depth
25-year Storm
Allowable Depth
Arterial or Parkway No cross flow
permitted
No cross flow
permitted
c. Hydraulics. The allowable storm capacity of each street section
with curb and gutter is calculated using the modified
Manning's formula for both the 2-year and 25-year storm
event.
Q = 0.56(Z/n)S1/2d8/3
Where, Q = discharge in cubic feet per second
Z = cross slope of the street in feet per foot
d = depth of flow at the gutter in feet
S = longitudinal slope of the street in feet
per foot
n = Manning's roughness coefficient
6. Types of inlets allowed.
a. Public streets.
(1) Curb opening inlets. Type "SS" standard curb opening
inlets as shown Drawing 140 shall be used for public
streets with curb and gutter.
(2) Graded inlets.
In general the use of grated inlets in streets, which require
adjustment when streets are repaved will not be
permitted.
Where conditions are such that curb inlets cannot
intercept the required rate of flow, necessary to control
street flooding depth or to provide diversion of flow to
detention, sedimentation or infiltration basins, "trench
inlets" with veined grates may be specified with approval
of the City.
Other types of inlets will not be permitted unless approved
by the City.
b. Outside of public right-of-way. The type of inlets specified
outside of public right-of-way is left to the discretion of the
designer provided the following criteria are met:
(1) Maximum flooding depths for the major or minor storm as
set forth above are not exceeded.
(2) General safety requirements set forth below are met.
Section
410.680
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.680
AO:549
(3) All inlets shall be depressed a minimum of two (2) inches
below the surrounding grade to allow proper drainage to
the inlet and prevent inadvertent ponding in the area
around the inlet.
(4) Inlets in pavements shall be provided with a concrete
apron.
7. General safety requirements. All inlet openings shall:
a. Provide for the safety of the public from being swept into the
storm drainage system; the maximum allowable opening shall
not exceed six (6) inches in width.
b. Be sufficiently small to prevent entry of debris which would
clog the storm drainage system;
c. Be sized and oriented to provide for safety of pedestrians,
bicyclists, etc.
B. Storm Sewers.
1. Design criteria.
a. Design storm frequency. The storm sewer system, beginning at
the upstream end with inlets, is required when the 5-year peak
flow in the street exceeds five (5) cfs or when allowable street
depths are exceeded. Allowable street depths are specified
above.
b. Construction materials. Storm sewers may be constructed
using reinforced concrete, corrugated metal (steel or
aluminum) or plastic pipe. The materials, pipes or
appurtenances shall meet one (1) or more of the following
standards:
PIPE MATERIAL STANDARD
Reinforced Concrete Pipe —
Round
ASTM C-76 or AASHTO
M-170
Reinforced Concrete Pip —
Elliptical
ASTM C-507 or AASHTO
M-207
Reinforced Concrete Pipe —
Joints
ASTM C-443 or AASHTO
M-198
Reinforced Concrete Pipe —
Arch
ASTM C-506 or AASHTO
M-206
Pre-cast Concrete Manholes ASTM C-478 or AASHTO
M-199
Pre-cast Concrete Box Pipe ASTM C-789/C-850 or
AASHTO M-259/M-273
Section
410.680
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.680
AO:550
PIPE MATERIAL STANDARD
Corrugated Steel Pipe-
Metallic Coated for Sewers
and Drains
AASHTO M-36
Corrugated Aluminum Alloy
Pipe and Under Drains
AASHTO M-196
Bituminous Coated
Corrugated Metal Pipe and
Pipe Arches
AASHTO M-190
Corrugated PVC Pipe ASTM D-3034 and ASTM
F-679
Corrugated Polyethylene Pipe ASTM D-1248
c. Vertical alignment.
(1) The sewer grade shall be such that a minimum cover is
maintained to withstand AASHTO HS-20 loading on the
pipe. The minimum cover depends upon the pipe size, type
and class and soil bedding condition, but shall not be less
than one (1) foot from the top of pipe to the finished grade
at any point along the pipe. If the pipe encroaches on the
street subgrade, approval is required. Manholes will be
required whenever there is a change in size, direction,
elevation grade and slope or where there is a junction of
two (2) or more sewers. The maximum spacing between
manholes for storm sewers (cross sectional area less than
twenty-five (25) square feet) shall be four hundred (400)
feet. For large storm sewers (cross sectional area greater
than twenty-five (25) square feet), manholes for
maintenance access need only be placed a minimum of
every five hundred (500) feet; access to the laterals can be
obtained from within the larger storm sewer.
(2) The minimum clearance between storm sewer and water
main (for new construction), either above or below shall be
twelve (12) inches. Concrete encasement of the water line
will be required for clearances of twelve (12) inches or less
when the clearance between existing water mains cannot
be obtained.
(3) The minimum clearance between storm sewer and
sanitary sewer (for new construction), either above or
below, shall be eighteen (18) inches. In addition, when an
existing sanitary sewer main lies above a storm sewer or
within eighteen (18) inches below, the sanitary sewer shall
have an impervious encasement or be constructed of
structural sewer pipe for a minimum of ten (10) feet on
each side of the storm sewer crossing.
Section
410.680
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.680
AO:551
(4) Siphons or inverted siphons are not allowed in the storm
sewer system.
d. Horizontal alignment.
(1) Storm sewer alignment between manholes shall be
straight except when approved by the City. Approved
curvilinear storm sewers may be constructed by using
radius pipe. The radius requirement for pipe bends is
dependent upon the manufacturer's specifications.
(2) A minimum horizontal clearance of ten (10) feet is
required between sanitary and water utilities and the
storm sewer.
(3) The permitted locations for storm sewer within a street
ROW are: (a) on centerline, (b) between centerline and
curb and (c) behind the curb. Storm sewer shall not be
placed on the area within the wheel lanes of the pavement.
e. Pipe size. The minimum allowable pipe size for storm sewers is
dependent upon a diameter practical from the maintenance
standpoint. For storm sewers less than fifty (50) feet in length
the minimum allowable diameter is fifteen (15) inches. All
other pipe shall have a minimum diameter of eighteen (18)
inches.
f. Storm sewer capacity and velocity.
(1) Storm sewers should be designed to convey the design
storm (25-year) flood peaks without surcharging the storm
sewer. The sewer may be surcharged during larger floods
and under special conditions when approved by the City.
(2) The capacity and velocity shall be based on the Manning's
n-values presented in Table I. The maximum full flow
velocity shall be less than fifteen (15) fps. Higher velocities
may be approved by the City if the design includes
adequate provisions for uplift forces, dynamic impact
forces and abrasion. The minimum velocity in a pipe based
on full flow shall be two and one-half (2.5) fps and the
minimum slope shall be one-half percent (0.50%) to avoid
excessive accumulations of sediment. The energy grade
line (EGL) for the design flow shall be no more than six (6)
inches below the final grade at manholes, inlets or other
junctions. To insure that this objective is achieved, the
hydraulic grade line (HGL) and the energy grade line
(EGL) shall be calculated by accounting for pipe friction
losses and pipe form losses. Total hydraulic losses will
include friction, expansion, contraction, bend, manhole
and junction losses. The methods for estimating these
losses are presented in the following Sections.
Section
410.680
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.680
AO:552
g. Storm sewer outlets. All storm sewer outlets into open
channels shall be constructed with a headwall and wingwalls
or a flared-end-section. Riprap or other approved material shall
be provided all outlets.
h. Hydraulic evaluation. Presented in this Section are the general
procedures for hydraulic design and evaluation of storm
sewers. The user is assumed to possess a basic working
knowledge of storm sewer hydraulics and is encouraged to
review textbooks and other technical literature available on
the subject.
i. Pipe friction losses. Pipe friction losses are estimated using
Equation 1001 and Manning's formula (Equation 1002) which
are expressed as follows:
Hf = Sf x L (1001)
Where, Hf = head loss due to friction
(feet)
Sf = friction slope from
Manning's equation (feet per foot)
L = length of pipe segment (feet)
and V = 1.49 x R2/3 x Sf1/2/n (1002)
Where, V = velocity of flow (feet per
second)
R = hydraulic radius = A/WP
(feet)
Sf = friction slope (feet per foot)
A = area of flow (square feet)
WP = wetted perimeter (feet)
n = Manning's roughness
coefficient (Table I)
j. Pipe form losses. Generally, between the inlet and outlet, the
flow encounters, in the flow passageway, a variety of
configuration such as changes in pipe size, branches, bends,
junctions, expansions and contractions. These shape variations
impose losses in addition to those resulting from pipe friction.
Form losses are the result of fully developed turbulence and
can be expressed as follows:
HL = K (V2/2g) (1003)
Where, HL = head loss (feet)
K = loss coefficient
V2/2g = velocity head (feet)
Section
410.680
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.680
AO:553
g = gravitational acceleration
(32.2 ft/sec2).
The following is a discussion of a few of the common types of
form losses encountered in storm design.
(1) Expansion losses. Expansion losses in a storm sewer will
occur when the sewer outlets into a channel. The
expansion will result in a shearing action between the
incoming high velocity jet and the surrounding outlet
boundary. As a result, much of the kinetic energy is
dissipated by eddy currents and turbulence. The loss head
can be expressed as:
HL = Kx
(V12/2g)(1-(A1/A2))2
(1004)
Where, A = cross section area in
square feet
V1 = average upstream
pipe flow velocity, feet per
second
Kx = expansion loss
coefficient.
Subscripts 1 and 2 denote the upstream and
downstream sections respectively. The value
of Kx is about one (1.0) for a sudden
expansion (such as an outlet to a channel)
and about two-tenths (0.2) for a welldesigned
expansion transition. Table II
presents the expansion loss coefficient for
various flow conditions.
(2) Contraction losses. The form loss due to contraction is:
HL = Kc(V22/2g)(1-(A2/A1)2)2 (1005)
Where, Kc = Contraction loss coefficient
Kc is equal to 0.5 for a sudden contraction and about 0.1
for a well-designed transition. Subscripts 1 and 2 denote
the upstream and downstream sections respectively.
Table II presents the contraction loss coefficient for
various flow conditions.
(3) Bend losses. The head losses for bends in excess of that
caused by an equivalent length of straight pipe may be
expressed by the relation:
HL = Kb(V2/2g) (1006)
Where, Kb = Bend coefficient
Section
410.680
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.680
AO:554
The bend coefficient has been found to be a function of:
(a) the ratio of the radius of curvature of the bend to the
width of the conduit, (b) deflection angle of the conduit,
(c) geometry of the cross section of flow and (d) the
Reynolds Number and relative roughness. Recommended
bend loss coefficients for standard bends, radius pipe and
bends through manholes are presented in Table II.
(4) Junction and manhole losses. A junction occurs where one
(1) or more branch sewers enter a main sewer, usually at
manholes. The hydraulic design of a junction is in effect
the design of two (2) or more transitions, one (1) for each
flow path. Allowances should be made for head loss due to
the impact at junctions. The head loss at a junction for
each pipe entering the junction can be calculated from:
HL = (V22/2g) = Kj(V12/2g) (1007)
Where, V2 = the outfall flow velocity
V1 = the inlet velocity
Kj = junction loss coefficient
Because of the difficulty in evaluating hydraulic losses
at junctions (Reference 6) due to the many complex
conditions involving pipe size, geometry of the junction
and flow combinations, a simplified table of loss
coefficients has been prepared. Table II presents the
recommended energy loss coefficients for typical manhole
or junction conditions encountered in the urban storm
sewer system.
(5) Partially full pipe flow. When a storm sewer is not flowing
full, the sewer acts like an open channel and the hydraulic
properties can be calculated using open channel.
(6) Storm sewer outlets. When the storm sewer system
discharges into an open channel, additional losses, in the
form of expansions losses, occur at the outlet. For a
headwall and no wing walls, the loss coefficient Ke is one
(1.0). For a headwall with forty-five degree (45°) wing
walls, the loss coefficient is about one and fourteen
hundredths (1.14). For a flared-end-section (which has a
D2/D1 ratio of two (2) and a theta angle of around thirty
degrees (30°)) the loss coefficient is approximately onehalf
(0.5).
(7) Connection pipes.
(a) Connector pipes are used to convey runoff from an
inlet to the storm sewer. If, however, the storm sewer
runs through the inlet, then a connector pipe is not
Section
410.680
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.680
AO:555
needed. Connector pipes can connect a single inlet to
the storm sewer or they can be connected in a series.
(b) These bends, turns and flows through the connector
pipe give rise to three (3) hydraulic losses: a change
from static to kinetic energy to get the water moving
through the connector pipe, an entrance loss from the
inlet to the connector pipe and a friction loss along the
length of the connector pipe. The total head loss in the
connector pipe can be calculated from the following
equation:
Hcp = Hv + Ke x Hv + Sf x L (1009)
Where, Hcp = head loss in the connector
pipe (feet)
Ke = Entrance loss coefficient
Hv = velocity head in the pipe,
assuming full pipe flow (feet)
and the other variables are as previously defined. The
value of the entrance loss coefficient is determined
from Table II.
(c) If the connector pipes are connected in series, the
head loss in each pipe is calculated from Equation
1009 and the total head loss is the summation of the
individual head losses.
2. Easements. Easements shall be provided for all storm sewers
constructed in the City of Republic that are not located within
public rights-of-way. The minimum easement widths are as follows:
a. For pipes forty-eight (48) inches or less in diameter or width
the required easement width is fifteen (15) feet.
b. For pipes and boxes greater than forty-eight (48) inches in
width the required easement width is fifteen (15) feet plus half
the width of the proposed storm sewer.
c. Storm sewers greater than eight (8) feet in depth to the flow
line may require additional easement width.
d. All easements required for construction, which are not
included on the final plat shall be recorded and filed with the
City prior to approval of the construction drawings.
C. Design Standards For Culverts.
1. Structural design. All culverts shall be designed to withstand an
HS-20 loading in accordance with the design procedures of
AASHTO "Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges". The
designer shall also check the construction loads and utilize the
Section
410.680
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.680
AO:556
most severe loading condition. The minimum allowable cover is one
(1) foot.
2. Design capacity. Culverts shall be designed to pass a 25-year storm
with one (1) foot of freeboard prior to overtopping the road or
driveway.
3. Headwater. The maximum headwater for the major storm design
flow shall be one and one-half (1.5) times the culvert diameter for
round culverts or one and one-half (1.5) times the culvert rise
dimension for shapes other than round.
4. Inlet and outlet protection. For road and driveway culverts larger
than fifteen (15) inches, culverts are to be designed with protection
at the inlet and outlet areas as provided in Section 410.710 of this
criteria. Headwalls or end sections are to be located a sufficient
distance from the edge of the shoulder or the back of walk to allow
for a maximum slope of 3H:1V to the back of the structure. The type
of outlet protection required is as follows:
V<7FPS 7FPS<V<15FPS V>15FPS
Minimum Riprap
protection
Riprap protection
or Energy
Dissipater
Energy dissipater
5. Velocity limitations. The maximum allowable discharge velocity is
fifteen (15) feet per second.
6. Culvert hydraulics. It is recommended that the procedures outlined
in the publication "Hydraulic Design of Highway Culverts"
(reference 4) be used for the hydraulic design of culverts.
Backwater calculations demonstrating the backwater effects of the
culvert may be required.
D. Design Standards For Bridges.
1. Structural design. All bridges shall be designed to withstand an
HS-20 loading in accordance with the design procedures of
AASHTO "Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges" (reference
13). The designer shall also check the construction loads and utilize
the most severe loading condition.
2. Design capacity. Bridges shall be designed to pass the 100-year
storm with one (1) foot of freeboard between the water surface and
the bridge low chord.
3. Backwater. "Backwater" is defined as the rise in the water surface
due to the constriction created by the bridge approach road fills.
The maximum backwater for the 100-storm design flow shall be one
(1) foot.
Section
410.680
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.680
AO:557
4. Velocity limitations. Discharge velocities through bridge openings
shall be limited to fifteen (15) feet per second. Abutment and
channel scour protection shall be provided at all bridges.
5. Bridge hydraulics. All bridge hydraulics shall be evaluated using
the procedures presented the publication "Hydraulics of Bridge
Waterway" (reference 14). Backwater calculations demonstrating
the effects of the bridge and approach fills compared to the existing
flood stages shall be submitted for all bridges.
E. Design Standards For Open Channels.
1. General design guidelines.
a. Natural channels. The hydraulic properties of natural channels
vary along the channel reach and can be either controlled to
the extent desired or altered to meet the given requirements.
Natural channels used as part of the drainage system must be
evaluated for the effects of increased peak flow, flow duration
and volume of runoff due to urbanization.
b. Grass lined channels. Grass lined channels are the most
desirable of the artificial channels. The channel storage, lower
velocities and the greenbelt multiple use benefits obtained
create significant advantages over other artificial channels.
Unless existing development restricts the availability of right
of way, channels lined with grass should be given preference
over other artificial types. The minimum slope in a grass-lined
channel shall be one percent (1.0%) unless a concrete low flow
channel is installed.
c. Concrete lined channels. Concrete lined channels are
sometimes required where right of way restrictions within
existing development prohibit grass-lined channels. The lining
must be designed to withstand the various forces and actions,
which tend to overtop the bank, deteriorate the lining, erode
the soil beneath the lining and erode unlined areas. The
minimum slope in a concrete lined channel shall be one-half
percent (0.50%).
d. Rock lined channels. Rock lined channels are constructed from
ordinary riprap or wire enclosed riprap (gabions etc.). The rock
lining permits higher design velocity than for grass lined
channels. Rock linings will normally be used only for erosion
control at culvert/storm sewer outlets, at sharp channel bends,
at channel confluences and at locally steepened channel
sections.
e. Other lining types. The use of fabrics and other synthetic
materials for channel linings has increased over the past
several years. Proposed improvements of this type will be
Section
410.680
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.680
AO:558
reviewed on an individual basis as for applicability and
performance.
2. Hydraulics. An open channel is a conduit in which water flows with
a free surface. The calculations for uniform and gradually varied
flow are relatively straightforward and are based upon similar
assumptions (e.g. parallel streamlines). The basic equations and
computational procedures are presented in this Section.
a. Uniform flow. Open channel flow is said to be uniform if the
depth of flow is the same at every section of the channel. For a
given channel geometry, roughness, discharge and slope, there
is only one possible depth, the normal depth. For a channel of
uniform cross section the water surface will be parallel to the
channel bottom for uniform flow.
b. The computation of normal depth for uniform flow shall be
based upon Manning's formula as follows:
Q = (1.49/n)AR2/3S1/2
Where, Q = Discharge in cubic feet per second (cfs)
n = Roughness coefficient (Table I)
A = Cross sectional flow area in square feet
R = Hydraulic radius, A/P, in feet
P = Wetted perimeter in feet
S = Slope of the energy grade line (EGL) in feet/foot
For channels with a uniform cross section the EGL slope and
the bottom slope are assumed to be the same.
c. Critical flow. The design of earth or rock channels in the
critical flow regime (Froude numbers from 0.9 to 1.2) is not
permitted. The Froude number is defined as follows:
F = V/(gD)0.5
Where, F = Froude number
V = Velocity in feet per second (fps)
g = Acceleration of gravity, 32.2 ft/sec2
D = Hydraulic depth in feet = A/T
A = Cross sectional flow area in square feet
T = Top width of flow area in feet
The Froude number shall be calculated for the design of all
open channels.
d. Gradually varied flow.
Section
410.680
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.680
AO:559
(1) The most common occurrence of gradually varied flow in
storm drainage is the backwater created by culverts,
storm sewer inlets or channel constrictions. For these
conditions the flow depth will be greater than normal
depth in the channel and the water surface profile must be
computed using backwater techniques.
(2) Backwater computations can be made using the methods
presented in Chow (reference 1). Many computer
programs are available for computation of backwater
curves. The most widely used program is HEC-2, Water
Surface Profiles, developed by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers (reference 2) and is the program recommended
for backwater profile computations. Another program by
the Federal Highway Administration is WSPRO and is
acceptable for use in backwater computations.
3. Design standards.
a. Flow velocity. Maximum flow velocities shall not exceed the
following:
Channel Type Max. Velocity
Grass lined* 5 fps
Concrete 15 fps
Rock Lined 10 fps
*Refer to item f. below
b. Maximum depth. The maximum allowable channel depth of
flow is three (3) feet for the design flow.
c. Freeboard requirements.
(1) "Freeboard" is defined as the vertical distance between
the computed water surface elevation for the design flow
and the minimum top of bank elevation for a given cross
section.
(2) For all channels one (1) foot minimum of freeboard is
required.
(3) Freeboard shall be in addition to super elevation.
d. Curvature. The minimum channel centerline radius shall be
three (3) times the top width of the design flow.
e. Super elevation. Super elevation shall be calculated for all
curves. An approximation of the super elevation h may be
calculated from the following formula:
Section
410.680
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.680
AO:560
Section 410.690. Stormwater Detention Design. [Ord. No. 02-47 §§1
— 2, 11-25-2002]
H = V2T/(gr)
Where,
h = Super elevation in feet
V = Velocity in fps
T = Top width of flow area in feet
G = Acceleration of gravity, 32.2 ft/sec2
r = radius of curvature in feet
Freeboard shall be measured above the super elevated water
surface.
f. Grass channels.
(1) Side slopes shall be three (3) (horizontal) to one (1)
(vertical) or flatter. Steeper slopes may be used subject to
additional erosion protection and approval from the City.
(2) For design discharges greater than fifty (50) cfs, grade
checks shall be provided at a maximum of two hundred
(200) feet horizontal spacing.
(3) Channel drops shall be provided as necessary to control
the design velocities within acceptable limits.
(4) Vertical drops may be used up to three (3) feet in height.
Drops greater than three (3) feet shall be baffled chutes or
similar structures.
(5) The variation of Manning's n with the retardance and the
product of mean velocity and hydraulic radius as shown in
Figure 7.23 in reference 17 shall be used in the capacity
calculations. Retardance curve C shall be used to
determine the channel capacity and retardance curve D
shall be used to determine the velocity.
4. Easements.
a. Easements shall be provided for all open channels constructed
in the City of Republic that are not located within public rights
of way. The minimum easement width for open channels is the
flow width inundated by a 100-year event plus fifteen (15) feet.
b. All easements required for construction, which are not
included on the final plat shall be recorded and filed with the
City prior to approval of the construction drawings.
A. Purpose.
Section
410.680
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.690
AO:561
1. Detention facilities are used to reduce storm water runoff rates by
storing excess runoff.
2. The usual function of a detention facilities is to provide sufficient
storage such that peak runoff rates are not increased when
development occurs.
B. Policy. The primary goal of the City of Republic stormwater
management program is the prevention of flood damage to residential,
commercial and public property. In adopting this policy, City of Republic
recognizes that:
1. There are many areas in the City where residential flooding occurs
because of inadequately sized drainage ways.
2. Flooding depths and frequency will increase as development
occurs upstream of these areas.
3. Detention basins are the only effective "on-site" means which can
be used to control peak runoff storm water rates as areas develop.
4. The City of Republic further recognizes that:
a. The best means to assure effective performance of a detention
basin utilize is perform reservoir routing calculations using
hydrographs.
b. Such methods have not been in widespread use in this area,
but rather a method known as the "Simplified Volume Formula"
has been the basis of City detention policy.
c. Use of the Simplified Volume Formula frequently does not
result in adequately sized detention facilities.
d. The inaccuracy of the Rational Method upon which the
Simplified Volume Formula is based increases as the area
under consideration increases.
e. Even though the Simplified Volume Formula has severe
limitations, requirement of detailed analytical methods may
not be justified in all cases.
f. Detention basins designed using the Simplified Volume
Formula do provide a minimal amount of flooding protection
and potential water quality benefits by functioning as sediment
basins.
5. Therefore, in order to provide a reasonable level of flood protection
to homes and businesses, while maintaining a climate favorable for
development and economic growth, City of Republic has
established the following policy for design of detention facilities.
C. Methods of Analysis. The method of analysis to be required for the
design of detention facilities will be determined as follows:
Section
410.690
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.690
AO:562
1. Detailed analysis will be required in the following cases:
a. In areas where residences or other structures located
downstream of a development can be shown to have an
imminent flooding hazard a detailed analysis using
hydrographs and reservoir routing techniques will be required.
b. Residences or other structures will be defined as having an
imminent flooding hazard when the lowest point, at which
surface runoff may gain entry, is located at or below the
estimated flooding level which would result from a storm with
an annual probability of one percent (1%) or greater under
conditions existing in the basin prior to development of the
applicant's property (i.e., affected by the "100-year" storm).
c. Consideration of downstream flooding problems will be limited
to the area which may reasonably be expected to be
significantly affected by runoff from the applicant's property.
d. Detailed analysis will be required for all detention facilities
where the peak runoff rate from the area upstream of the
detention facility (off-site and on-site) exceeds fifty (50) cfs
(cubic feet per second) for a storm with an annual probability
of one percent (1%) (the "100-year" storm) under fully
developed conditions.
(Note: This would be the rate of flow from approximately
twelve (12) acres for residential areas or five (5) acres for fully
paved commercial areas.)
2. Simplified analysis will be permitted in the following cases: For
areas where there are no imminent downstream flooding problems
and where the peak runoff rate from the drainage area (off-site and
on-site) upstream of the detention facility does not exceed fifty (50)
cfs for the one percent (1%) annual probability ("100-year") storm
under fully developed conditions, the Simplified Volume Formula
may be used.
3. Alternatives to detention.
a. Fee in lieu of detention. In cases where channelization or other
improvements can be shown to be more effective than
detention in reducing the flooding hazard to downstream
properties and where no adverse effects to downstream
properties will result from construction of such improvements,
the City may enter into an agreement with the applicant to
accept compensation in lieu of constructing on-site detention
facilities.
b. The City has established the following formula for the fee in
lieu of detention:
Section
410.690
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.690
AO:563
Fee = K * (Ia) acres of impervious surface added
Where Ia is the increase in impervious area (roofs, pavement,
driveways, patios, etc.) in acres and K shall be determined as
follows:
K shall equal ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) up to and
including forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560)
square feet (one (1) acre) of impervious area added plus five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for impervious area added in
excess of forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560)
square feet (one (1) acre).
K is a factor determined by the City. This factor is based upon
the net financial gain, which the developer would realize if
the detention facility is not built. This amount will generally
be equal to the construction cost of the detention facility plus
revenue from sale of additional lots or increased value of lots,
less the cost of developing the lots, including utilities and
streets, financing costs, sales costs and reasonable profit. The
City shall evaluate this formula annually and make the
appropriate adjustments.
c. Criteria for approving an alternative to detention. The City will
evaluate each request for an alternative design or fee in lieu of
detention based on the following criteria. The City of Republic
reserves the right to set precedent with each case considered
depending upon the unique circumstances surrounding each
request.
(1) Size of site in relation to the stormwater generated.*
(2) Size of the site in relation to the drainage area.*
(3) Impact on properties downstream of site.*
(4) Areas of concern as identified by the City of Republic's
Stormwater Master Plan.
(5) Location of the site with respect to floodplains, streams or
other large watercourses.
(6) Location of the site with respect to environmentally
sensitive areas.
(7) Approval of previous requests.
Section
410.690
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.690
AO:564
* Downstream impacts shall generally be
considered insignificant when the added
upstream impervious area is less than ten
percent (10%) of the total contributing
watershed area. Exceptions to this rule
include development where downstream
areas are known to have an imminent
flooding hazard as defined in Section
410.690.
d. Residential subdivisions. Unless otherwise approved by the
City, through review of stormwater calculations and criteria
referenced herein, detention shall be required in all major
residential subdivisions and the fee in lieu of detention
established in Section 410.690(C-3(a)) shall apply. Upon
request by a developer, the City may consider alternatives to
the fee in lieu of detention in cases where it can be proven that
the absence of detention will not adversely affect downstream
property owners. Each request will be evaluated on a case-bycase
basis and a fee in lieu detention may be established for
the purposes of regional improvements within the watershed
or abroad in the City.
e. Justified exceptions. The City may consider, upon request, a
waiver of detention and the fee in lieu for sites, in which the
alteration of the site is inconsequential and will not
substantially increase the runoff. A justified exception will be
granted for sites based on the following criteria.
(1) Existing sites in which the addition of impervious surface
will not increase more that five thousand (5,000) square
feet.
(2) Sites in which existing gravel, chat or stone parking lots or
driveways are paved with asphalt cement or concrete
surfaces. This shall not apply to parking areas or
circulation routes in which vegetation has consumed the
site and altered the ability to shed or absorb runoff. The
City shall exercise strict discretion with respect to
approving exceptions based on these criteria.
(3) Sites in which a change in use has occurred, that does not
increase the impervious area of the site.
(4) Subdivisions meeting the definition of a minor subdivision
or the development of individual single-family-residential
homes on individual lots in existing subdivisions.
f. Procedure. A request for approval of an alternative to
detention must begin with the applicant providing the City with
stormwater calculations for the increased runoff from the
Section
410.690
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.690
AO:565
development. In addition to providing calculations, the
applicant must submit a request for alternative design based
on the criteria established above. The City Planner will
coordinate review of the request with the Public Works
Department, City Engineer or other departments impacted by
the request. If the City determines the request is justified the
City Planner will notify the applicant or his representative of
the approval and the fee required in lieu of installing detention.
g. Minimum fee in lieu of detention established. The City of
Republic has established a minimum fee of one thousand one
hundred fifty dollars ($1,150.00) in lieu providing detention to
be paid upon approval by the City.
4. Innovation in design.
a. It is the desire of the City that detention facilities be designed
and constructed in a manner to enhance aesthetic and
environmental quality of the City as much as possible.
b. The City of Republic therefore encourages designs, which
utilize and enhance natural settings and minimize disturbance
and destruction of wooded areas, natural channels and
wetlands.
5. Interpretation.
a. Interpretations of the detention policy will be made by the City
Engineer or City Planner in writing.
b. Appeals of the decisions of the City Engineer or City Planner
may be made, in writing, to the Community Development
Director.
D. Design Criteria.
1. General.
a. Detention facilities shall discharge into a drainage easement or
public right-of-way.
b. One (1) foot of freeboard shall be provided between the
maximum water surface elevation (maximum stage for a one
percent (1%) annual probability event) and the minimum top of
berm or wall elevation.
c. Embankment slopes steeper than three (3) horizontal to one
(1) vertical (3H:1V) are not permitted.
d. In certain instances, such as when the existing development
conditions runoff from a watershed would exceed the capacity
of the existing downstream facilities, retention basins (i.e., no
Section
410.690
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.690
AO:566
outlet or with a release rate at the capacity of the downstream
facilities) for the storm runoff may be required by the City.
e. Dry detention basins shall maintain a minimum bottom slope of
two (2) feet per hundred (100) feet (two percent (2%)).
f. Trickle channels shall have a minimum slope of one-half (0.5)
foot per hundred (100) feet (one-half percent (0.5%)).
g. The maximum allowable depth of ponding for parking lot
detention is twelve (12) inches.
h. Parking lot detention may not inundate more than ten percent
(10%) of the total parking area.
i. All parking lot detention areas shall have a minimum of two (2)
signs posted identifying the detention pond area. The signs
shall have a minimum area of one and one-half (1.5) square
feet and contain the following message:
WARNING:
This area is a storm water detention pond and
is subject to periodic flooding to a depth of
twelve (12) inches.
j. The sign shall be reflective and have a minimum height of
forty-eight (48) inches from the bottom of the sign to the
parking space finished grade. Any suitable materials and
geometry of the sign are permissible, subject to approval by
the City.
2. Detailed analysis.
a. Detailed analysis shall be performed using hydrograph
methodologies and reservoir routing techniques.
b. The most common techniques are those developed by the
Corps of Engineers and the Soil Conservation Service. These
methods are preferred, however other proven techniques will
be accepted.
c. Detention basins designed by detailed methods shall be
designed on the basis of multiple storm recurrence frequencies
to ensure that they function properly for both frequent storms
and large infrequent storms.
d. A minimum of three (3) recurrence frequencies, the fifty
percent (50%), ten percent (10%) and one percent (1%) annual
probability storms (the "2-year, 10-year and 100-year" storms)
must be considered.
e. The runoff model must include the entire drainage basin
upstream of the proposed detention pond. The model shall be
Section
410.690
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.690
AO:567
prepared in sufficient detail to ensure that peak runoff rates
are reasonably accurate.
f. The runoff model shall be developed for the following cases:
(1) Case 1: Existing conditions in the drainage basin prior to
development of the applicant's property.
(2) Case 2: Existing conditions in the drainage basin with
developed conditions on the applicant's property.
(3) Case 3: Fully developed conditions in the entire drainage
basin.
(4) Cases 1 and 2 are utilized to determine the required
detention volume and the type of outlet structure to be
provided and shall be analyzed for the three (3) storm
recurrence frequencies required above.
(5) The detention facility shall be designed such that peak
outflow rates from the facility for Case 2 are no greater
than the rates determined in Case 1 for each of the three
(3) storm recurrence frequencies required.
(6) The storage volume provided shall not be less than the
difference in total runoff volume between Case 1 and Case
2.
(7) Case 3 is used determine the size of the overflow spillway.
Case 3 need only be analyzed for the one percent (1%)
annual probability ("100-year").
(8) The overflow spillway will, in most cases, be combined
with the outlet structure.
3. Submittals. The following information must be submitted for
detention ponds designed by detailed methods:
a. Information regarding analytical methods and software to be
used, including:
(1) Name of software to be used.
(2) Type and distribution of precipitation input.
(3) Method for determining precipitation losses.
(4) Type of synthetic hydrograph.
(5) Method for routing hydrographs.
(6) Method used for reservoir routing.
b. Map(s) showing sub-basin delineation, topography, presumed
flow routes and pertinent points of interest; soil types; existing
Section
410.690
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.690
AO:568
basin development conditions used in the model; fully
developed conditions used in the model.
c. Routing diagram for the runoff model.
d. A summary of sub-basin characteristics used for program
input.
e. Stage-area or stage-storage characteristics for the basin in
tabular or graphic form.
f. Stage-discharge characteristics for the outlet structure and
overflow spillway in tabular or graphic form; hydraulic data for
weirs, orifices and other components of the control structure.
g. A printout of the input data file.
h. A summary printout of program output, including plots of
hydrographs. (These are intended to be the printer plots
generated by the software.)
4. Simplified analysis.
a. Method of evaluation. Differential runoff rates shall be
evaluated by equation:
R = (Cd X I100) - (Cu X I100)
Where, R = Differential Runoff Factor
Cd = Runoff Coefficient for developed conditions
Cu = Runoff Coefficient for developed conditions
I100 = Intensity for 100-year storm
b. "C" values shall be determined from the following table:
SUGGESTED RUNOFF COEFFICIENTS
"C" Value Surface Conditions
.10—.15 Tall grass, brush
.15—.20 Parks, golf courses, farms and one (1) acre
single-family residences
.35 Single-family residences on lots of not less than
15,000 sq. ft.
.45 Single-family residences on lots of not less than
10,000 sq. ft.
.47 Single-family residences on lots of not less than
7,500 sq. ft.
.51 Single-family residences on lots of not less than
6,000 sq. ft.
.90 Gravel surfaces.
Section
410.690
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.690
AO:569
SUGGESTED RUNOFF COEFFICIENTS
"C" Value Surface Conditions
.95 Asphalt and concrete surfaces.
1.00 Buildings and other structures.
c. Volume of Detention. Volume of detention shall be determined
according to the "Simplified Volume Formula", as follows:
V = R X A X tc (min.) x 60 (sec./min.)
V = Total volume of detention (cu. ft.)
R = Differential Runoff Factor
A = Area of project in acres
tc = Time of concentration (5 minutes, minimum)
d. Time of Concentration.
(1) SCS Method. The preferred method for determining time
of concentration shall be the method set forth in Chapter 3
of the Soil Conservation Service Technical Release No. 55,
"Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds", 2nd Edition,
1986.
(2) Other Methods.
(a) Time of concentration may also be calculated by other
accepted methods providing reasonable results.
(b) The time of concentration used in the formula shall be
determined based upon existing conditions.
e. Rainfall Intensity. Rainfall intensity shall be determined from
Drawing 20.
f. Required Volume. The required volume of detention shall be
determined from the following Table:
Calculated Volume Required Volume
1 cu. ft. thru 500 cu. ft. 500 cu. ft.
501 cu. ft. through 5,999 cu.
ft.
Round up to nearest 500 cu.
ft.
5,000 cu. ft. through 9,999 cu.
ft.
Round up to nearest 1,000 cu.
ft.
10,000 cu. ft. thru 49,999 cu.
ft.
Round up to nearest 5,000 cu.
ft.
Above 50,000 cu. ft. Round up to nearest 10,000
cu. ft.
5. Control structures.
Section
410.690
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.690
AO:570
Section 410.700. Sinkholes and Karst Features. [Ord. No. 02-47 §§1
— 2, 11-25-2002]
a. Detention facilities designed by the simplified analysis shall be
provided with obvious and effective outlet control structures.
These outlet structures may include v-notch weirs or
rectangular weirs, as well as pipe. Plan view and sections of
the structure with adequate detail shall be included in plans.
b. The design discharge (Q) for the low-flow outlet shall not
exceed the existing runoff for the one-year storm. The
maximum discharge shall be designed to take place under total
anticipated design-head conditions. The design-head storage
volume is not to be considered a part of the volume of
detention required.
c. Sizing of a low-flow pipe shall be by inlet control.
d. Low-flow pipes shall not be smaller than four (4) inches in
diameter to minimize maintenance and operating problems,
except in parking lot and roof detention where minimum size
and configuration of opening shall be designed specifically for
each condition.
e. Overflow spillways will be required on all detention facilities,
which have storage volumes of one thousand (1,000) or more
cubic feet.
f. The overflow opening or spillway shall be designed so that the
combination flow of the low flow outlet and the flow over the
spillway will not exceed the total peak runoff for the improved
area. The total peak runoff is to be determined from a 25-year
frequency rain for drainage areas less than one (1.0) square
mile and from a 100-year frequency rain for drainage areas one
(1.0) square miles or greater.
A. General.
1. The City of Republic is located on the Springfield Plateau of the
Ozarks physiographic region. This area is underlain by
Mississippian Age limestone, which is highly susceptible to
solutional weathering. As a result, sinkholes, springs and caves are
common.
2. In many areas of the City special consideration must be given to
flood hazards and potential for groundwater contamination due to
the presence of sinkholes, caves, losing streams, springs and other
features associated with karst geology.
3. The requirements set forth herein, are intended to provide specific
criteria for design and construction for any site upon which
sinkholes or other karst features are located.
Section
410.690
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.700
AO:571
4. Interpretations of these requirements shall be made and appeals
may be made according to the procedures set forth in these Design
Criteria.
B. Policy. In keeping with the intent of the City Development Regulations
the following policy is set forth for development in areas containing
sinkholes:
1. Development in sinkhole areas will be based upon the following
axioms:
a. Avoidance.
b. Minimization.
c. Mitigation.
2. Construction in sinkholes shall be avoided. Exceptions will be made
only in situations where it can be conclusively demonstrated that
there are no practical alternatives to such construction.
3. These situations are mostly likely to arise where:
a. An underground cavity has caused a collapsed sinkhole to
form, after subdivision approval or building construction.
b. A sinkhole has been altered or filled either unknowingly or
prior to passage of these regulations.
c. Maintenance and operation is required for existing roads and
utilities.
d. Location of existing streets or utilities would render access or
utility service to a property impractical or cost prohibitive.
4. In these types of cases, measures, which will have minimal impact
on the sinkhole or receiving water, may be proposed. Plans for
minimal alteration can be approved provided it is conclusively
demonstrated that the proposed plan is the minimum practical
alternative.
5. In these cases potential impacts of construction on the sinkhole and
receiving waters must be studied and assessed and
recommendations made for mitigation of potential impacts upon
surface flooding and groundwater quality before the plans can be
approved. The degree and sophistication of study required will
increase in proportion to the potential impacts.
C. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall have these
prescribed meanings:
ALTERED SINKHOLE — A sinkhole that has been filled, excavated or
otherwise disturbed.
Section
410.700
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.700
AO:572
COLLAPSED SINKHOLE — A subsidence or cave-in of the ground
surface caused when soil overburden can no longer be supported by
underlying strata due to the presence of subsurface solution cavities.
HEAVY EQUIPMENT — Motorized equipment having a gross weight of
more than six (6) tons.
LIGHT EQUIPMENT — Motorized equipment weighing six (6) tons or
less.
QUALIFIED GEOLOGIST — A person who has met or exceeded the
minimum geological educational requirement and who can interpret
and apply geologic data principles and concepts and who can conduct
field or laboratory geologic investigations (per RSMo.) and who by
reason of experience and education, has an understanding of local karst
geology.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — A person registered to
practice engineering according to the laws of the State of Missouri and
who by reason of technical education and experience has a background
in the fundamentals of storm drainage and karst geology.
SINKHOLE — Any depression in the surface of the ground, with or
without collapse of adjacent rock that provides a means through which
surface water can come into contact with subsurface water.
Sinkhole depressions may be gradual or abrupt; they may or may not
have a well defined eye. While most sinkholes can be defined as the
area within a "closed contour", some sinkholes such as those located on
the sides of hills may not.
All sinkholes provide discreet points of recharge to groundwater.
SINKHOLE CLUSTER AREA — An area containing two (2) or more
sinkholes located in close proximity, generally interconnected by
groundwater conduits.
SINKHOLE EYE — Generally, a visible opening, cavity or cave in the
bottom of a sinkhole, sometimes referred to as a swallow hole.
SINKHOLE FLOODING AREA — The area inundated by runoff from a
storm with an annual exceedance probability of one percent (1%) and a
duration of twenty-four (24) hours.
SINKHOLE RIM — The perimeter of the sinkhole depression. The
sinkhole rim will generally vary in elevation.
SINKHOLE WATERSHED — The ground surface area that provides
drainage to the sinkhole. This area extends beyond the sinkhole
depression and generally crosses property boundaries.
TERMINAL SINKHOLE — The lowest sinkhole in a sinkhole cluster to
which any surface water overflowing from other sinkholes in the cluster
will flow.
UNALTERED SINKHOLE — A sinkhole that has never been altered or
disturbed.
Section
410.700
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.700
AO:573
D. Permits Required.
1. Grading permit. A grading permit must be obtained prior to any
alteration of sinkholes associated with new subdivision
construction in accordance with the City's Subdivision Regulations.
Procedures and requirements for grading permits are set forth in
Section 410.710.
2. Other permits. Other permits from State or Federal agencies may
be required, as outlined in Section 410.650 of these Design
Criteria, depending upon the size and nature of the proposed
activity.
E. General Plan Requirements. General requirements for grading and
drainage plans are set forth in Sections 410.670, 410.680 and 410.710
of these Design Criteria.
F. Sinkhole Evaluation. An evaluation including the following information
shall be made for all sites upon which sinkholes are fully or partially
located:
1. The site plan for the proposed development must show the
following items with respect to location of proposed construction,
proposed or existing property lines and existing structures:
a. Sinkholes.
(1) Location and limits of the area of the sinkhole depression
as determined by field surveys or other reliable sources as
may be approved.
Location of sinkholes based solely upon USGS 7-1/2
Minute Series Quadrangle Maps will not be considered
sufficient unless field verified.
(2) Location and elevation of the sinkhole eye where visible or
known.
(3) Topographic contours at maximum intervals of two (2) feet
and spot elevations sufficient to determine the low point
on the sinkhole rim and the profile of the potential
overflow area.
(4) Minimum entry elevations of any existing structures
located within the sinkhole rim.
(5) Elevation of any roadway located within or adjacent to the
sinkhole.
b. Water supply sources.
(1) The approximate location of public or private water supply
sources such as springs or wells, as determined from
Section
410.700
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.700
AO:574
information available from the City and Missouri
Department of Natural Resources.
(2) Boundaries of any known recharge areas to wells or
springs as determined from information available from the
City and Missouri Department of Natural Resources.
c. Other geologic features. Location of caves, springs, faults and
fracture trends, geologic mapping units based upon
information from the City or other reliable sources.
d. Flooding limits for the sinkholes determined as set below.
2. A drainage area map showing the sinkhole watershed area. Where
the site is located in a sinkhole cluster area, this map shall be
extended to include the watershed area any sinkholes located
downstream of the site which may receive overflow drainage from
the site.
3. Assessment of potential impacts on groundwater quality and
proposed water quality management measures as set forth below.
G. Flooding Considerations.
1. Minimum flooding analysis.
a. Maximum estimated flooding elevations shall be determined
for each sinkhole for both pre-development and post
development conditions, assuming no subsurface outflow from
the sinkhole.
b. Where the estimated volume of runoff exceeds the volume of
the sinkhole depression, the depth, spread and path of
overflow shall be estimated and shown on the map.
c. The overflow volume shall be included determining the
maximum estimated flooding elevations in the next
downstream sinkhole. This analysis shall continue downstream
until the lowest sinkhole of the sinkhole cluster is reached or
overflow reaches a surface watercourse.
d. The volume of runoff considered shall be that which results
from a rainstorm with an annual probability of one percent
(1%) (100-year storm) and a duration of twenty-four (24) hours
(eight and two-tenths (8.2) inches for Republic).
e. The runoff volume shall be determined by the method set forth
in Chapter 2 of the SCS TR-55 Manual (Reference).
f. No further flooding analysis will be required provided that:
(1) The post-development flooding area of any sinkhole which
receives drainage receiving drainage from the site is
located entirely on the site.
Section
410.700
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.700
AO:575
(2) A drainage easement covering the post-development
flooding area is provided for any off-site sinkhole or
portion of a sinkhole which receives increased peak rates
of runoff from the site. If the receiving sinkhole is not
contiguous to the site, an easement must also be provided
for the waterway that connects the site to the sinkhole.
(3) The minimum entry elevation of any existing structure is at
least one (1) foot higher than the estimated flooding
elevation from the one percent (1%) annual probability
24-hour storm.
(4) The flooding depth on any existing public road does not
exceed the maximum depths set forth in Section 410.680.
2. Detailed flooding analysis.
a. In cases where the conditions set forth above cannot be met, a
detailed flooding analysis will be required if any increase in
runoff volume is proposed. For detailed flooding analysis a
runoff model must be made for the sinkhole watershed and
reservoir routing analysis performed using hydrograph
techniques as set forth in Section 410.690.
b. The following alternative methods may be used singly or in
combination to keep flooding levels at predevelopment levels:
(1) Diversion of excess runoff to surface watercourses. Where
feasible, increased post-development runoff may by
diverted to a surface watercourse, provided that:
(a) Any increase in peak runoff rate in the receiving
watercourse does not create or worsen existing
flooding problems downstream; and
(b) The diverted stormwater remains in the same surface
watershed.
(c) Storm sewers, open channels and other
appurtenances provided for diversions shall be
designed in accordance with applicable sections of
these Design Criteria.
(d) The effect of diverted water on downstream
watercourses and developments and requirements for
additional detention facilities prior to release of runoff
to the surface watercourse shall be determined as set
forth in Section 410.690, Detention Facilities.
(e) Effects of the diversion shall be shown by reservoir
routing analysis. Routing of excess runoff shall be
considered satisfactory when it can be demonstrated
that the post-development flooding elevation in the
Section
410.700
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.700
AO:576
sinkhole does not exceed the pre-development
flooding elevation within reasonable tolerance
(generally one-tenth (0.1) foot).
c. Storage of excess runoff within the sinkhole watershed.
(1) Where feasible, detention facilities may be constructed
within the sinkhole watershed or in perimeter areas of the
sinkhole. These detention facilities must be located
outside the sinkhole flooding area determined for postdevelopment
conditions.
(2) The flooding considerations set forth in this Section will be
met if it can be demonstrated that:
(a) Inflow rates to the sinkhole can be reduced to a
degree that, in conjunction with the observed outflow
rate, the post-development flooding elevation in the
sinkhole does not exceed the pre-development
flooding elevation within reasonable tolerance
(generally one-tenth (0.1) foot).
(b) Sediment and erosion control and water quality
considerations as set forth elsewhere in this Section
can be satisfied.
H. Water Quality Considerations.
1. Sinkholes provide direct recharge routes to groundwater. As a
result water quality in wells, caves and springs may be affected by
discharge of runoff from developed areas.
2. The Sinkhole Evaluation must consider potential impacts of the
proposed construction on receiving groundwater and propose
measures to mitigate such impacts.
3. Four (4) primary factors must be considered:
a. Receiving groundwater use.
b. Relative groundwater contamination hazard associated with
the proposed development.
c. Ability to capture pollutants.
d. Management measures to be provided to reduce pollutant
levels.
4. Receiving groundwater use.
a. The Sinkhole Evaluation Report shall identify whether the site
lies within a critical area based upon information available
from the City.
Section
410.700
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.700
AO:577
b. Where disagreements may arise over whether a site is located
within a particular recharge area dye tracing may be required
for confirmation of the destination of water discharges through
a sinkhole.
c. Critical areas. The following areas are classified as critically
sensitive to contamination from urban runoff:
(1) Recharge areas of domestic water supply wells.
(2) Recharge areas of springs used for public or private water
supply.
(3) Recharge areas of caves providing habitat to rare or
endangered species such as the Ozark cave fish.
d. Sensitive areas. All other sinkhole areas will be classified as
sensitive to contamination from urban runoff.
5. Groundwater contamination hazard. The relative potential for
groundwater contamination will be classified as low, moderate or
high depending upon the type of land use, development density and
amount of directly connected impervious area. The Sinkhole
Evaluation shall identify whether the proposed development poses
a low, moderate or high hazard to groundwater uses, as defined
below:
a. Low hazard. The following land uses are classified as posing a
relatively low hazard to groundwater contamination:
(1) Wooded areas and lawns.
(2) Parks and recreation areas.
(3) Residential developments on sewer, provided directly
connected impervious areas discharging to the sinkhole is
less than one (1) acre.
(4) Low density commercial and office developments provided
directly connected impervious areas discharging to the
sinkhole is less than one (1) acre.
(5) Discharge from graded areas less than one (1) acre having
required sediment controls per Section 410.710.
b. Moderate hazard.
(1) Concentrated discharge from streets and parking lots and
roofs and other directly connected impervious areas
having an area greater than one (1) acre and less than five
(5) acres.
(2) Multi-family residential developments and higher intensity
office developments provided the directly connected
Section
410.700
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.700
AO:578
impervious areas discharging to the sinkhole is less than
five (5) acres.
(3) Discharge from graded areas greater than one (1) acre and
less than five (5) acres having required sediment controls
per Section 410.710.
c. High hazard.
(1) Collector and arterial streets and highways used for
commercial transport of toxic materials.
(2) Railroads.
(3) Concentrated discharge from streets and parking lots and
roofs and other directly connected impervious areas
having an area greater than five (5) acres.
(4) Commercial, industrial and manufacturing areas.
(5) Individual wastewater treatment systems.
(6) Commercial feedlots or poultry operations.
(7) Discharge from graded areas greater than five (5) acres
having required sediment controls per Section 410.710.
6. Capturing and filtering pollutants.
a. The majority of sinkholes drain a limited watershed area. For
sinkholes where the surrounding drainage area is small
enough that the area draining to the sinkhole flows
predominantly as "sheet flow", potential impacts on water
quality can be addressed by erecting silt control barriers
around the sinkhole during construction and providing a
vegetative buffer area around the sinkhole to filter out
potential contaminants.
b. When the volume of runoff into the sinkhole increases to the
point where flow becomes concentrated, the degree of effort
required to capture and filter out contaminants increases
significantly.
c. Concentrated inflow occurs naturally when the sinkhole
watershed area reaches a sufficient size for watercourses
leading into the sinkhole to form. Concentrated surface flows
result as urbanization occurs due to construction of roads,
storm sewers, drainage channels. Subsurface flows can
become concentrated through utility trenches.
d. The Sinkhole Evaluation shall include maps showing any
existing watercourse which flows into the sinkhole and location
of any proposed concentrated storm water discharges into the
sinkhole.
Section
410.700
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.700
AO:579
7. Water quality management measures.
a. Sediment and erosion control.
(1) Non-concentrated flow (sheet flow). In critical areas,
existing ground cover shall not be removed within twentyfive
(25) feet of the sinkhole rim and a silt barrier shall be
provided around the outer perimeter of the buffer area.
(2) Concentrated flow. A sediment basin will be required at
each point where concentrated flows are discharged into
the sinkhole.
Sediment basins shall be designed according to the
procedures set forth in Section 410.710.
b. Minimizing directly connected impervious area.
(1) The groundwater contamination hazard category for
impervious areas may be reduced by reducing the amount
of Directly Connected Impervious Area. This is the area of
roofs, drives, streets, parking lots, etc. which are
connected via paved gutters, channels or storm sewers.
(2) Directly Connected Impervious Areas can be reduced by
providing properly sized grass swales, vegetative filter
strips or other Best Management Practices to separate
paved areas.
c. Diversion of runoff.
(1) Concentrated discharges to sinkholes can be reduced to
manageable levels or avoided by diverting runoff from
impervious areas away from sinkholes where possible.
(2) Diversions shall be done in a manner that does not
increase flooding hazards on downstream properties and,
generally, shall not be directed out of the surface
watershed in which the sinkhole is located.
d. Filtration areas.
(1) For areas having a low or moderate groundwater
contamination hazard and where flow into the sinkhole
occurs as sheet flow, water quality requirements can be
satisfied by maintaining a permanent vegetative buffer
area with a minimum width of thirty (30) feet around the
sinkhole.
(2) Use of pesticides and fertilizers will not be permitted
within the buffer area. Animal wastes will not be permitted
to accumulate in the buffer area.
e. Grassed swales and channels.
Section
410.700
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.700
AO:580
(1) For areas having a low groundwater contamination hazard
concentrated flows from directly connected impervious
areas of less than one (1) acre may be discharged into the
sinkhole through grassed swales and channels.
(2) Swales and channels shall be designed for non-erosive
velocities and appropriate temporary erosion control
measures such as sodding or erosion control blankets
provided.
f. Storage and infiltration.
(1) Storage and infiltration will be required in the following
cases:
(a) All areas having a high groundwater contamination
hazard.
(b) Areas having a moderate groundwater contamination
hazard where concentrated inflow occurs.
(2) Storage and infiltration basins shall be designed to
capture the runoff from storms up to one (1) inch and
release runoff over a minimum period of twenty-four (24)
hours and maximum period of forty-eight (48) hours.
(3) Standards outlet structures for sedimentation and
infiltration basins are shown in the standard drawings.
I. Development Requirements.
1. Stormwater detention in sinkholes.
a. Where flooding considerations and water quality
considerations, as set forth in Section 410.710, can be met, the
volume of runoff storage in sinkholes can be counted toward
storm water detention requirements, provided that proper
sediment and erosion control measures are provided as set
forth in Section 410.710.
b. The volume of required detention storage shall be determined
as set forth in Section 410.690.
c. Excavation within the sinkhole flooding area to provide
additional detention storage will not be allowed.
2. Modification of sinkholes to increase outflow rates. Increasing
outflow rates in sinkholes by excavating the sinkhole eye or
installing disposal wells for diverting surface runoff to the
groundwater system is prohibited, unless clear and imminent
danger to the public health and safety can be demonstrated.
3. Setbacks and use restrictions.
Section
410.700
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.700
AO:581
a. No new construction of any of the following shall be permitted
within thirty (30) feet of the sinkhole rim:
(1) Residential, commercial or industrial structures.
(2) Swimming pools.
(3) Streets, highways or parking lots.
(4) Storage yards for materials, vehicles and equipment.
(5) Sanitary sewer lines.
b. Use of pesticides and fertilizers within thirty (30) feet of the
sinkhole rim is prohibited.
c. Use of heavy construction equipment in unaltered sinkholes is
prohibited.
d. Construction of underground utilities is prohibited within the
sinkhole rim.
e. Recreational facilities such as hiking, jogging and bicycling
trails, playgrounds, exercise courses and grass playing fields
are permitted within the sinkhole area provided they are not
located within the eye of the sinkhole.
f. Golf courses are permitted subject to approval of a
Management Plan for use of pesticides and fertilizers.
g. Clearing and pruning of trees and undergrowth and limited
grubbing of roots is permitted.
h. Landscaping and minor gardening is permitted outside of the
sinkhole eye provided erosion and sediment discharge is
limited through use of minimum tillage and mulches.
i. Construction of light incidental landscaping and recreational
structures such as gazebos, playground equipment, etc. is
permitted except in the sinkhole eye.
4. Collapsed sinkholes.
a. Collapsed sinkholes may be stabilized and filled using
approved techniques. A Grading Permit must be issued prior to
performing any construction.
b. The probable cause of the collapse and potential adverse
impacts of filling the collapse shall be investigated and
information submitted with the Grading Permit application.
5. Altered sinkholes.
a. Filling or altering of sinkholes without a Grading Permit
constitutes a violation of these regulations. In such cases
Section
410.700
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.700
AO:582
Section 410.710. Grading, Sediment and Erosion Control. [Ord. No.
02-47 §§1 — 2, 11-25-2002]
corrective measures must be proposed within the time period
specified in the Zoning Regulations for enforcement of such
violations. No corrective or remedial measures shall be
undertaken until the proposed remediation plan has been
reviewed by the City and a Grading Permit issued.
b. No Building Permits will be issued or zoning or subdivision
approvals granted, until the remedial measures specified in the
Grading Permit have been completed and approved.
A. Goals And Objectives. The goal of the regulation is to effectively
minimize erosion and discharge of sediment by application of relatively
simple and cost effective Best Management Practices. This goal can be
attained by meeting the following objectives:
1. Minimize the area disturbed by construction at any given time.
2. Stabilize disturbed areas as soon as possible by re-establishing sod,
other forms of landscaping and completing proposed structures,
pavements and storm drainage systems.
3. Provide for containment of sediment until areas are stabilized.
4. Provide permanent erosion controls.
B. General Design Guidelines. The following items must be considered in
preparing a sediment and erosion control plan:
1. Temporary versus permanent controls.
a. The greatest potential for soil erosion occurs during
construction. Temporary controls are those that are provided
for the purpose of controlling erosion and containing sediment
until construction is complete.
b. Temporary controls include straw or hay bale dikes, silt fences,
erosion control blankets etc., which are not needed after the
area is stabilized.
c. Permanent controls consist of riprap, concrete trickle
channels, detention basins, etc., which will remain in place
through the life of the development.
d. It is possible for the same facility to serve both a temporary
and permanent purpose. The difference between temporary
and permanent erosion control should be clearly recognized in
preparing a sediment and erosion control plan.
2. Sheet flow versus concentrated flow.
Section
410.700
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.710
AO:583
a. In areas where runoff occurs primarily as sheet flow,
containment of sediment is relatively simple. In these areas
straw or hay bales, silt fences and vegetative filter areas can be
very effective.
b. Where concentrations of flow occur containment of sediment
becomes more difficult as the rate and volume of flow increase.
In these areas more sophisticated controls such as
sedimentation basins must be provided.
3. Slope. Control of erosion becomes progressively more difficult as
the slope of the ground increases. Areas with steeply sloping
topography and cut and fill slopes must be given special
consideration.
4. Soils and geologic setting. Area soils and the geologic setting must
be considered in preparing the plan and any special considerations
deemed necessary for a particular site provided.
5. Environmentally sensitive areas. Where construction occurs within
the vicinity of permanent streams, springs, sinkholes, lakes or
wetlands, special attention must be given to preventing discharge
of sediment.
C. Grading Permits.
1. Permit requirements. Grading permits are required for all
construction sites with the following exceptions:
a. Grading for single-family or duplex residences constructed in
subdivisions where approved sediment and erosion controls
have been constructed.
b. Emergency construction required repairing or replacing roads,
utilities or other items affecting the general safety and well
being of the public.
c. For emergency construction sites which would otherwise be
required to obtain a permit and for which remedial
construction will take more than fourteen (14) calendar days,
application for the permit must be made within three (3)
calendar days from the start of construction.
d. The following activities, provided that they are not located
within twenty-five (25) feet of a spring, sinkhole, wetland or
watercourse:
(1) Gardening or landscaping normally associated with singlefamily
residences that cover less than one-half (½) acre.
(2) Grading and repair of existing roads or driveways.
Section
410.710
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.710
AO:584
(3) Cleaning and routine maintenance of roadside ditches or
utilities.
(4) Utility construction where the actual trench width is two
(2) feet or less.
2. Permit procedure. The following items must be received prior to
issuance of a Grading Permit:
a. An approved grading, sediment and erosion control plan. The
submittal and approval procedure is as follows for
subdivisions, commercial and other sites.
(1) The sediment and erosion control plan shall be submitted
for review along with the plans for the proposed
improvements.
(2) Grading permits for commercial, multi-family or major
subdivisions will be issued by the City Planner after the
project plans have been approved.
3. Plan requirements. Plans must be prepared by and bear the seal of,
an engineer registered to practice in the State of Missouri. Plan
requirements are set forth in Section 410.660 and in this Section.
Plans will not be required in the following cases:
a. Grading associated solely with a single-family residence.
b. Grading or filling of less than one (1) acre if located outside of
the allowable building areas and not located within twenty-five
(25) feet of spring, sinkhole, wetland or watercourse. In these
instances a grading permit can be issued, providing an
inspection of the site by a representative of the City does not
reveal conditions that would warrant preparation of a detailed
plan.
D. Other Permits.
1. NPDES storm water permit. Effective October 1, 1992,
construction sites where the area to be disturbed is five (5) acres or
more must apply for a storm water discharge permit from the
Missouri Department of Natural Resources. Permit requirements
are set forth in 10 CSR 20-6.200 of the Missouri Clean Water Laws.
2. "404" permit. Grading activities in streams or wetlands may
require a Department of the Army Permit under Section 404 of the
Clean Water Act.
E. Design Standards And Criteria.
1. Grading.
a. Maximum grades. Cut or fill slopes shall not exceed four (4) to
one (1).
Section
410.710
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.710
AO:585
b. Maximum height. Cut or fill slopes shall not exceed fifteen (15)
feet in vertical height unless a horizontal bench area at least
five (5) feet in width is provided for each fifteen (15) feet in
vertical height.
c. Minimum slope. Slope in grassed areas shall not be less than
one percent (1%).
d. Construction specifications. Construction for streets must
comply with specifications set forth by the City of Republic. For
all other areas, construction specifications stating
requirements for stripping, materials, subgrade compaction,
placement of fills, moisture and density control, preparation
and maintenance of subgrade must be included or referenced
on the plans or accompanying specifications submitted.
e. Spoil areas.
(1) Broken concrete, asphalt and other spoil materials may
not be buried in fills within proposed building or pavement
areas.
(2) Outside of proposed building and pavement areas, broken
concrete or stone may be buried in fills, provided it is
covered by a minimum of two (2) feet of earth.
(3) Burying of other materials in fills is prohibited.
f. Stockpile areas. Location of proposed stockpile areas shall be
outlined on the plans and specifications for proper drainage
included.
g. Borrow areas. The proposed limits of temporary borrow areas
shall be outlined in the plans and a proposed operating plan
described on the grading plan. Temporary slopes in borrow
areas may exceed the maximums set forth above. At the time
that borrow operations are completed, the area shall be graded
in accordance with the criteria set forth above and reseeded.
2. Sediment containment.
a. Existing vegetative filter area. Existing vegetative filter areas
may be used where:
(1) Unconcentrated sheet flow occurs;
(2) An area of existing vegetation a minimum of twenty-five
(25) feet in width can be maintained between the area to
be graded and a property line, watercourse, sinkhole,
spring, wetland or classified lake;
(3) Existing ground slope is no greater than five (5) to one (1)
(twenty percent (20%));
Section
410.710
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.710
AO:586
(4) The existing vegetative growth is of sufficient density and
in sufficiently good condition to provide for filtration of
sediment.
(5) Vegetative filter areas are a temporary and permanent
practice.
b. Hay/straw bale dike or silt fence. Containment areas
constructed of hay or straw bales or silt fence may be provided
in areas where:
(1) Unconcentrated sheet flow occurs,
(2) An area of existing vegetation a minimum of twenty-five
(25) feet in width cannot be maintained between the area
to be graded and a property line, watercourse, sinkhole,
spring, wetland or classified lake,
(3) Existing ground slope is no greater than five (5) to one (1)
(twenty percent (20%)),
(4) Concentrated flow from an area no greater than one (1)
acre occurs and a minimum volume of one thousand
(1,000) cubic feet per acre is contained behind the dike.
Either cereal grain straw or hay may be used for bale
dikes. Straw/hay bale dikes shall be constructed as shown
in Drawing 50. Straw/hale bale dikes and silt fences are
temporary practices.
c. Temporary containment berms.
(1) Temporary containment berms may be provided for areas
where concentrated flow from areas greater than one (1)
acre and less than five (5) acres occurs. Temporary
containment berms must contain a volume of one thousand
(1,000) cubic feet per acre of drainage area.
(2) Temporary containment berms shall have a riprap outlet
with a sediment filter as shown in Drawing 40 or a
perforated pipe outlet as shown in Drawing 80.
(3) Details for temporary containment berms are shown in
Drawing 30.
(4) Temporary containment berms and accumulated sediment
may be completely removed after the tributary area is
stabilized and must be removed prior to final acceptance
and release of escrow.
d. Sedimentation basin.
(1) Sediment basins shall be provided for all areas where
concentrated flow occurs from an area of five (5) or more
Section
410.710
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.710
AO:587
acres. Sediment basins shall be designed to detain the
runoff from one (1) inch of rainfall for a period of at least
twenty-four (24) hours.
Runoff shall be calculated using the methods contained
in Chapter 2 of TR-55 (Reference 11), using the
recommended curve number for newly graded areas from
Table 2-2a.
Note: For construction sites in Republic an average value
of runoff volume from one (1) inch of rainfall is
approximately one thousand two hundred (1,200) cubic
feet per acre, using a Curve Number of 90, as indicative
of a mixture of type B and C soils. This value may be used
in sizing sediment basins or the runoff volume determined
using the values from Figure 2-1 of TR-55.
(2) Sediment basins shall be provided with an outflow
structure consisting of:
(a) A flow restriction device which provides for the
required detention time,
(b) An outfall pipe sized to carry the maximum estimated
outflow rate,
(c) Protective structures at the pipe outlet to prevent
crushing or damage of the end of the pipe,
(d) Protective structures to prevent blockage of the pipe
with debris,
(e) Erosion protection at the pipe outlet. A typical outlet
structure is shown in Drawing 140.
(3) An overflow spillway capable of discharging the peak flow
rate for the four percent (4%) annual probability (25-year)
storm while maintaining a minimum freeboard of one (1)
foot.
(4) Overflow spillways may be sodded where the depth of flow
at the crest is limited to no greater than six (6) inches and
outlet channel velocities do not exceed five (5) feet per
second for the minor (5-year) storm.
(5) Overflow spillways not meeting these restrictions must be
constructed of riprap, concrete or other approved, nonerodible
material.
3. Erosion protection.
a. Seeding and mulching.
Section
410.710
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.710
AO:588
(1) Permanent seeding. Permanent seeding fertilizer and
mulch shall be applied at the rates set forth in Drawing 10
or according to other specifications, which are approved
with the Grading Permit.
(2) Permanent seeding seasons are from March first (1st) to
May fifteenth (15th) and August fifteenth (15th) to October
fifteenth (15th).
(3) Mulching. Where slopes are less than four (4) to one (1),
cereal grain mulch is required at the rate of one hundred
(100) pounds per one thousand (1,000) square feet (four
thousand five hundred (4,500) pounds per acre). Cereal
grain mulch shall meet the requirements of Section 802 of
the State Specifications (Reference 17) for Type 1 mulch.
(4) Where slopes are four (4) to one (1) or greater Type 3
mulch ("hydromulch") meeting the requirements of
Section 802 of the State Specifications (Reference 17)
shall be used.
(5) Temporary seeding. Whenever grading operations are
suspended for more than thirty (30) calendar days
between permanent grass or seeding periods, all disturbed
areas must be reseeded with temporary cover according to
Drawing 10.
Temporary seeding season runs from May fifteenth (15th)
to November fifteenth (15th).
(6) Overseeding. During the winter season (November
fifteenth (15th) to March first (1st)) temporary seed and
mulch shall be placed in on all completed areas or areas
where grading is suspended for more than thirty (30)
calendar days. During this period seed, mulch and soil
amendments shall be applied at the following rates:
Lime: 100% of specified quantity.*
Fertilizer: 75% of specified quantity.
Seed: 50% of specified quantity.
Mulch: 100% of specified quantity.
* Per Drawing 10.
Areas seeded during this period shall be
reseeded and mulched during the next
permanent seeding season according to
seeding requirements.
Section
410.710
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.710
AO:589
(7) Maintenance. Seeded areas must be maintained for one (1)
year following permanent seeding.
b. Cut and fill slopes. Cut and fill slopes shall be protected from
erosion by construction of straw bale dikes, silt fences,
diversion berms or swales along the top of the slope.
(1) Where drainage must be carried down the slopes, pipe
drains, concrete flumes, riprap chutes or other impervious
areas must be provided. Suitable erosion control measures
such as riprap stilling basins, must be provided at the
bottom of the slope.
(2) Diversions shall be maintained until permanent growth is
firmly established on the slopes.
(3) Typical diversion details are shown in Drawing 30. Riprap
chute details are shown in Drawing 70.
c. Channels and swales. Permanent channels and swales shall be
provided with a stabilized invert consisting of one of the
following materials:
(1) Sod. Where the average velocity of flow is five (5) feet per
second or less and there is no base flow, the channel shall
be lined with sod.
(a) For channels with a bottom width less than fifteen (15)
feet, sod shall extend up the side slope to a minimum
height of six (6) inches above the toe. (Drawing 90).
(b) Channels with a bottom width of fifteen (15) feet or
greater, shall be graded as shown in Drawing 90 and a
low flow area, fifteen (15) feet in width lined with sod.
(c) The remainder of the channel slopes shall be seeded
and mulched as provided above.
(2) Erosion control blanket. Commercial erosion control
blankets may be used in lieu of sod provided that samples
are submitted and approved by the City. The guaranteed
maintenance period shall be one (1) year.
(3) Non-erosive lining. In grass channels where base flow
occurs, a non-erosive low-flow channel of riprap or
concrete must be provided. Low flow channels shall have a
minimum capacity of five (5) cubic feet per second. Other
suitable non-erosive materials may be specified with
approval of the City.
(4) For channels which have an average velocity of five (5) feet
per second or greater a non-erosive lining of riprap
concrete or other approved material must be provided.
Section
410.710
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.710
AO:590
d. Storm sewer and culvert outlets. Erosion protection shall be
provided at storm sewer and culvert outlets. Minimum erosion
protection shall consist of a concrete toe wall and non-erosive
lining, meeting the City's specifications for public
improvements.
(1) The required length of non-erosive lining will not be
decreased where flared end sections or headwalls are
provided unless calculations and data to support the
decrease in length are submitted and approved.
(2) Non-erosive lining shall consist of riprap, unless otherwise
specified and approved. Field stone, gabions or riprap
shall extend to the point at which average channel velocity
for the peak flow rate from the minor (5-year) storm has
decreased to five (5) feet per second maximum.
(3) The length of riprap to be provided shall be as follows:
(See Drawing 120)
Average outlet velocity less than five (5) feet
per second:
L = three (3) times the pipe diameter or
culvert width.
Average outlet velocity less than five (5) to
ten (10) feet per second:
L = length determined using Drawing
120.
Average outlet velocity greater than ten (10)
feet per second:
(4) Use MHTD standard energy dissipater headwall.
(Reference 17)
The height of erosion protection shall be as shown in
Drawing 120.
(5) Minimum toe wall dimensions are shown in Drawing 120.
Where headwalls or flared end sections are specified, toe
walls must be provided at the downstream end.
e. Curb openings. Where drainage has been approved by the City
to flow from paved areas to grass areas through curb openings
erosion protection shall be provided as shown in Drawing 130.
f. Ditch checks and drop structures. In grass channels grades
and velocities may be controlled by use of ditch checks and
drop structures. Riprap ditch checks may be required in
natural channels where average velocity for the peak flow rate
from the 5-year storm exceeds five (5) feet per second for postdevelopment
conditions.
Section
410.710
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
410.710
AO:591
g. Spillways. Erosion protection must be provided at spillways
and outlet structures for detention ponds. Erosion protection
shall extend to the point where flow has stabilized and average
velocity in the outlet channel is five (5) feet per second or less.
4. Temporary construction entrance.
a. A minimum of one (1) temporary construction entrance is
required at each site. Additional temporary entrances may be
provided if approved. The location of each construction
entrance shall be shown on the plan.
b. Only construction entrances designated on the sediment and
erosion control plan may be used. Barricades shall be
maintained if necessary to prevent access at other points until
construction is complete.
c. Construction entrances shall be constructed of crushed
limestone meeting the following specifications:
(1) Construction entrances shall be a minimum of twenty-five
(25) feet wide and fifty (50) feet long.
(2) Minimum thickness of crushed limestone surface shall be
six (6) inches. Additional two (2) inch lifts of crushed
limestone shall be added at the discretion of the County if
the surface of the initial drive deteriorates or becomes too
muddy to be effective.
(3) In locations where an existing drive or street extends at
least fifty (50) feet into the site, the existing drive may be
designated as the construction entrance and construction
of a new gravel entrance is not required, unless job
conditions warrant as set forth in the preceding
paragraph.
5. Cleaning streets. Streets both interior and adjacent to the site shall
be completely cleaned of sediment at the end of construction and
prior to release of security.
6. Dust control. The contractor will be required to use water trucks to
water all roads and construction areas to minimize dust leaving the
site when conditions warrant.
7. Sequencing and scheduling. Costs of sediment and erosion control
can be minimized if proper consideration is given to sequencing
and scheduling construction. Any special sequencing and
scheduling considerations should be noted in the grading plan. A
detailed schedule must be received from the contractor at the Pre-
Construction Conference.
Section
410.710
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
410.710
AO:592
Chapter 415
SIGN REGULATIONS
Section 415.010. Purpose. [CC 1999 §26-110]
Section 415.020. Definitions. [CC 1999 §26-111; Ord. No. 04-71 §1,
12-27-2004; Ord. No. 05-23 §1, 3-28-2005]
As used in this Chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section:
ATTACHED SIGN (SIGN, WALL) — Any sign substantially and permanently
attached to, applied on, structurally connected to, painted on, engraved on,
etched on, or supported by any part of a building's wall, awning, canopy,
marquee, parapet, sunshield, window, door or similar item.
ATTENTION ATTRACTING DEVICES — Any animated, mechanical or
stuffed item designed to promote, advertise, demonstrate or call attention
to any commercial, office, retail or service business or activity.
A. This Chapter provides standards for the erection and maintenance of
signs. All signs shall be erected and maintained in accordance with
these standards. The general purpose of these standards is to promote,
preserve and protect the health, safety, general welfare, convenience
and enjoyment of the public and to preserve and protect the aesthetic
quality of the City of Republic, and to achieve the following:
1. Safety. To promote the safety of persons and property by providing
that signs:
a. Do not create a hazard due to collapse, fire, collision, decay,
abandonment or other safety considerations; and
b. Do not create traffic hazards by confusing or distracting
motorists.
2. Landscape quality and preservation. To protect the public welfare
and to enhance the appearance and economy of the City, by
providing that signs:
a. Do not interfere with scenic views;
b. Do not constitute a nuisance to occupancy of adjacent property
by their brightness, size, height or movement;
c. Do not negatively affect the City's tourism industry;
d. Do not create or worsen visual clutter or visual blight;
e. Do otherwise protect and preserve a quality landscape in the
City; and
f. Do otherwise enhance the appearance and economy of the City.
Section
410.710
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.020
AO:593
BANNER — A sign made of fabric or any other non-rigid material with no
enclosing framework.
BUILDING CODE — The Building Code of the City of Republic, Missouri,
together with any related Code(s) adopted by the City, and any regulations
adopted in conformance therewith.
BUSINESS AREA — Any district designated under Chapter 405 of the
Republic City Code for office, commercial or industrial use.
CITY BUILDING INSPECTOR — The City Building Inspector of the City of
Republic, Missouri, or his/her designated representative of the Community
Development Department.[Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
COMMERCIAL — Relating to the sale of goods or services.
COPY — The letters, figures, characters, representations, pictures or
wording on a sign, including any identification, description, symbol,
trademark, object, design logo, illustration or device illuminated or nonilluminated
which directs attention to a product, service, place, activity,
person, institution, business or solicitation, including any permanently
installed or situated merchandise; or any emblem or painting designed to
advertise, communicate, identify or convey information.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A pole or monument sign, located on private
property, which directs vehicular traffic. The sign may display arrows,
words or other symbols to indicate the direction of the facilities. No goods
or services for sale may be listed.
EFFECTIVE AREA — The area enclosed by the minimum imaginary
rectangle, or combination of contiguous rectangles, composed of vertical
and horizontal lines which fully contain all extremities of the sign. This
rectangle, or combination of contiguous rectangles, is to be calculated from
an orthographic projection of the sign viewed horizontally. The viewpoint
for an orthographic projection shall be rotated horizontally around the sign
to give the largest rectangle. For flat signs, this viewpoint is opposite a
corner. If elements of the sign are movable or flexible, as a flag or string
of lights, the measurement shall be taken when the elements are fully
extended and parallel to the plane of view. The sign seen from this viewpoint
is then enclosed within the smallest plane of view. The sign seen from this
viewpoint is then enclosed within the smallest rectangle, or combination
of contiguous rectangles, which fully contains the sign. The area of the
rectangle, or combination of contiguous rectangles, is the "effective area"
of the sign, A combination of contiguous rectangles may be used with more
than one (1) surface containing copy.
ERECT — Attach, alter, build, construct, reconstruct, enlarge or move.
FLAGS — A construction of fabric, plastic or paper depicting through
symbols, characters, design or letters a nation, political subdivision or
business when hung, without frame, from a staff or pole.
FLASHING LIGHT — A continuously intermittent light or sequential light;
but not including animation or lighting changes which change the copy of a
sign.
Section
415.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
415.020
AO:594
FRONTAGE, BUILDING — The wall of the building that faces the street
abutting the property. If the building is located on a corner at an angle
facing two (2) streets, the frontage shall be the wall of the building which
faces the street with the highest average daily traffic count.
IDEOLOGICAL AND NON-COMMERCIAL SIGN — A sign which does not
name or advertise a product, service or business but only expresses a
viewpoint, non-commercial message, opinion or idea. This includes
commemorative plaques, historic markers, holiday decorations, political
signs, political or fraternal flags or emblems, or protective signs which are
commonly associated with safeguarding the permitted uses of a premises
including, but not limited to "vicious dog", "no trespassing", "neighborhood
watch" and "authorized parking only".
LOT — A parcel of land under one (1) ownership designated as a separate
and distinct tract and identified by a tract or lot number or symbol in a duly
approved subdivision plat of record.
MENU BOARD — An on-premise sign utilized by the public patronizing a
drive-through business as to a bill of fare or other products or services.
NON-BUSINESS AREA — Any area within a residential zoning district,
including areas therein where legal non-residential uses are present.
NON-COMMERCIAL — Relating to a public service, religion, charity, idea
or similar item.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign structure advertising an establishment,
merchandise, service or entertainment which is not sold, produced,
manufactured or furnished at the property on which said sign is located,
e.g. "billboards", "outdoor advertising" or "off-site sign".
ON-PREMISES SIGN — A sign which pertains to the use of the premises on
which it is located and maintained.
PERMANENT SIGN — Any wall or monument sign or other sign which is
intended remain displayed.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, association, firm, partnership,
institution or other legal entity, singular or plural.
PREMISES — Any tract of land, consisting of one (1) or more lots, under
single or multiple ownership, which operates as a functional unit. When
developed, a premises shall also posses one (1) or more of the following
criteria:
1. Shared parking.
2. Common management.
3. Common identification.
4. Common access.
5. Shared circulation.
Section
415.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.020
AO:595
SETBACK — The horizontal distance between the curb line and a vertical
projection from that portion of the sign nearest the curb line.
SIGN — Any object principally designed to convey a message, including
sign structure and decorative cover. Examples of signs include, but are
not limited to: message boards, changeable copy boards, pennants, flags,
billboards, and streamers.
SIGN, DETACHED — A sign not attached to or painted on a building,
but which is permanently affixed to the ground, otherwise known as a
monument or freestanding sign. A sign attached to a flat surface such as a
fence or a wall not a part of a building shall be considered a detached sign.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A sign which is supported by one (1) or more
uprights, poles or braces affixed to the ground, not attached to the principal
building or structure. The bottom of the sign face shall be no closer than
eight (8) feet from the ground.
SIGN, MONUMENT — A sign supported by the ground, not attached to the
principal building or structure, where the bottom edge of the sign is on or
in the ground.
SIGN, PROJECTING — Any sign which is attached to and projects from a
surface or building face.
SIGN, ROOF — Any sign erected upon, against or directly above a roof.
SIGN STRUCTURE — Any structure which supports, has supported, or is
designed to support a sign, including any decorative cover, exclusive of any
copy.
SIGN, WALL — Any sign in a parallel plane to and attached, installed,
painted, engraved or etched upon a structure's wall, awning, canopy,
marquee, parapet, sunshield, window, door or similar item.
STP URBAN SYSTEM — Surface Transportation Program (Urban System)
is a network of roads and highways that qualify for Federal aid under the
Inter-modal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act.
STREET GRADE — The highest altitude of the street vertically under any
portion of the sign or its supports.
USE — The purpose for which a building, lot, sign or other structure is
arranged, intended, designed, occupied or maintained.
Section 415.030. Exempt Signs. [CC 1999 §26-112; Ord. No. 99-42
§1, 9-27-1999; Ord. No. 04-64 §1, 10-11-2004; Ord. No. 08-67 §1,
9-8-2008]
A. The following signs shall not require the issuance of a sign permit but
must be in conformance with all other sign regulations and the Building
Code. These signs are allowed in addition to all other signs allowed
under this Chapter.
1. Address numbers.
Section
415.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
415.030
AO:596
a. Address numbers for each residential building and business
address numbers not exceeding one (1) square foot in effective
areas per character, and one (1) name plate not exceeding two
(2) square feet in effective area per dwelling unit or business.
All address numbers and name plates shall be attached signs,
except as follows:
b. If a building is more than one hundred (100) feet from the
street, its address numbers may be detached.
2. Banner signs. One (1) banner sign per business premises, which is
not over thirty-six (36) square feet in effective area.
3. Directional signs. Detached on-premises directional signs which do
not exceed five (5) square feet in effective area. Any logo, business
name, product, or service identification, or other advertising shall
not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the effective area. No part of
the sign shall exceed four (4) feet in height above street grade or
four (4) feet in height above the lowest level of the ground under
the sign if elevation of premises at sign location is more than twelve
(12) inches above street grade, excluding berms or other
landscaping features.
4. Election signs. Any sign erected for an election campaign, provided
that said sign is removed ten (10) days after election is final.
5. Flags. Flags of any nation, State or political subdivision provided:
a. If the flag is flown from a flagpole, such flagpole shall be a
minimum of four (4) times the length of the flag but shall not
exceed over sixty (60) feet in height from finished grade.
6. Government sign. Any sign erected or maintained by or for any
agency of government pursuant to and in discharge of any
governmental function or required or authorized by law, ordinance
or governmental regulations; or any sign erected in cooperation
with the City or other government agency for the purpose of
promoting the City or community.
7. Holiday decorations. Holiday decorations in season.
8. Internal signs. Any on-premises sign, the copy of which cannot be
viewed from a street right-of-way or adjoining property.
9. Neighborhood identification sign. A detached sign, masonry wall,
landscaping or other similar material or features which are
combined to form a display for neighborhood or tract identification,
provided that the legend of such display shall consist of only the
neighborhood, tract name or historic district.
10. Real estate sale, lease and construction signs. One (1) detached or
attached non-illuminated temporary on-premise and/or off-premise
sign each pertaining to the construction, sale or lease of real
Section
415.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.030
AO:597
estate. Such sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in
effective area in business areas and not to exceed four (4) square
feet in effective area in non-business areas. One (1) additional sign
shall be permitted in both business and non-business areas if the
premises on which they are located either has at least two hundred
fifty (250) feet of frontage, contains more than five (5) acres, or
has frontage on more than one (1) street. All such signs shall be
removed within seven (7) days after the closing of the sale or lease.
11. Vehicular signs. Any sign permanently attached to a motor vehicle
which is traveling or lawfully parked where the primary purpose of
such parking is not the display of any sign. This definition shall not
include signs in transit to a site of permanent use.
12. Miscellaneous exempt signs.
a. A sign located on machinery or equipment which is necessary
or customary to the business, including such devices as
gasoline pumps or vending machines, which does not increase
the size of the surface area or alter the shape of the machine or
equipment.
b. Private street or road name signs.
c. "No trespassing", "no dumping", "no loitering" and like signs
not exceeding one (1) square foot.
d. Signs warning the public of the existence of danger, but
containing no advertising material, to be removed upon
subsidence of the danger for which warning is being given and
not exceeding one (1) square foot in effective area.
e. A sign on facilities located in City parks which provides
information that is incidental to a sponsored activity such as
scoreboards, time clocks, benches or signs in concession
stands.
f. A detached or attached temporary sign not exceeding thirtytwo
(32) square feet in background area advertising drives or
events of a civic, philanthropic, educational, religious, political
or similar nature, provided that said sign is posted only during
said drive or event for no more than sixty (60) days per year
and is removed within twenty-four (24) hours after an event.
g. Attached incidental sign, which pertains to goods, products,
services or facilities that are available on the premises where
the sign is located, but only tangentially related to the main
activities or purpose of the business, not exceeding a total of
four (4) square feet in effective area per business.
13. Personal property sales, moving sales, garage sales or yard sales
signs. Posting of such signs shall not be permitted more than one
Section
415.030
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
415.030
AO:598
Section 415.040. Exempt Operations. [CC 1999 §26-113]
Section 415.050. General Sign Provisions. [CC 1999 §26-114; Ord.
No. 10-26 §2, 6-14-2010]
(1) day prior to the sale and must be removed by the last day of the
sale. Posting of such signs shall be permitted on public property,
including right-of-way, and shall be further governed by Sections
415.050 and 415.060.
14. Menu board signs in drive-thru facilities.
a. Shall be located at the rear fifty percent (50%) of the principal
building; and
b. Shall have a sign envelope that does not exceed sixty (60)
square feet in area; and
c. Shall be limited to internally lit indirect lighting.
A. The following operations shall not require the issuance of a sign permit:
1. Changing of the copy describing products or services on an existing
permitted sign which is specifically designed for the use of
manually or automatically changeable copy including billboard
panels and posters; but not including changes in the structure, size,
placement or location of the sign.
2. Maintenance, including repainting, refurbishing, cleaning or other
normal repair of a sign not involving structural changes.
A. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all signs in the City, without
regard to their classification as a business or non-business sign.
B. General Provisions. All signs are prohibited except as allowed by this
Chapter.
1. Public areas. No sign other than a government sign shall be
allowed, which is located within or projects over any public
property, including rights-of-way, except where the building is
located on or within three (3) feet of the property line. No such
signs are allowed in the right-of-way of any thoroughfare
designated as part of the STP Urban System. In no instance shall
signs project beyond a vertical plane two (2) feet inside the curb
line from any building and the bottom of said sign shall not be less
than ten (10) feet above the highest level of the ground under the
sign at the sign's lowest point.
2. Parking spaces. No sign shall occupy a parking space necessary to
satisfy minimum off-street parking requirements.
3. Sign illumination. Illuminated signs shall be designed, located and
constructed to eliminate or significantly reduce glare and shall not
Section
415.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.050
AO:599
increase the lighting intensity upon adjoining premises not under
the same ownership and control.
4. Sign condition. No person shall maintain or allow to be maintained
on any premises owned or controlled by that person any dangerous
or defective sign. All signs, together with all their supports, braces,
connections or anchors, shall be kept in good repair. Unsafe signs,
damaged or deteriorated signs or signs in danger of breaking apart
or falling shall be removed or repaired by their owner. Any fading,
chipping, peeling or flaking of paint, plastic or glass; or any
mechanical, electrical or structural defect shall be corrected upon
written notice by the Republic Community Development
Department. [Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
5. Compliance with Building Codes. All signs shall be erected or
affixed and maintained in compliance with the Republic Building
Code.
6. Signs at street intersections. Signs may be erected in the street
intersection sight triangles; however, any sign must be at least ten
(10) feet above street grade except for supports, which may not
exceed one (1) foot in width or diameter or be spaced less than ten
(10) feet apart from any other stationary object. Sight triangles
shall be established in accordance with Table 405.910. The
Community Development Department may require additional
triangle area for clear sight and safety as determined by a traffic
study for special conditions. [Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
7. Signs at street/driveway intersections.
a. Signs may be erected in the street/driveway sight triangles,
however, any sign must be at least ten (10) feet above street
grade except for supports, which may not exceed one (1) foot
in width or diameter or be spaced less than ten (10) feet apart
from any other stationary object.
b. A street/driveway sight triangle is formed by the intersection of
a public or private street and a driveway (see Figure 415.050)
where the triangle area is that area encompassed within two
(2) intersecting lines formed by the edge of the pavement,
curb, roadway or projection thereof and extending forty (40)
feet down the street from the right edge of the driveway when
standing in the driveway facing the street, and extending
eleven (11) feet from the edge of the street extending up the
driveway pavement, and a third (3rd) imaginary line
connecting the extremities of the other two (2) without
overlaying the pavement. On the left side of the driveway, the
triangle shall be measured by measuring sixty-five (65) feet
down the street pavement from the edge of the driveway and
measuring eleven (11) feet down the driveway pavement from
the edge of the street, and an imaginary third (3rd) straight
Section
415.050
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
415.050
AO:600
Section 415.060. Prohibited Signs. [CC 1999 §26-115]
line connecting the extremities of the other two (2) without
overlaying the pavement. (See Figure 415.050)
FIGURE 415.050
8. Ideological or non-commercial signs. Any sign permitted under this
Chapter may contain ideological or non-commercial copy in lieu of
any other copy.
A. The following signs are prohibited, which:
1. Concern unlawful activity;
2. Operate or employ any motion picture projection in conjunction
with any advertisements;
3. Employ any searchlights, strobe lights, balloons or similar attention
getting devices;
4. May be confused with or construed as a traffic control sign, signal
or device, or the light of an emergency or road equipment vehicle
by reason of their size, location, movement, content, coloring, or
manner of illumination;
Section
415.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.060
AO:601
Section 415.070. Temporary Banners. [CC 1999 §26-116; Ord. No.
04-71 §1, 12-27-2004]
5. Hide from the view of those to whom the device is directed, any
traffic or street sign or signal or similar device;
6. Are temporary, except as specifically allowed in this Code;
7. Signs other than those specifically allowed by Section 415.030(10)
that are capable of being carried, wheeled or moved from one
location to another;
8. Signs which are attached to any tree, fence, branch, another sign
or utility pole except warning signs issued and properly posted by
the utility company.
A. Temporary Banners Permitted.
1. Except as otherwise exempted in Section 415.030, or provided in
this Section, temporary banners may only be used in a business
area.
2. In non-business areas, each premises may display one (1)
temporary banner not exceeding four (4) square feet in effective
area for up to seven (7) consecutive days twice each calendar year.
B. General Provisions.
1. The effective area shall not exceed thirty-five (35) square feet.
2. All temporary banners shall be attached banners.
3. Each business may display one (1) attached temporary banner as
set forth below.
C. Temporary Banners — Duration Of Display.
1. A business or premises shall be allowed to display a temporary
banner for not more than thirty (30) days per display period and not
more than ninety (90) days per calendar year.
2. No temporary banner shall be displayed without obtaining a new
permit before each display period.
3. In business areas, a temporary business with a valid business
license and a temporary building permit may apply for and obtain a
special permit which would allow the use of a temporary banner for
the period of the building permit. Such a banner must be attached
to a temporary or permanent structure and may not exceed thirtytwo
(32) square feet in effective area.
D. Temporary Banners — Emergency Uses. In the event a sign or business
is substantially damaged through fire, flood, act of God, insurrection,
riot or similar emergency beyond the control of the business owner or
Section
415.060
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
415.070
AO:602
Section 415.080. Provisions For Signs in Business Areas. [CC 1999
§26-117; Ord. No. 99-42 §1, 9-27-1999; Ord. No. 04-71 §1,
12-27-2004; Ord. No. 05-23 §1, 3-28-2005; Ord. No. 07-20 §1,
4-9-2007; Ord. No. 08-18 §1, 2-25-2008; Ord. No. 08-67 §1,
9-8-2008]
occupant, a temporary banner shall be allowed for a period of time not
to exceed sixty (60) days, unless the time period is extended by the
Community Development Department for a continuing hardship. [Ord.
No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
A. General Provisions. These provisions shall apply to all permanent signs
in business areas as defined in this Chapter.
1. A sign in a business area shall conform to regulations for a sign in a
non-business area if the sign is within twenty-five (25) feet of a nonbusiness
area.
2. Flashing lights or animation on signs in business areas shall be
placed at least ten (10) feet above street grade.
3. Both on-premises or off-premises signs are allowed in general
commercial and less restrictive zoning districts. Only on-premises
signs are allowed in more restrictive districts. Off-premises
detached signs shall conform to the standards for on-premises
signs, with the following exceptions:
a. Off-premises detached signs shall maintain a minimum front
yard setback of twenty-five (25) feet. [Ord. No. 15-19 §1,
8-10-2015]
b. Off-premises detached signs shall maintain a maximum radius
of one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet between all other offpremises
detached signs. Off-premises detached signs shall
maintain a maximum height of forty (40) feet and a maximum
effective area of four hundred (400) square feet. [Ord. No.
15-19 §1, 8-10-2015]
c. Off-premises detached signs are prohibited within one hundred
twenty-five (125) feet of a non-business area.
4. Sign regulations enforced by the Missouri Highway and
Transportation Commission along the primary highway system in
the City shall take precedence over any less restrictive
requirements of this Chapter.
5. All heights specified in this Code shall be measured from street
grade at a point perpendicular to facing street unless otherwise
specified.
B. Detached Signs. Detached signs are allowed in business areas.
Section
415.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.080
AO:603
1. A premises fronting on a collector street shall be allowed a
detached sign with an effective area determined by adding fifty (50)
square feet to a ratio of one (1) square foot of effective area per
lineal foot of frontage along the collector street.
2. Each premises shall be allowed one (1) permanent detached onpremises
or off-premises sign. Premises with frontage on more than
one (1) street shall be permitted to have one (1) additional onpremises
sign per side.
3. Premises which have more than four hundred twenty-five (425) feet
of frontage along a street may have one (1) additional detached
sign for each additional four hundred twenty-five (425) feet of
frontage or fraction thereof, provided a minimum of three hundred
(300) feet of separation is maintained between signs on a given
premises.
4. The maximum effective area for any detached business sign shall
be three hundred (300) square feet.
5. Each detached sign shall not exceed a maximum height of twentyfive
(25) feet.
6. A minimum setback of ten (10) feet will be required from the
property line for monument signs and a minimum setback of five (5)
feet from the property line for freestanding signs.
C. Attached Signs. Attached signs are allowed in business areas in
accordance with the following provisions:
1. Each business shall be allowed an attached sign. In the event the
business does not front on a street, it shall be allowed signage as if
it fronted on a local street. The attached sign shall not extend any
further than eighteen (18) inches from any part of the structure, i.e.
awning, canopy, door, marquee, parapet, sunshield, wall or similar
item. Attached signs do not include signs on the inside or outside of
the window, which do any advertising beyond merely identifying
the business and giving the times it is open, these shall be subject
to total square footage limitations. An attached sign shall not
extend beyond the wall edge.
2. The total effective area of all wall signs allowed for a business shall
be calculated based upon the lineal footage of each wall having
frontage on a street. If the business has frontage on any street
other than a local street, the effective area shall not exceed three
(3) square feet per lineal foot of the wall length. If the business has
frontage on a local street, the effective area shall not exceed onehalf
(½) square foot per lineal foot of the wall length.
3. A premises may have a roof sign only if it does not have a detached
or projecting sign. No part of the sign shall extend beyond any wall.
The methodology used to determine the effective area allowed for
Section
415.080
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
415.080
AO:604
Section 415.090. Provisions For Signs in Non-Business Areas. [CC
1999 §26-118]
detached signs shall be used to calculate the effective area allowed
for roof signs.
4. A business may have a projecting sign only if it does not have a roof
sign or a maximum number or allowable detached signs for that
premises. Where a business frontage would allow the use of two (2)
or more detached signs, a projecting sign may be substituted for
one (1) of the detached signs. Projecting signs shall have a
minimum clearance of ten (10) feet above the highest level of the
ground under the sign at the sign's lowest point and shall not
exceed twenty (20) square feet in effective area.
5. Each premises containing more than one (1) business shall reserve
one (1) detached sign to identify either the entire premises, or
businesses located there, desiring to be identified, unless otherwise
approved by the Community Development Department. [Ord. No.
16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
D. Menu board signs shall be governed by the provisions of Section
415.030 paragraph (14).
E. Commercial subdivision signs shall:
1. Be limited to one (1) subdivision sign per entrance.
2. Not exceed an effective area of three hundred (300) square feet.
3. Not exceed a height of twenty-five (25) feet.
4. Comply with all other applicable provisions of the sign ordinance
(i.e., "Intersection Clear Sight Triangle").
5. Be limited to displaying the names of companies located in the
subdivision and no advertising matter shall be allowed on the sign.
6. Not supersede any other detached signs allowed within this
Section.
7. Be placed in a sign easement.
8. Have a minimum setback of ten (10) feet from the property line for
a monument sign and a minimum setback of five (5) feet from the
property line for freestanding sign.
9. A sign permit is required for any commercial subdivision sign.
10. Sign shall not be in sight triangle.
A. Single-Family And Two-Family Residential Districts. These provisions
shall apply to all permanent signs in non-business areas:
Section
415.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.090
AO:605
1. Dwelling units in single-family or two-family zoning districts shall
be allowed to utilize any non-business sign described in Section
415.030, Exempt Signs. Home occupations, as defined in Section
405.020, and as allowed in Article III of Chapter 405 of this Title,
shall be allowed one (1) on-premises detached sign, such sign shall
not exceed five (5) square feet in effective area and four (4) feet in
height. No off-premises signs shall be allowed other than those
specifically allowed by Section 415.070, Temporary Signs.
2. Wall signs shall not be permitted, however, this does not include
signs on the inside or outside of windows except that any signs on
the outside of the window, which do any advertising beyond merely
identifying the business and giving the times it is open, shall not
exceed five (5) square feet in effective area.
3. Flashing lights and animation are not allowed except as seasonal
decorations.
B. Detached Signs. Detached signs are allowed in non-business areas as
follows:
1. Each premises containing a multi-family use or legal nonconforming
use shall be allowed one (1) detached sign. Premises
with more than seven hundred fifty (750) feet of frontage along a
public street may have one (1) additional detached sign, provided a
minimum of three hundred (300) feet of separation is maintained
between signs, and a minimum setback of twenty-five (25) feet from
adjacent property line is maintained for both signs.
2. A minimum front yard setback of ten (10) feet is required of all
detached signs. No detached sign shall exceed thirty-two (32)
square feet in effective area or eight (8) feet in height.
C. Attached Signs. Attached signs are allowed in non-business areas as
follows:
Each premises containing a multi-family use or legal non-conforming
use shall be allowed one (1) wall sign per wall, which shall extend no
further than eighteen (18) inches from the wall. The sign may contain
the name and logo of the establishment, business or use and nothing
else. Wall signs do not include signs on the inside or outside of windows
except that any signs on the outside of the window, which do any
advertising beyond merely identifying the business and giving the times
it is open, shall be subject to total square footage limitations. A wall
sign shall not project beyond the wall edge. The total effective area
of all wall signs allowed for a business shall be calculated based upon
street frontage and whether or not the premises has a detached sign.
Where a premises has no detached sign, the total effective area of all
wall signs shall not exceed one (1) square foot per linear foot of the
wall length along the street or streets upon which the business fronts.
Where a premises has a detached sign, the total effective area of all
Section
415.090
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
415.090
AO:606
Section 415.100. Legal Non-Conforming Signs. [CC 1999 §26-119]
wall signs shall not exceed one-half (½) square foot per lineal foot of the
wall length along the street or streets upon which the business fronts.
A. Non-Conforming Signs. The sign for a legal non-conforming use shall be
a legal non-conforming sign if the sign:
1. Was erected or attached prior to the adoption of this Chapter,
2. Is on-premise, and
3. Would have been legal if the use had been located in the most
restrictive zoning district where the use is allowed by right.
B. Continuation Of Legal Non-Conforming Signs. Any sign which was
lawfully erected or affixed prior to such time as it came within the
purview of this Chapter and which sign complied with all regulations in
force at the time it was erected or affixed, but which fails to conform to
all applicable regulations and restrictions of this Chapter, shall be
considered a legal non-conforming sign. A legal non-conforming sign
may be continued and shall be maintained in good condition, but shall
not be:
1. Structurally altered (except to meet safety requirements) so as to
prolong the life of the sign;
2. Altered so as to increase the degree of non-conformity of the sign;
3. Expanded;
4. Re-established after damage or destruction of seventy-five percent
(75%) of the value (tax value, if listed for tax purposes) or more of
the non-conforming sign.
C. Abandoned Or Discontinued. Abandonment or discontinuance occurs
whenever:
1. The sign for a continuous period of three (3) months or more
advertises services or products no longer available to the traveling
public because the services or products have been discontinued or
cannot be obtained at the destination or by the directions indicated
on the sign; or
2. The sign for a continuous period of three (3) months or longer is
maintained without an advertising message. The following signs
are signs maintained without an advertising message:
a. A sign with a message which is partially obliterated so as not to
identify a particular service or product;
b. A sign which is blank or painted out;
Section
415.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.100
AO:607
Section 415.110. Directional Signs. [CC 1999 §26-120]
On-premises detached directional signs in excess of five (5) square feet
in effective area shall be allowed in any area, provided such signs do not
name or advertise any product, service or business, and the total allowable
effective area of detached signs on the premises is not exceeded. A site plan
locating all detached signs, including existing and proposed directional or
instructional signs, shall be required prior to issuance of a sign permit.
Section 415.120. Commercial Sign Overlay Districts. [CC 1999
§26-121; Ord. No. 08-18 §1, 2-25-2008]
c. A sign with a message consisting solely of the name of the sign
owner on any part of the sign.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Commercial Sign Overlay Districts is to
permit on-premises detached signs in proximity to the intersection of
major highways and expressways, freeways or interstates. Larger and
taller on-premises detached signs are deemed appropriate in these
areas due to the orientation of the commercial activity located at these
intersections.
1. Highway Overlay District. All signs located on a highway in a
commercial district shall conform to Section 415.080, Provisions
for Signs in Business Areas, except for the following:
a. Property located within a one thousand two hundred (1,200)
feet radius from the center of the intersection of the rights-ofway
of U.S. Highway 60 and State Highway 174.
b. Property located within a one thousand two hundred (1,200)
feet radius from the center of the intersection of the rights-ofway
of U.S. Highway 60 and State Highway M.
c. The maximum effective area for any on-premises detached sign
in a Highway Overlay District shall be three hundred (300)
square feet and shall have a maximum height of thirty-five (35)
feet.
2. Expressway Overlay District. All signs located in an Expressway
Overlay District shall conform to Section 415.080, Provisions for
Signs in Business Areas, except for the following:
a. Property located within a radius of one thousand five hundred
(1,500) feet from the center of the intersection of the rights-ofway
of U.S. Highway 60 or Sunshine Street and James River
Freeway, Brookline Avenue or State Highway MM and James
River Freeway or State Highway MM and I-44.
b. The maximum effective area for any on-premises detached sign
in an Expressway Overlay District shall be four hundred (400)
square feet and shall have a maximum height of sixty (60) feet.
Section
415.100
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
415.120
AO:608
Section 415.130. Sign Permits and Inspections. [CC 1999 §26-122]
3. Railroad Overlay District. Due to the restricted view caused by the
railroad overpass and elevated road bed located near the
intersection of U.S. Highway 60 and State Highway 174, a sign
allowed by paragraph (1) and located on the west side of the
railroad right-of-way within the radius described in paragraph
(1)(a) shall have a maximum height of sixty (60) feet.
4. A premises that has any portion of the premises located within the
radius established in paragraphs (1), (2) or (3) is authorized to have
located on any portion of the premises the sign allowed under this
Section so long as not otherwise prohibited by this Code.
A. Permits Required. [Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
1. Except as otherwise provided in this Code, it shall be unlawful for
any person to erect, repair, improve, maintain, convert or
manufacture any sign or cause the same to be done without first
obtaining a sign permit for each such sign from the Community
Development Department. In connection with the sign permit, an
application fee in the amount of thirty dollars ($30.00) shall be
charged, upon receipt of an application for a sign permit. No sign
permit shall be issued except to a person licensed to do business in
the City or to a person exempt from the City licensing provisions.
2. Every sign permit issued by the Community Development
Department shall become null and void if work on the sign is not
commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of
such permit. If work authorized by such permit is suspended or
abandoned for ninety (90) days after the work is commenced, the
sign shall be considered abandoned unless a new permit shall be
first obtained to proceed with the work on the sign, provided that
no changes have been made in the original plans.
B. License. No person shall perform any work or service for any person or
for any government entity in connection with the erection, repair,
improvement, maintenance, conversion or manufacture of any sign in
the City, or any work or service in connection with causing any such
work to be done, unless such person shall first have obtained a business
license and paid the license fees provided for by the City, or shall be
represented by a duly licensed person.
C. Application For Permit. Application for a permit shall be made to the
Community Development Department upon a form provided by the City
and shall be accompanied by such information as may be required to
ensure compliance with all appropriate laws and regulations of the City
including, but not limited to: [Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
1. Name, address and business license number of permit application.
2. Name and address of owner of sign.
Section
415.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.130
AO:609
Section 415.140. Enforcement and Penalty. [CC 1999 §26-123]
3. Name and address of the owner and the occupant of the premises
where the sign is located or to be located.
4. Name and address of architect and or engineer responsible for
design (see latest building code adopted by the City, as established
in Chapter 500).
Drawings shall require a seal by an architect or an engineer when
the sign is a roof sign, or the surface is twenty (20) feet or more
from grade, or when the structural integrity of the sign is
questioned.
5. Clear and legible drawings with description showing the precise
location of the sign which is the subject of the permit and all other
existing signs on the same premises or as otherwise specified by
the Community Development Department.
6. Drawings showing the dimensions, construction supports, sizes,
materials of the sign, and method of attachment and character of
structural members to which attachment is to be made.
7. The Community Development Department shall issue a permit for
work to be done on a sign when an application therefore has been
properly made and the sign complies with all appropriate laws and
regulations of the City.
D. Denial Or Revocation. [Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
1. The Community Development Department may, in writing,
suspend, deny or revoke a permit issued under provisions of this
Section whenever the permit is issued on the basis of a
misstatement of fact, fraud or non-compliance with the Chapter.
2. When a sign permit is denied by the Community Development
Department, written notice shall be given of the denial to the
applicant, together with a brief written statement of the reason for
the denial. Such denials shall have referenced the Section of the
Sign Code or other pertinent Code used as a standard for the basis
of denial.
A. Removal Of Signs By The City. The Community Development
Department shall identify any signs that are illegal or endanger the
public safety such as an abandoned, dangerous or materially,
electrically or structurally defective sign or a sign for which no permit
has been issued. [Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
B. Revocation Of Permits, Utilities And City License. Whenever the
Community Development Department has ordered a person to correct a
violation and when such violation has not been corrected within the
time specified by such order, thereafter, the Community Development
Section
415.130
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
415.140
AO:610
Section 415.150. Conflicts and Savings. [CC 1999 §26-124]
Department may institute an administrative action to revoke any and
all permits issued by the City under which the activity is conducted,
occupancy permits and the right to receive utilities for the activity of
the building or structure wherein the activity is conducted. [Ord. No.
16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
C. Penalty For Violation. If a person violates this Chapter or if a notice of a
violation is not complied with within the time specified by the
Community Development Department, then the Department may cause
a Municipal Court summons to be issued and the Department may also
request the City Attorney to institute the appropriate legal proceedings
to obtain an injunction to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to
require removal or termination of the unlawful use of the building or
structure in violation of the provisions of this Code or of any order or
direction made pursuant thereto. [Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
D. Prosecution Of Violation. Any person violating any of the provisions of
the Building Code, or this Chapter, or failing to comply with any order
issued pursuant to any Section thereof, or who shall erect, construct,
alter or repair a sign in violation of an approved plan or directive of the
Community Development Department or of a permit issued under the
provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a violation of a municipal
ordinance and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided by
Missouri law, except the court shall hear evidence concerning the
economic value of continuing the violation and shall assess a fine
sufficient in the court's judgment to deter a continuation of the
violation. Each day that a violation continues, after service of notice as
provided for in this Chapter, and filing of charges in Municipal Court,
shall be deemed a separate offense. Notice as required above shall not
be required in order to prosecute a person for a violation of any
provision of this Chapter. [Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
E. Abatement Of Violation. The imposition of the penalties herein
prescribed shall not prevent the City Attorney from instituting
appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain,
correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a
building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct,
business or use of building or structure in or about any premises in
violation of this Chapter.
F. Responsibility. Any person who shall occupy the premises when the sign
is erected or attached as lessee or licensed operator shall be jointly and
severally responsible for compliance with the provisions of this Chapter
in the same manner as the owner of the sign and of the premises.
A. If the provisions of this Chapter conflict with other ordinances or
regulations, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern
or prevail to the extent of the conflict.
Section
415.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
415.150
AO:611
Chapter 420
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section 420.010. Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose
and Objectives. [Ord. No. 00-36 §1, 11-27-2000; Ord. No. 10-51 §1,
11-22-2010]
B. If any Section, Subsection, sentence, clause or provision of this Chapter
is held invalid, the remainder of this Chapter shall not be affected by
such invalidity.
A. Statutory Authorization. The legislature of the State of Missouri has in
Section 89.020, RSMo., delegated the responsibility to local
government units to adopt floodplain management regulations
designed to protect the health, safety, and general welfare. Therefore,
the City Council of the City of Republic, Missouri, ordains as follows.
B. Findings Of Fact.
1. Flood losses resulting from periodic inundation. The special flood
hazard areas of Republic, Missouri, are subject to inundation which
results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment
of the tax base; all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety, and general welfare.
2. General causes of the flood losses. These flood losses are caused by
(1) the cumulative effect of development in any delineated
floodplain causing increases in flood heights and velocities; and (2)
the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods,
hazards to others, inadequately elevated, or otherwise unprotected
from flood damages.
3. Methods used to analyze flood hazards. The Flood Insurance Study
(FIS) that is the basis of this Chapter uses a standard engineering
method of analyzing flood hazards, which consist of a series of
interrelated steps.
a. Selection of a base flood that is based upon engineering
calculations, which permit a consideration of such flood factors
as its expected frequency of occurrence, the area inundated,
and the depth of inundation. The base flood selected for this
Chapter is representative of large floods, which are
characteristic of what can be expected to occur on the
particular streams subject to this Chapter. It is in the general
order of a flood which could be expected to have a one percent
(1%) chance of occurrence in any one (1) year as delineated on
the Federal Insurance Administrator's FIS, and illustrative
materials for Greene County and for Christian County Missouri
Section
415.150
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
420.010
AO:612
Section 420.020. Definitions. [Ord. No. 00-36 §1, 11-27-2000; Ord.
No. 10-51 §1, 11-22-2010]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning they have in
common usage and to give this Chapter its most reasonable application.
100-YEAR FLOOD — See "Base Flood".
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — The same as "Appurtenant Structure".
ACTUARIAL RATES — See "Risk Premium Rates".
ADMINISTRATOR — The Federal Insurance Administrator.
AGENCY — The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
dated December 17, 2010, as amended, and any future
revisions thereto.
b. Calculations of water surface profiles are based on a standard
hydraulic engineering analysis of the capacity of the stream
channel and over bank areas to convey the regulatory flood.
c. Computation of a floodway required to convey this flood
without increasing flood heights more than one (1) foot at any
point.
d. Delineation of floodway encroachment lines within which no
development is permitted that would cause any increase in
flood height.
e. Delineation of flood fringe, i.e., that area outside the floodway
encroachment lines, but still subject to inundation by the base
flood.
C. Statement Of Purpose. It is the purpose of this Chapter to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare; to minimize those losses
described in Section 420.010(B)(1); to establish or maintain the
community's eligibility for participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP) as defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR)
59.22(a)(3); and to meet the requirements of 44 CFR 60.3(d) by
applying the provisions of this Chapter to:
1. Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flooding or cause undue increases in flood
heights or velocities;
2. Require uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities that
serve such uses, be provided with flood protection at the time of
initial construction; and
3. Protect individuals from buying lands that are unsuited for the
intended development purposes due to the flood hazard.
Section
420.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.020
AO:613
AGRICULTURAL COMMODITIES — Agricultural products and livestock.
AGRICULTURAL STRUCTURE — Any structure used exclusively in
connection with the production, storage, drying, or raising of agricultural
commodities.
APPEAL — A request for review of the Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this Chapter or a request for a variance.
APPURTENANT STRUCTURE — A structure that is on the same parcel of
property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in
any given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the structure having its floor subgrade (below
ground) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "Structure".
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER OR CHIEF ELECTED OFFICIAL — The
official of the community who is charged with the authority to implement
and administer laws, ordinances, and regulations for that community.
COMMUNITY — Any State or area or political subdivision thereof, which
has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for
the areas within its jurisdictions.
DEVELOPMENT — Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, levees,
levee systems, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or
drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING — For insurance purposes, means a non-basement
building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by
foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
ELIGIBLE COMMUNITY OR PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY — A community
for which the Administrator has authorized the sale of flood insurance under
the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION — For the purposes of determining rates,
means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before
the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective
before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing
structures".
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
Section
420.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
420.020
AO:614
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD OR FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map of
a community on which the Administrator has delineated both special flood
hazard areas and the designated regulatory floodway.
FLOOD ELEVATION DETERMINATION — A determination by the
Floodplain Administrator of the water surface elevations of the base flood,
that is, the flood level that has a one percent (1%) or greater chance of
occurrence in any given year.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards.
FLOOD FRINGE — The area outside the floodway encroachment lines, but
still subject to inundation by the regulatory flood.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Administrator, where the boundaries of the flood
areas having special flood hazards have been designated as (unnumbered
or numbered) A Zones.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community
on which the Administrator has delineated both the special flood hazard
areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — An examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see "Flooding").
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including,
but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and
floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as floodplain and grading ordinances) and other
1. The overflow of inland and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
2.
Section
420.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.020
AO:615
applications of Police power. The term describes such State or local
regulations, in any combination thereof, that provide standards for the
purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOOD PROOFING — Any combination of structural additions, changes,
or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate flood damage to real
estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, or structures
and their contents.
FLOODWAY OR REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or
other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than one (1) foot.
FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT LINES — The lines marking the limits of
floodways on Federal, State and local floodplain maps.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as bridge openings and the hydrological effect of
urbanization of the watershed.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use that cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water. This term includes only docking facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, but does not include longterm
storage or related manufacturing facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the national Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
1.
Certified or pre-registered historic district or a district preliminarily
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
2.
Individually listed on a State Inventory of Historic Places in States
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
3.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior, or
a.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in States without approved
programs.
b.
4.
Section
420.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
420.020
AO:616
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of
the applicable floodproofing design requirements of this Chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one (1) or more
sections, that is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MAP — The Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM), Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM), or the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) for a
community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
MARKET VALUE OR FAIR MARKET VALUE — An estimate of what is fair,
economic, just and equitable value under normal local market conditions.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP), means the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of
1929 or other datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are referred.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For the purpose of determining insurance rates,
means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or
after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974,
whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means
structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after
the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community and includes and subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lot on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by the community.
NFIP — The National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY — Also known as an "eligible community",
means a community in which the Administrator has authorized the sale of
flood insurance.
PERSON — Includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation,
partnership, association or any other entity, including Federal, State, and
local governments and agencies.
Section
420.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.020
AO:617
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — At least fifty-one percent (51%) of the
actual cash value of the structure, less land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REMEDY A VIOLATION — To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with Federal, State or local floodplain management regulations
or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its non-compliance.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two (2) separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost
of repairs at the time of each such flood event equals or exceeds twentyfive
percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
RISK PREMIUM RATES — Those rates established by the Administrator
pursuant to individual community studies and investigations, which are
undertaken to provide flood insurance in accordance with Section 1307
of the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973, and the accepted
actuarial principles. "Risk premium rates" include provisions for operating
costs and allowances.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — See "Area of Special Flood Hazard".
SPECIAL HAZARD AREA — An area having special flood hazards and shown
on an FHMB, FIRM, or FBFM as Zones (unnumbered or numbered) A and
AE.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvements, and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start
of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement,
or other improvements were within one hundred eighty (180) days of the
permit date. The "actual start" means either the first (1st) placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs
or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, any work
beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home
on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation
such as clearing, grading and filling, the installation of streets and/or
walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, foundations, the
erection of temporary forms, nor installation on the property of accessory
structures, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the "actual start
1. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
2.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
3.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use.
4.
Section
420.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
420.020
AO:618
of construction" means the first (1st) alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
STATE COORDINATING AGENCY — That agency of the State Government,
or other office designated by the Governor of the State or by the State
Statute at the request of the Administrator to assist in the implementation
of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) in that State.
STRUCTURE — For floodplain management purposes, means a walled and
roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally
above ground, as well as manufactured home. "Structure", for insurance
purposes, means a walled or roofed building, other than a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground and affixed to a permanent
site, as well as a manufactured home on a permanent foundation. For
the latter purpose, the term includes a building while in the course of
construction, alteration or repair, but does not include building materials or
supplies intended for use in such construction, alteration or repair, unless
such materials or supplies are within an enclosed building on the premises.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred. The term includes repetitive loss
buildings (see definition).
For the purpose of this definition, "repair" is considered to occur when
the first (1st) repair or reconstruction of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other
structural part of the building commences.
The term does not apply to:
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any combination of reconstruction,
alteration, or improvement to a building, taking place during the life of
the building, in which the cumulative percentage of improvement equals or
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the current market value of the building. For
the purposes of this definition, an improvement occurs when the first (1st)
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building. This term includes structures, which have incurred
"repetitive loss" or "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair
work done.
Any project for improvement of a building required to comply with
existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the Community Development Director or his/her designee
and which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
[Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
1.
Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure"; or
2.
3. Any improvement to a building.
Section
420.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.020
AO:619
SUBSTANTIALLY IMPROVED EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
OR SUBDIVISIONS — Where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or
improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before repair,
reconstruction or improvement commenced.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by the community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation. Flood insurance requirements remain
in place for any varied use or structure and cannot be varied by the
community.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure of other development without elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this Chapter
is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is
provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION — The height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum where specified),
of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplain.
Section 420.030. General Provisions. [Ord. No. 00-36 §1,
11-27-2000; Ord. No. 10-51 §1, 11-22-2010]
Any project for improvement of a building required to comply with
existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications that have been
identified by the appropriate code enforcement officials and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
1.
Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure", or
2.
Any building that has been damaged from any source or is categorized
as repetitive loss.
3.
A. Lands To Which This Chapter Applies. This Chapter shall apply to all
lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Republic identified as
numbered and unnumbered A Zones and AE Zones on the Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) for Greene County, Missouri, on map
panels 29077C0295E, 29077C0305E, 29077C0308E, 29077C0313E,
29077C0314E, 29077C0315E, 29077C0316E, 29077C0317E,
29077C0318E, 29077C0407E, 29077C0426E, 29077C0427E and
29077C0435E dated December 17, 2010 and on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map for Christian County on map panel 29043C0050C dated
December 17, 2010, as amended, and any future revisions thereto. In
all areas covered by this Chapter, no development shall be permitted
except through the issuance of a floodplain development permit,
granted by the City of Republic or its duly designated representative
under such safeguards and restrictions as the City Council or the
designated representative may reasonably impose for the promotion
Section
420.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
420.030
AO:620
Section 420.040. Administration. [Ord. No. 00-36 §1, 11-27-2000;
Ord. No. 05-23 §1, 3-28-2005; Ord. No. 10-51 §1, 11-22-2010]
and maintenance of the general welfare, health of the inhabitants of the
community, and as specifically noted in Section 420.050.
B. Compliance. No development located within the special flood hazard
area of this community shall be located, extended, converted, or
structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this
Chapter and other applicable regulations.
C. Abrogation And Greater Restrictions. It is not intended by this Chapter
to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or
deed restrictions. However, where this Chapter imposes greater
restrictions, the provisions of this Chapter shall prevail. All other
ordinances inconsistent with this Chapter are hereby repealed to the
extent of the inconsistency only.
D. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this Chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements, shall be
liberally construed in favor of the Governing Body, and shall not be
deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by State
Statutes.
E. Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability. The degree of flood protection
required by this Chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods of study.
Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood heights may be
increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge
openings restricted by debris. This Chapter does not imply that areas
outside the floodway and flood fringe or land uses permitted within
such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This Chapter
shall not create a liability on the part of the City of Republic, any officer
or employee thereof for any flood damages that may result from
reliance on this Chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
F. Severability. If any Section, clause, provision, or portion of this Chapter
is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of appropriate
jurisdiction, the remainder of this Chapter shall not be affected thereby.
A. Floodplain Development Permit Required. A floodplain development
permit shall be required for all proposed construction or other
development including the placement of manufactured homes in the
areas described in Section 420.030(A). No person, firm, corporation, or
unit of government shall initiate any development or substantial
improvement or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a
separate floodplain development permit for each structure or other
development.
Section
420.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.040
AO:621
B. Designation Of Floodplain Administrator. The Community Development
Director or his/her designee in association with the Community
Development Department is hereby appointed to administer and
implement the provisions of this Chapter. [Ord. No. 16-23 § 1,
11-28-2016]
C. Duties And Responsibilities Of Floodplain Administrator. Duties of the
Community Development Director or his/her designee in association
with the Community Development Department shall include, but not be
limited to: [Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
1. Review of all applications for floodplain development permits to
assure that sites are reasonably safe from flooding and that the
floodplain development permit requirements of this Chapter have
been satisfied;
2. Review of all applications for development permits for proposed
development to assure that all necessary permits have been
obtained from Federal, State or local governmental agencies from
which prior approval is required by Federal, State or local law;
3. Review of all subdivision proposals and other proposed new
development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions,
to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from
flooding;
4. Issue floodplain development permits for all approved applications;
5. Notify adjacent communities and the Missouri State Emergency
Management Agency (MO SEMA) prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA);
6. Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of any watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not
diminished;
7. Verify and maintain a record of the actual elevation (in relation to
mean sea level) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new
or substantially improved structures;
8. Verify and maintain a record of actual elevation (in relation to mean
sea level) that the new or substantially improved non-residential
structures have been floodproofed; and
9. When floodproofing techniques are utilized for a particular nonresidential
structure, the Community Development Director or his/
her designee shall require certification from a registered
professional engineer or architect.
D. Application For Floodplain Development Permit. To obtain a floodplain
development permit the applicant shall first file an application in
Section
420.040
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
420.040
AO:622
Section 420.050. Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction. [Ord. No.
00-36 §1, 11-27-2000; Ord. No. 03-56 §1, 8-25-2003; Ord. No. 10-51
§1, 11-22-2010]
writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every floodplain
development permit application shall:
1. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot,
block and tract, house and street address, or similar description
that will readily identify and specifically locate the proposed
structure or work;
2. Identify and describe the work to be covered by the floodplain
development permit;
3. Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended;
4. Indicate the assessed value of the structure and the fair market
value of the improvement;
5. Specify whether development is located in designated flood fringe
or floodway;
6. Identify the existing base flood elevation and the elevation of the
proposed development;
7. Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the
Community Development Director or his/her designee; [Ord. No.
16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
8. Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed
construction; and
9. Be signed by the permittee or his/her authorized agent who may be
required to submit evidence to indicate such authority.
A. General Standards.
1. No permit for floodplain development shall be granted for new
construction, substantial improvements, and other improvements,
including the placement of manufactured homes, within any
numbered or unnumbered A Zones and AE Zones, unless the
conditions of this Section are satisfied.
2. All areas identified as unnumbered A Zones on the FIRM are
subject to inundation of the 100-year flood; however, the base flood
elevation is not provided. Development within unnumbered A
Zones is subject to all provisions of this Chapter. If Flood Insurance
Study data is not available, the community shall obtain, review, and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation or floodway data
currently available from Federal, State or other sources.
Section
420.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.050
AO:623
3. Until a floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development, including fill, shall be
permitted within any numbered A Zone or AE Zone on the FIRM
unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point
within the community.
4. All new construction, subdivision proposals, substantial
improvements, prefabricated structures, placement of
manufactured homes, and other developments shall require:
a. Design or adequate anchorage to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy;
b. Construction with materials resistant to flood damage;
c. Utilization of methods and practices that minimize flood
damages;
d. All electrical heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities be designed and/or
located as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding;
e. New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary
sewage systems be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from
the systems into floodwaters, and on-site waste disposal
systems be located so as to avoid impairment or
contamination; and
f. Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, located
within special flood hazard areas are required to assure that:
1. All such proposals are consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
2. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems, are located and constructed
to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
3. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to
flood hazards; and
4. All proposals for development, including proposals for
manufactured home parks and subdivisions, of five (5)
acres or fifty (50) lots, whichever is lesser, include within
such proposals base flood elevation data.
Section
420.050
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
420.050
AO:624
g. Staking and/or construction fencing be installed at all points of
the 100-year floodplain and floodway, indicating the limits of
such, at least every fifty (50) feet or as otherwise designated by
the City staff.
5. Storage, material and equipment.
a. The storage or processing of materials within the special flood
hazard area that are in time of flooding buoyant, flammable,
explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life
is prohibited.
b. Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not
subject to major damage by floods, if firmly anchored to
prevent flotation, or if readily removable from the area within
the time available after a flood warning.
6. Accessory structures. Structures used solely for parking and
limited storage purposes, not attached to any other structure on
the site, of limited investment value, and not larger than four
hundred (400) square feet may be constructed at-grade and wetfloodproofed
provided there is no human habitation or occupancy
of the structure; the structure is of single-wall design; a variance
has been granted from the standard floodplain management
requirements of this Chapter; and a floodplain development permit
has been issued.
7. Non-conforming use. A structure, or the use of a structure or
premises that was lawful before the passage or amendment of the
ordinance, but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this
Chapter, may be continued subject to the following conditions:
a. If such structure, use, or utility service is discontinued for six
(6) consecutive months, any future use of the building shall
conform to this Chapter.
b. If any non-conforming use or structure is destroyed by any
means, including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost
is more than fifty percent (50%) of the pre-damaged market
value of the structure. This limitation does not include the cost
of any alteration to comply with existing State or local health,
sanitary, building, safety codes, regulations or the cost of any
alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places, the State Inventory of Historic Places, or local
inventory of historic places upon determination.
8. Agricultural structures. Structures used solely for agricultural
purposes in connection with the production, harvesting, storage,
drying, or raising of agricultural commodities, including the raising
of livestock, may be constructed at grade and wet-floodproofed
provided there is no human habitation or occupancy of the
structure; the structure is of single wall design; there is no
Section
420.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.050
AO:625
permanent retail, wholesale or manufacturing use included in the
structure; a variance has been granted from the floodplain
management requirements of this Chapter; and a floodplain
development permit has been issued.
B. Specific Standards.
1. In all areas identified as numbered and unnumbered A Zones and
AE Zones, where base flood elevation data have been prohibited, as
set forth in Section 420.050(A)(2), the following provisions are
required:
a. Residential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any residential structures, including
manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to at least one (1) foot above base flood
elevation.
b. Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential
structures, including manufactured homes, shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to at least
one (1) foot above the base flood elevation or, together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be floodproofed so that
below the base flood elevation the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A
registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that
the standards of this Subsection are satisfied. Such
certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator
as set forth in Section 420.040(C)(9).
c. Require for all new construction and substantial improvements
that fully enclosed areas below lowest floor used solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other
than a basement and that are subject to flooding shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of
not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided; and
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1)
foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that
they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
Section
420.050
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
420.050
AO:626
C. Manufactured Homes.
1. All manufactured homes to be placed within all unnumbered and
numbered A Zones and AE Zones on the community's FIRM shall be
required to be installed using methods and practices that minimize
flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured
homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are
not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
2. Require manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within unnumbered or numbered A Zones and AE Zones
on the community's FIRM on sites:
a. Outside of manufactured home park or subdivision;
b. In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
c. In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision; or
d. In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on
which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage
as the result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation
such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
elevated to at least one (1) foot above the base flood elevation
and be securely attached to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement.
3. Require that manufactured homes to be placed or substantially
improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision within all unnumbered and numbered A Zones and AE
Zones, on the community's FIRM, that are not subject to the
provisions of Section 420.050(C)(2) of this Chapter, be elevated so
that either:
a. The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one (1)
foot above the base flood level; or
b. The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent
strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height
above grade and be securely attached to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement.
D. Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
Section 420.030(A) are areas designated as floodways. Since the
floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of
floodwaters that carry debris and potential projectiles, the following
provisions shall apply:
Section
420.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.050
AO:627
Section 420.060. Floodplain Management Variance Procedures.
[Ord. No. 00-36 §1, 11-27-2000; Ord. No. 10-51 §1, 11-22-2010]
1. The community shall select and adopt a regulatory floodway based
on the principle that the area chosen for the regulatory floodway
must be designed to carry the waters of the base flood without
increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one
(1) foot at any point.
2. The community shall prohibit any encroachments, including fill,
new construction, substantial improvements, and other
development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has
been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that
the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in
flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
3. If Section 420.050(D)(2) is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood
hazard reduction provisions of Section 420.050.
4. In unnumbered A Zones, the community shall obtain, review, and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation or floodway data
currently available from Federal, State or other sources as set forth
in Section 420.050(A)(2).
E. Recreational Vehicles.
1. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within all
unnumbered and numbered A Zones and AE Zones on the
community's FIRM either:
a. Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days, or
b. Meet the permitting, elevating, and the anchoring
requirements for manufactured homes of this Chapter, or
c. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use.*
* A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is
on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security
devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
A. Establishment Of Appeal Board. The Board of Adjustment as
established by the City of Republic shall hear and decide appeals and
requests for variances from the floodplain management requirements
of this Chapter.
B. Responsibility Of Appeal Board. [Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
Section
420.050
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
420.060
AO:628
1. Where an application for a floodplain development permit or
request for a variance from the floodplain management regulations
is denied by the Community Development Director or his/her
designee, the applicant may apply for such floodplain development
permit or variance directly to the Board of Adjustment as defined in
Section 420.060(A).
2. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Community Development Director or
his/her designee in the enforcement or administration of this
Chapter.
C. Further Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of
Adjustment or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the Circuit
Court of Greene County as provided in Section 89.110, RSMo.
D. Floodplain Management Variance Of City Of Republic. In passing upon
such applications for variances, the Board of Adjustment shall consider
all technical data and evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other Sections of this Chapter, and the following criteria:
1. The danger to life and property due to flood damage;
2. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
3. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
4. The importance of the service provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
5. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
6. The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flood
damage, for the proposed use;
7. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
8. The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan
and Floodplain Management Program for that area;
9. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
10. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters, if applicable, expected at the site; and
11. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
Section
420.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.060
AO:629
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems; streets;
and bridges.
E. Conditions For Approving Floodplain Management Variances.
1. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (½) acre
or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
(2) through (6) below have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the one-half (½) acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
2. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic
Places, the State Inventory of Historic Places, or local inventory of
historic places upon determination provided proposed activity will
not preclude the structure's continued historic designation.
3. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
4. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
5. Variances shall only be issued upon:
a. A showing of good and sufficient cause;
b. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
c. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local
laws or ordinances.
6. A community shall notify the applicant in writing over the signature
of a community official that:
a. The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below base
flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage, and
b. Such construction below the base flood level increase risks to
life and property.
Such notification shall be maintained with the record of
all variance actions as required by this Chapter.
Section
420.060
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
420.060
AO:630
F. Conditions For Approving Variances For Accessory Structures.
1. Any variance granted for an accessory structure shall be decided
individually based on a case-by-case analysis of the building's
unique circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following
conditions as well as those criteria and conditions set forth in
Section 420.060(D) and (E) of this Chapter.
2. In order to minimize flood damages during the 100-year flood and
the threat to public health and safety, the following conditions shall
be included for any variance issued for accessory structures that
are constructed at-grade and wet-floodproofed.
a. Use of the accessory structures must be solely for parking and
limited storage purposes in Zone A only as identified on the
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
b. For any new or substantially damaged accessory structures,
the exterior and interior building components and elements
(i.e., foundation, wall framing, exterior and interior finishes
flooring etc.) below the base flood elevation must be built with
flood-resistant materials in accordance with Section
420.050(A)(4)(b) of this Chapter.
c. The accessory structures must be adequately anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure in accordance with Section 420.050(A)(4)(a) of this
Chapter. All of the building's structural components must be
capable of resisting specific flood-related forces including
hydrostatic, buoyancy, and hydrodynamic and debris impact
forces.
d. Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be
located above the base flood elevation or floodproofed so that
they are contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure
that is capable of resisting damage during flood conditions in
accordance with Section 420.050(A)(4)(d) of this Chapter.
e. The accessory structures must meet all National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP) opening requirements. The NFIP
requires that enclosure or foundation walls, subject to the
100-year flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters in accordance with Section
420.050(B)(1)(c) of this Chapter.
f. The accessory structures must comply with the floodplain
management floodway encroachment provisions of Section
420.050(D)(2) of this Chapter. No variances may be issued for
accessory structures within any designated floodway, if any
increase in flood levels would result during the 100-year flood.
Section
420.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.060
AO:631
g. Equipment, machinery, or other contents must be protected
from any flood damage.
h. No disaster relief assistance under any program administered
by any Federal agency shall be paid for any repair or
restoration costs of the accessory structures.
i. A community shall notify the applicant in writing over the
signature of a community official that:
(1) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below
base flood level will result in increased premium rates for
flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of
insurance coverage, and
(2) Such construction below the base flood level increases
risks to life and property. Such notification shall be
maintained with the record of all variance actions as
required by this Chapter.
j. Wet-floodproofing construction techniques must be reviewed
and approved by the community and registered professional
engineer or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain
development permit for construction.
G. Conditions For Approving Variances For Agricultural Structures.
1. Any variance granted for an agricultural structure shall be decided
individually based on a case- by-case analysis of the building's
unique circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following
conditions as well as those criteria and conditions set forth in
Section 420.060(D) and (E) of this Chapter.
2. In order to minimize flood damages during the 100-year flood and
the threat to public health and safety, the following conditions shall
be included for any variance issued for agricultural structures that
are constructed at-grade and wet-floodproofed.
a. All agricultural structures considered for a variance from the
floodplain management regulations of this Chapter shall
demonstrate that the varied structure is located in wide,
expansive floodplain areas and no other alternate location
outside of the special flood hazard area exists for the
agricultural structure. Residential structures, such as
farmhouses, cannot be considered agricultural structures.
b. Use of the varied structures must be limited to agricultural
purposes in Zone A only as identified on the community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
c. For any new or substantially damaged agricultural structures,
the exterior and interior building components and elements
Section
420.060
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
420.060
AO:632
(i.e., foundation, wall framing, exterior and interior finishes,
flooring, etc.) below the base flood elevation must be built
with flood-resistant materials in accordance with Section
420.050(A)(4)(b) of this Chapter.
d. The agricultural structures must be adequately anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structures in accordance with Section 420.050(A)(4)(a) of this
Chapter. All of the building's structural components must be
capable of resisting specific flood-related forces including
hydrostatic, buoyancy, and hydrodynamic and debris impact
forces.
e. Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be
located above the base flood elevation or floodproofed so that
they are contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure
that is capable of resisting damage during flood conditions in
accordance with Section 420.050(A)(4)(d) of this Chapter.
f. The agricultural structures must meet all National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP) opening requirements. The NFIP
requires that enclosure or foundation walls, subject to the
100-year flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters in accordance with Section
420.050(B)(1)(c) of this Chapter.
g. The agricultural structures must comply with the floodplain
management floodway encroachment provisions of Section
420.050(D)(2) of this Chapter. No variances may be issued for
agricultural structures within any designated floodway, if any
increase in flood levels would result during the 100-year flood.
h. Major equipment, machinery, or other contents must be
protected from any flood damage.
i. No disaster relief assistance under any program administered
by any Federal agency shall be paid for any repair or
restoration costs of the agricultural structures.
j. A community shall notify the applicant in writing over the
signature of a City Official that:
(1) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below
base flood level will result in increased premium rates for
flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of
insurance coverage, and
(2) Such construction below the base flood level increases
risks to life and property. Such notification shall be
maintained with the record of all variance actions as
required by this Chapter.
Section
420.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
420.060
AO:633
Section 420.070. Penalties For Violation. [Ord. No. 00-36 §1,
11-27-2000; Ord. No. 10-51 §1, 11-22-2010]
Violation of the provision of this Chapter or failure to comply with any of its
requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with granting of variances) shall constitute a misdemeanor.
Any person who violates this Chapter or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and in addition, shall pay all costs and
expenses involved in the case. Each day that such violation continues shall
be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent
the City of Republic or other appropriate authority from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
Section 420.080. Amendments. [Ord. No. 00-36 §1, 11-27-2000;
Ord. No. 10-51 §1, 11-22-2010]
The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this Chapter may
from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or appealed to
reflect any and all changes in the National Flood Disaster Protection Act
of 1973, provided however, that no such action may be taken until after a
public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties of interest and citizens
shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of time and place of such
hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the
City of Republic. At least twenty (20) days shall elapse between date of
this publication and the public hearing. A copy of such amendments will be
provided to the Region VII office of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA). The regulations of this Chapter are in compliance with the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) regulations.
Chapter 425
COMMUNITY STANDARDS FOR CITY OF REPUBLIC
k. Wet-floodproofing construction techniques must be reviewed
and approved by the community and a registered professional
engineer or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain
development permit for construction.
Section
420.060
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
420.080
AO:634
ARTICLE I
Nuisances
Section 425.010. Statutory Authorization. [Ord. No. 03-78 §§1 — 2,
11-24-2003; Ord. No. 07-62 §1, 10-8-2007]
The Council of the City of Republic in recognition of its duty to provide for
the health, safety and well-being of the citizens of the City affirms the need
to suppress all nuisances which are or may be injurious to the health and
welfare of the inhabitants of the City, or prejudicial to the morals thereof,
that such nuisances may be suppressed by ordinances, and the expenses for
abating these nuisances may be assessed against the owner or occupant of
the property and against the property on which said nuisance is committed
and a special tax bill may be issued against said property for said expenses.
Therefore, the City Council of the City of Republic, Missouri, ordains as
follows.
Section 425.020. Declarations and Purposes. [Ord. No. 03-78 §§1 —
2, 11-24-2003; Ord. No. 07-62 §1, 10-8-2007]
A. The City Council for the City of Republic, Missouri, does hereby find
and declare that it is necessary to provide for the abatement of
conditions which are detrimental to property values and community
appearance, an obstruction to or interference with the comfort and
enjoyment of adjacent property or premises, or hazardous or injurious
to the health, safety or welfare of the general public in such ways that
constitute a public nuisance and to establish community standards to
safeguard health and public welfare in keeping with the character of
the City by allowing for the maintenance of exterior property for each of
the following purposes:
1. To safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of
Republic by maintaining exterior property in good and appropriate
condition;
2. To promote a sound and attractive community appearance; and
3. To enhance the economic value of the community, and each area in
it, through the regulation of the maintenance and conditions of
property.
B. Accordingly, the City Council declares that the purposes of this Chapter
are to:
1. Reduce the threat to health, safety, welfare, appearance and
economic value due to the decline in property condition(s) by
lawfully delineating the circumstances under which such
condition(s) are considered unlawful and/or abated; and further
declares that
2. Abatement of such condition(s) is in the best interest of the health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the City, as maximum use and
Section
425.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
425.020
AO:635
Section 425.030. Administration and Enforcement. [Ord. No. 03-78
§§1 — 2, 11-24-2003; Ord. No. 07-62 §1, 10-8-2007]
enjoyment of property or premises in proximity to one another
depends upon maintenance of those properties at or above the
established minimum standards as defined within this Chapter.
A. The Mayor and City Council for the City of Republic, Missouri, hereby
assign the duties of administering this Chapter as follows:
1. The Code Compliance Official within the Community Development
Department (or within such other department designated for
enforcement by the City Administrator) shall have the duty,
responsibility and authority to enforce this Chapter and Sections in
any manner authorized by the Municipal Code of Ordinances or by
any other law including, but not limited to, issuance of citations,
civil actions and abatement activity regulation. [Ord. No. 16-23 §
1, 11-28-2016]
2. The Records Division of the Republic Police Department will
provide the Community Development Department officials
identifying information, when available, of the location and
identifying descriptions of violators to assist the reporting, citation
completion and service process. [Ord. No. 16-23 § 1,
11-28-2016]
3. For the purposes of inspections and/or enforcement of the
provisions of this Chapter, Code Compliance Officials, Community
Development Department officials or their designees shall be
authorized and permitted to enter upon the property of another
without being considered trespassers. [Ord. No. 16-23 § 1,
11-28-2016]
4. All inspections and enforcement actions, unless expressly stated to
the contrary, shall be under the direction of the Code Compliance
Official who may appoint or designate other public officers or
employees to perform duties as may be necessary to enforce the
provisions of this Chapter including, but not limited to, abatement
activity, work orders, vegetation removal, mowing, etc.
5. When the Code Compliance Official determines an emergency
exists which creates a dangerous and imminent health or safety
hazard to persons, property or the general public which requires
immediate action, the Code Compliance Official may order all
required action necessary to immediately abate or remove the
conditions causing the emergency. Any orders issued pursuant to
this paragraph shall be effective immediately or in the time and
manner prescribed in the order itself.
Section
425.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
425.040
AO:636
Section 425.040. Definitions. [Ord. No. 03-78 §§1 — 2, 11-24-2003;
Ord. No. 07-62 §1, 10-8-2007; Ord. No. 10-05 §1, 2-22-2010]
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words are defined as follows:
ABANDONED — In addition to those definitions contained in applicable
State Statutes, State Codes, other ordinances adopted by the City of
Republic or as contained in binding case law decisions, the term
"abandoned" refers to any item which has ceased to be used for its designed
and intended purpose. The following factors, among others, will be
considered in determining whether or not an item has been abandoned:
ABATE — To repair, replace, remove, destroy or otherwise remedy the
condition in question by such means and in such a manner and to such an
extent as the Enforcement Officer in his/her judgment shall determine is
necessary in the interest of the general health, safety and welfare of the
community.
CODE COMPLIANCE OFFICIAL — City Official or employee as may be
designated in writing by the City Administrator to enforce property or
premises maintenance and other City Code violations as authorized herein.
DISMANTLED — That from which essential equipment, parts or contents
have been removed or stripped and the outward appearance verifies the
removal.
FIELD DRESSING — The process of removing the internal organs of an
animal which has been harvested in the wild or by other means.
GRAFFITI — Defacement, damage or destruction by the presence of paint or
ink, chalk, dye or other similar substances; or by carving, etching or other
engraving.
INOPERABLE — Incapable of functioning or producing activity for
mechanical reasons or other reasons.
JUNK VEHICLE — Any vehicle which does not properly display license
plates or stickers indicating current registration and has any one (1) or
more of the following characteristics:
1. Present operability and functional utility;
2. The date of last effective use;
3. The condition of disrepair or damage;
4. The last time an effort was made to repair or rehabilitate the item;
5. The status of registration or licensing of the item.
Lacks engine, wheel, tire, properly installed battery or other structural
parts which renders the vehicle inoperable for use as designed by the
manufacturer;
1.
2. Has a missing windshield or missing windows;
Section
425.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
425.040
AO:637
LIEN HOLDER — Any person or entity who has a recorded interest in real
property, including mortgagee, beneficiary under a deed of trust or holder
of other recorded liens or claims of interest in real property.
NUISANCE — In addition to the conditions described within this Chapter,
any unlawful act or the failure to perform a duty, or permitting any condition
or thing to be or exist on property owned or occupied in which such act,
omission, condition or thing:
OCCUPANT — Any person or persons holding and exercising temporary or
terminable tenancy rights with respect to a residence, building or property
including renters, lessees and/or other persons residing temporarily on the
subject property.
OWNER — The registered owner of a vehicle; the person(s) to whom
property tax is assessed on real or personal property as shown on the last
equalized assessment roll of the County.
PARTS — Any mechanical, structural, body or decorative part of any vehicle,
machinery or trailer.
PROPERTY — Any land, lot, parcel or portion of land whether improved
or unimproved, occupied or unoccupied, including any alley, sidewalk,
parkway or public easement abutting such land, lot, parcel or portion of
land.
VEHICLE — Any self-propelled vehicle not operating exclusively on tracks
except for farm tractors. The term "vehicle" shall include, but is not limited
to, an automobile, truck, van, sports utility vehicle, motorcycle, motorized
scooter or dirt-bike.
Has a missing door, bumper, hood, driver's seat or other similar
structural piece;
3.
Has become or has the potential to become the breeding ground or
habitat of rats, mice, snakes, mosquitoes or other vermin;
4.
Has junk, garbage or refuse stored therein; or paper, cardboard, wood
or other combustible materials stored therein; or is used as a storage
facility for solid waste or other hazardous materials; or is used for the
storage of gasoline, propane or diesel fuel at any location on or about
the vehicle other than in the vehicle's gas or fuel tank;
5.
Has become a potential source of contamination of the soil from
petroleum products or other toxic liquids being discharged or leaking
from the vehicle.
6.
1. Injures or endangers the health, safety or welfare of others; and/or
Unlawfully interferes with the use of, obstructs or tends to obstruct
or renders dangerous any property, path, sidewalk, stream, ditch or
drainage.
2.
Section
425.040
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
425.050
AO:638
Section 425.050. Enumeration. [Ord. No. 03-78 §§1 — 2,
11-24-2003; Ord. No. 07-62 §1, 10-8-2007; Ord. No. 08-91 §3,
1-12-2009; Ord. No. 10-05 §1, 2-22-2010]
A. The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to be
or remain on any public or private property of any of the following
items, conditions or actions are hereby declared to be and constitute a
public nuisance and a violation of this Chapter; provided however, this
enumeration shall not be deemed or construed to be exclusive, limiting
or restrictive:
1. Noxious weeds and overgrown vegetation at least seven (7) inches
in length.
2. Accumulation of rubbish, trash, refuse, junk and other abandoned
materials, metals, lumber or items offensive to the senses or a risk
to health, safety and/or welfare.
3. Any condition which provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes and
other vermin.
4. Allowing or permitting vegetation, grass or weeds to grow outside
or extend beyond the boundaries of any lot or property to a length
greater than six (6) inches, to a height greater than ten (10) inches
or encroach upon any sidewalk more than four (4) inches.
5. Conditions contributing to or causing rank or noxious odors and
stenches, as well as the conditions, substances or other causes
which give rise to the emission or generation of such odors and
stenches.
6. The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or
body of water by sewage or industrial wastes.
7. Abandoning, discarding or knowingly permitting to remain on
premises or property, in a place accessible to children, any
abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or
semi-airtight container which has a capacity of one and one-half
(1½) cubic feet or more and an opening of fifty (50) square inches
or more and which has a door or lid equipped with hinge, latch or
other fastening device capable of securing such door or lid, without
rendering such equipment harmless to human life by removing
such hinges, latches or other hardware which may cause a person
to be confined therein.
No part of this Section shall apply to any icebox, refrigerator or
other airtight or semi-airtight container located in that part of a
building occupied by a dealer, warehouseman or repairman of such
products.
8. All furniture, machinery, discarded containers or any other
appliance, article, item or equipment designed for use inside a
Section
425.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
425.050
AO:639
Section 425.060. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 03-78 §§1 — 2, 11-24-2003;
Ord. No. 07-62 §1, 10-8-2007; Ord. No. 09-34 §1, 9-28-2009]
dwelling unit if stored, placed or set upon the ground or on any
open porch, in any attached carport or freestanding carport, or in
any garage or shed that is without doors to conceal such articles.
9. To permit, cause, keep, maintain or allow a fence or wall that is
found to be in a deteriorated condition and/or in need of repair.
10. Dismantled, non-licensed, inoperable or junk vehicles as defined
herein.
11. Bricks, shingles, building materials, salvage materials including,
but not limited to, auto parts, scrap metal, tires and any other trade
materials stored, deposited, dumped discarded and/or abandoned
on any section of property.
12. Buildings, structures or other surfaces upon which graffiti exists.
13. Lumber not piled or stacked at least twelve (12) inches off the
ground.
14. Any flammable material which may endanger public safety.
15. Field dressing.
a. The field dressing and/or hoisting of any animal for personal
home use is allowed in residentially zoned areas of the City, so
long as it occurs in backyards only. Under no circumstances
will field dressing and/or hoisting of an animal be allowed in
front yards in residentially zoned areas.
b. All blood let during the bleeding process must be disposed of in
accordance with all applicable Federal, State and local
Statutes, ordinances and regulations. No blood may be poured
on the ground, bushes or lawns.
c. This Subsection shall not apply to any property zoned as
agricultural.
d. This Subsection shall not apply to dressing fish and small game
as identified by the Missouri Department of Conservation
including, but not limited to, rabbit, squirrel, quail, dove,
pheasant, woodcock, crow, groundhog, raccoon, gray fox, red
fox, coyote, bobcat, opossum, ruffed grouse, ducks, Canada
geese and snow geese.
A. The provisions of this Chapter do not regulate or place limitations on
any properly zoned junk yard, salvage dealer or waste tire facility
holding valid licenses and/or other necessary Federal, State or
municipal permits.
Section
425.050
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
425.060
AO:640
Section 425.070. Nuisances Prohibited. [Ord. No. 03-78 §§1 — 2,
11-24-2003; Ord. No. 07-62 §1, 10-8-2007]
B. The provisions of this Chapter do not prohibit the storage of idle but
operable recreational vehicles, boats or lawn mowing equipment.
C. The provisions of this Chapter do not prohibit the orderly storage of
firewood.
D. The provisions of this Chapter are not intended to regulate or place
limitations on any residential or commercial building project for which
a valid building permit has been issued by the City of Republic. This
exception shall be limited to the site for which any such permit was
issued and this exception shall not apply if continuous and substantial
progress toward completion of the building project is not being made.
E. The provisions of this Chapter, with regard to abatement of weeds and
rank vegetation over seven (7) inches in length, may include, but is not
limited to the following options to abate: Weeds and rank vegetation
over seven (7) inches in length located on land of two (2) acres or more,
including undeveloped portions of platted subdivisions with contiguous
lots that are greater than two (2) acres in total area, may be abated by
mowing a fourteen (14) foot strip along all property lines and
maintaining the mowed area at less than seven (7) inches and by taking
demonstrable action to prevent the remaining acreage from being a
detriment to the health, safety and welfare of the public. In lieu of the
fourteen (14) foot strip on land being actively used for agricultural
crops, the abatement may be by taking demonstrable action such as
mowing or use of chemical controls to prevent the land used for
agricultural purposes from being a detriment to the health, safety and
welfare of the public. The burden shall be upon the person in control of
land where weeds or other rank vegetation in excess of seven (7) inches
is located, to prove that demonstrable action has been taken and that
the action has, in fact, prevented a detriment to the health, safety and
welfare of the public. Failure to meet this burden will result in weeds
and rank vegetation being declared a per se nuisance.
A. It is unlawful for any owner or occupant having control of any lot or
land or any part thereof in the City of Republic to cause, permit or
maintain any nuisance on any such lot or land or contribute to the
creation or maintenance of any nuisance as defined within this Chapter;
and it is further unlawful for any person or his/her agent, servant,
representative or employee to cause or maintain a nuisance on the
property of another, with or without permission.
B. Any person who shall cause, create or maintain a nuisance or
contribute to any nuisance as defined within this Chapter shall be guilty
of violating the provisions hereof and shall be liable for all costs and
expenses attendant upon the removal and/or correction of such a
nuisance in addition to any penalties provided. Each day that a nuisance
is maintained can be the basis of a separate offense.
Section
425.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
425.080
AO:641
Section 425.080. Notice. [Ord. No. 03-78 §§1 — 2, 11-24-2003; Ord.
No. 07-62 §1, 10-8-2007; Ord. No. 13-09 §1, 2-25-2013]
Section 425.090. Abatement Costs, Special Tax Liens. [Ord. No.
03-78 §§1 — 2, 11-24-2003; Ord. No. 07-62 §1, 10-8-2007; Ord. No.
13-09 §1, 2-25-2013]
A. Upon verification of a reported nuisance violation within the City, the
Code Compliance Official shall provide notice of the violation pursuant
to the procedure in Code Section 430.020.
B. In addition to the notice requirements of this Chapter or Section
430.020, the notice to abate a nuisance issued under the provisions of
this Chapter shall contain:
1. A notice to abate the nuisance within a stated time not to be less
than ten (10) days, unless a different time period is provided for by
the Code;
2. The location of the nuisance, if the same is stationary;
3. A description of what constitutes the nuisance;
4. A statement of action necessary to abate the nuisance;
5. A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed, the City
will seek an order to abate the nuisance and assess the cost thereof
against such person or against the property or both.
C. The absence of notice as provided in this Section shall not delay nor
prevent nor be a defense in a prosecution pursuant to Section 425.070.
A. In the event that any violation of this Chapter is not abated by the
responsible person or persons as notified within the notice to abate and
within the time specified, the City may initiate an administrative
hearing before a hearing officer pursuant to those procedures set forth
in Chapter 430 of this Code. Procedures set forth in this Chapter shall
govern over the procedures of Chapter 430 should there be a conflict in
procedures.
B. Whenever the City is authorized to undertake the abatement of any
conditions constituting a nuisance as described within this Chapter, the
City may cause the abatement to be performed by City employees or by
private contract under the direction of the City. The City may by
ordinance or by resolution establish fee schedules for work done by City
employees.
C. In addition to all other fees, fines and costs imposed hereunder, the City
is hereby empowered to charge and collect all costs of abatement,
including administrative expenses, which shall be determined by the
Code Compliance Official, Community Development Department
officials or their designees and/or Municipal Court or hearing officer.
Said costs shall be assessed and billed to the owner, occupant or entity
Section
425.080
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
425.090
AO:642
Section 425.095. Weeds and Other Rank Vegetation. [Ord. No.
07-62 §1, 10-8-2007]
having control of the property upon which the violation(s) exists. These
costs are due and payable within thirty (30) days of receipt. [Ord. No.
16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
D. In the event the person or persons billed fails to pay within the thirty
(30) day period set forth in Subsection (C) of this Section, the Code
Compliance Official shall render an itemized document titled
"Certificate of Cost" showing the costs of abatement, administrative
expenses and any outstanding penalties and shall file the certificate
with the hearing officer. A copy of the document and notice shall be
served upon the property owner or responsible person or persons of the
property in accordance with the provisions of Section 425.080. The
notice of the Certificate of Cost shall advise that a request for hearing
to determine the amount of cost to be certified may be filed with the
Court Clerk. The notice shall further advise that upon certification of
the cost a special tax bill may be issued or the costs of the abatement
may be added to the annual real estate taxes assessed against the
property. The notice shall provide that the determination of the cost of
abatement and the assessment shall become final, unless the owner of
the tract of land files a written request for a hearing within ten (10)
days after the giving of the notice, which request shall set forth the
grounds upon which the owner contends that the assessment is invalid
or erroneous. If no hearing is requested, the hearing officer shall review
the file and if appropriate certify the cost to the City Clerk pursuant to
Code Section 430.040 if not paid.
E. If the property owner or responsible person or persons notified in
Subsection (D) timely requests a hearing, the hearing shall be
conducted by the hearing officer prior to certification of the cost to the
City Clerk. The cost, if any, as determined by the hearing officer shall be
certified to the City Clerk not sooner than thirty (30) days after issuance
of the hearing officer's written findings if not sooner paid.
A. Rank vegetation is declared to be a hazard to the public health, safety
and welfare. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Chapter, the
procedures set forth in this Section shall apply to the abatement of
weeds and other rank vegetation.
1. The presence of high weeds, brush and other rank vegetation,
excluding shade trees, ornamental shrubs, fruit trees,
domesticated berry bushes and vines, cover crops and domestic
grains and plantings, on lots and pieces of land within the City
constitute a menace to the public safety, health and welfare by
reason that such conditions may:
a. Cause a fire hazard.
b. Furnish cover for prowlers.
Section
425.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
425.095
AO:643
c. Create a nuisance with potential danger of injury on rocks,
debris, holes, etc., covered by excess growth.
d. Obstruct visibility at street intersections.
e. Result in the aggravation of allergies.
f. Furnish a potential harborage or breeding place for diseasecarrying
insects, arthropods, animals and poisonous snakes.
2. The growth of weeds, brush or rank vegetation shall constitute a
public nuisance when, in the opinion of the Code Compliance
Official, any such growth on a lot or piece of land may substantially
endanger the health, safety or welfare of the public, having
considered those hazards enumerated in paragraph (1).
3. The growth of weeds, brush or other rank vegetation in excess of
seven (7) inches in height is declared to be a public nuisance, per
se, detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the public.
4. It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee or agent in control of any
lot or piece of land within the City to allow weeds, brush or rank
vegetation to attain a height greater than seven (7) inches on such
land or lot. Any person violating this Section shall be punished as
provided by Section 100.220.
5. The abatement procedure for weeds or other rank vegetation shall
be as follows:
a. Notice to owner. Whenever the Code Compliance Official is
informed and determines that a nuisance, per se, exists under
paragraph (3), or whenever the Code Compliance Official shall
determine that a nuisance exists as provided by paragraph (2),
he shall notify the owner of the property of his order to abate
the nuisance by any of the methods set forth in Section
425.080 hereof.
b. Abatement by City upon failure to comply with notice. If the
nuisance is not abated within seven (7) days from the date the
notice is first given (by delivery, deposit to the mails or posting
of property), then the Code Compliance Official shall notify the
appropriate City department(s) of such nuisance, giving the
location thereof, and the appropriate City department(s) shall
cause such nuisance to be abated by whatever reasonable
means are necessary including use of contractor services.
6. Charges for abatement by the City shall be determined as follows:
a. Charges for the cost of abatement shall be determined
pursuant to Code Section 425.090 Subsections (C), (D) and (E).
b. If extraordinary weed maintenance procedures are required to
abate a nuisance under the provisions of this Chapter, the
Section
425.095
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
425.095
AO:644
Section 425.100. Penalties and Fine Schedule. [Ord. No. 03-78 §§1
— 2, 11-24-2003; Ord. No. 07-62 §1, 10-8-2007]
actual expenses incurred by the City for the abatement of the
nuisance shall be charged to the person in charge of the parcel
of land as set out in this Chapter.
c. For purposes of this Section, the term "extraordinary weed
maintenance procedures" shall be deemed to mean the
required use of heavy construction equipment such as motor
graders, crawler-tractors, wheel loaders and/or track-type
loaders. Actual expenses shall be deemed to include all
administrative costs, including costs incurred in renting such
equipment; the cost of fuel, oil, lubrication, filters and repair or
replacement of parts, including tires, when such repair or
replacement is not a result of normal wear and tear; the per
mile cost of dump trucks used in hauling away the rank
vegetation; and all labor costs.
7. No proceeding in Municipal Court for prosecution of a violation of
paragraph (4) shall prohibit or be any bar to a proceeding by the
City under the provisions of paragraphs (5) and (6), nor shall any
proceedings by the City under paragraphs (5) and (6) prohibit or be
any bar to a proceeding in Municipal Court for prosecution of a
violation of paragraph (4).
A. Upon entry of a guilty plea or upon a finding of guilt of a violation of any
Section of this Chapter, the court will order the following:
1. The imposition of a fine as scheduled within Subsection (3) and/or
the imposition of a sentence of imprisonment of up to ninety (90)
days for each offense.
2. Issuance of an abatement order for abatement of the violation.
3. Fine schedule for violations of this Chapter. (Fines in this table do
not include court costs or abatement fees.)
Section
#
Title Offense Fine
425.070 Nuisances Prohibited 1st $150.00
425.070 Nuisances Prohibited 2nd $300.00
425.070 Nuisances Prohibited 3rd $1,000.00
425.110 Failure to Abate a Nuisance as
Ordered
Any $1,000.00
Section
425.095
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
425.110
AO:645
Section 425.110. Failure To Abate A Nuisance As Ordered. [Ord. No.
03-78 §§1 — 2, 11-24-2003; Ord. No. 07-62 §1, 10-8-2007]
Upon conviction for the violation of any provision of this Chapter, an order
to abate will be issued directing the person or persons so convicted to abate
or correct the underlying nuisance. Failure of the person or persons to abate
such underlying nuisance within the time ordered shall be the basis of a
separate and chargeable offense.
Section 425.120. Separability. [Ord. No. 03-78 §§1 — 2, 11-24-2003;
Ord. No. 07-62 §1, 10-8-2007]
Every Section, provision or part of this Chapter is declared separable from
every other Section, provision or part; and if any Section, provision or part
hereof shall be held invalid, it shall not affect any other Section, provision
or part.
Section
425.110
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
425.120
AO:646
ARTICLE II
Outdoor Furnaces
Section 425.130. Purpose. [Ord. No. 09-28 §2, 9-14-2009]
The purpose of this Article is to protect the public health, safety and general
welfare of the residents of the City of Republic from excessive smoke
pollution, soot contamination and other toxic air pollutants and offensive
odors emanating from outdoor furnaces and to regulate the location and use
of same.
Section 425.140. Definition. [Ord. No. 09-28 §2, 9-14-2009; Ord. No.
10-48 §1, 11-8-2010]
As used in this Article, the following term shall have the prescribed
meaning:
OUTDOOR FURNACE — A fuel-fired boiler, furnace, stove or other similar
device fueled by wood, coal, corn or other types of fuel, located outside the
structure it is used to heat, with the designated purpose of providing indoor
heat for water and/or air for a residence or other structure. The provisions
of this Article do not apply to boilers or furnaces fueled by natural gas,
propane or fuel oil if the boiler or furnace has been inspected and approved
by the City Inspector and approved/inspected indoor fireplaces and wood
stoves designed and built according to all applicable City building/fire codes
and that meets or exceeds all appropriate government standards.
Section 425.150. Restrictions. [Ord. No. 09-28 §2, 9-14-2009; Ord.
No. 10-12 §1, 4-26-2010]
A. Outdoor furnaces are prohibited in the City of Republic, except as
specifically authorized in this Article.
B. An owner or person in control of an outdoor furnace which exists in the
City as of the effective date of this Article may operate the outdoor
furnace and the outdoor furnace may remain in place, only if the owner
or person in control of the outdoor furnace applies for an outdoor
furnace permit within thirty (30) days of the date of the City mailing
notice. The permit may be issued with conditions upon bringing the
outdoor furnace into compliance with this Article within sixty (60) days
of the date of the City mailing notice with the exception of Subsection
(C)(1 — 3). The issuance of the permit shall act as an exception to this
Article and is subject to annual renewal.
C. Outdoor furnaces placed in use after the effective date of this Article
must meet these requirements in order to qualify for the issuance of a
permit and no outdoor furnace shall be allowed to operate without
issuance of a permit. Upon application for a permit, the Building Official
or his designee shall inspect the outdoor furnace and shall issue a
permit for the outdoor furnace, so long as the outdoor furnace is in
compliance with the following standards and requirements:
Section
425.130
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
425.150
AO:647
1. No outdoor furnace shall be located on a parcel less than three (3)
acres and outdoor furnaces are prohibited from being located in
any area that is part of a platted subdivision consisting of lots of
less than three (3) acres in size.
2. Every outdoor furnace shall be located at least three hundred (300)
feet from any dwelling owned by another in existence on the
effective date of this Article.
3. Every outdoor furnace shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from
any property line.
4. Every outdoor furnace shall have a chimney (also referred to as a
"stack") that extends at least fifteen (15) feet above the grade plane
and at least two (2) feet higher than the height of the highest roof
peak of any dwelling (owned by one other than the owner of the
outdoor furnace and in existence on the effective date of this
Article) located within five hundred (500) feet. For purposes of this
Article, "grade plane" means the average level of the finished grade
at the structure within which the outdoor furnace is located, with
four (4) or more corner points utilized for determining the average.
For those outdoor furnaces operating in the City on the effective
date of the original ordinance, the owner of the furnace may apply
for a modification of the height requirement of this subparagraph.
If it can be shown to the Building Official that a lesser height does
not create an inappropriate amount of smoke on properties within
five hundred (500) feet of the outdoor furnace, the Building Official
may authorize in writing a deviation from this requirement to
remain in place so long as no nuisance is created by the height
deviation.
5. The outdoor furnace shall comply with the provisions of the Fire
Code, the Mechanical Code, the Zoning Ordinance and all other
applicable Statutes, regulations and ordinances including
qualifying for the Environmental Protection Agency Voluntary
Compliance Program or by virtue of compliance with specific
standards adopted by the Environmental Protection Agency for
wood furnaces. For those outdoor furnaces operating in the City on
the effective date of the original ordinance, the owner of the
furnace may provide the City a sworn affidavit stating that the
furnace was installed in compliance with the manufacturer's
instructions or may submit a letter from the manufacturer or the
manufacturer's authorized representative stating that the outdoor
furnace has been installed in compliance with the manufacturer's
instructions in lieu of providing the proof of compliance with the
Environmental Protection Agency requirements referred to above.
Acceptance of the affidavit or manufacturer's letter does not relieve
the outdoor furnace owner of the responsibility of operating the
outdoor furnace so as not to create a nuisance.
Section
425.150
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
425.150
AO:648
6. Failure by the owner of the outdoor furnace or the person who
owns or is in control of the property upon which it is located to
apply for the permit required by this Article; or to bring the outdoor
furnace into compliance with the requirements of the Article within
the time frame required; or the failure or refusal to comply with the
conditions of any exception granted under this Article shall
constitute a violation of this Article.
7. No outdoor furnace in existence on the effective date of this Article
that would otherwise be prohibited but for the granting of an
exception as provided for herein shall be replaced with a new
outdoor furnace unit nor shall it be repaired if such repair involves
more than fifty percent (50%) of the parts being repaired or
replaced.
8. a. All outdoor furnaces in the City in existence on the effective
date of this Article that would otherwise be prohibited but for
the granting of an exception as provided for herein may
continue to operate until such time as the conditions set out in
Subparagraphs (7) or (9) of this Subsection occur or until such
time as the furnace cannot pass safe operating standards
during inspection or until such time as the operation of the
furnace is determined to be a nuisance.
b. If an outdoor furnace in the City that is not in violation of this
Article becomes in violation of Subparagraphs (1 — 3) above
due to development within the City, the provisions of
Subparagraphs (7) and (9) shall apply to termination of use of
the outdoor furnace and including termination of use if the
furnace cannot pass safe operating standards during
inspection or until such time as the operation of the furnace is
determined to be a nuisance.
9. Prior to the completion or consummation of a sale or transfer of any
real property on or after the effective date of this Article, all
existing and/or installed outdoor furnaces that would otherwise be
prohibited but for the granting of an exception as provided for
herein shall be removed or rendered permanently inoperable.
10. The permit is annually renewable and is subject to inspection and
verification of compliance with this Article before the renewal of
the permit is granted.
D. Every owner or person in control of an outdoor furnace shall comply
with the following requirements and standards immediately:
1. Outdoor furnaces must meet all specifications provided by the
manufacturer. In addition, outdoor furnaces must conform to any
State construction code provisions that apply and to the City Fire
Code ordinance.
Section
425.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
425.150
AO:649
2. No more than one (1) outdoor furnace shall be permitted on any
parcel. Failure to comply with any of these requirements shall
constitute a violation of this Article.
3. No person that operates an outdoor furnace shall use a fuel other
than the following:
a. Clean wood i.e., firewood with no foreign substances and
properly cured;
b. Wood pellets made from clean wood;
c. Home heating oil in compliance with the applicable sulfur
content limit or natural gas may be used as starter fuels for
dual-fired outdoor hydronic heaters; and
d. Other fuels as approved by the City.
4. Upon application for a permit, the applicant shall provide a letter
from applicant's homeowner's insurance carrier stating that the
use of the outdoor wood furnace is covered by the homeowner's
policy.
E. Prohibited Fuels. No person shall burn any of the following items in an
outdoor hydronic heater:
1. Any wood that does not meet the definition of clean wood;
2. Garbage;
3. Tires;
4. Lawn clippings or yard waste;
5. Materials containing plastic;
6. Materials containing rubber;
7. Waste petroleum products;
8. Paints and paint thinners;
9. Chemicals;
10. Coal;
11. Glossy or colored papers;
12. Construction and demolition debris;
13. Plywood;
14. Particleboard;
15. Salt water driftwood;
Section
425.150
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
425.150
AO:650
Section 425.160. Violations — Denial, Non-Renewal, Suspension or
Revocation. [Ord. No. 09-28 §2, 9-14-2009; Ord. No. 10-48 §1,
11-8-2010]
16. Manure;
17. Animal carcasses; and
18. Asphalt products.
F. All outdoor furnaces shall be subject to periodic inspection by the
Building and/or other Code Inspector and by the Fire Chief or his
designee to assure that all provisions of this Article have been and
continue to be, satisfied.
G. The fee for an outdoor furnace permit shall be determined by resolution
of the City Council to cover anticipated reasonable costs of inspections
and administration of this Article.
H. No person, regardless of having been issued a City permit for operation
of an outdoor furnace, shall operate an outdoor furnace in such a
manner as to create a public nuisance. The following factors are a nonexclusive
list of factors that may be considered in determining if a
nuisance exists:
1. Emissions from the outdoor furnace exhibit black or dark grey
smoke for any continuous fifteen (15) minute period.
2. Malodorous or noxious odors are produced from the outdoor
furnace which are detectable outside the property of the person on
whose land the outdoor furnace is located.
3. The emissions from the outdoor furnace cause damage to
vegetation, livestock, domestic animals or property.
4. Operation in violation of any of the manufacturer's requirements,
the requirements of this Article or any other provision of the City
Code or State or Federal laws or regulations.
A. Delinquent Payments. The permit fee provided for in this Article shall
be deemed delinquent if not paid on or before the due date.
B. Permit Renewal Due Date. The permit required for outdoor furnace use
shall be renewable on or before the fifteenth (15th) of January of each
year and failure to renew within thirty (30) days of that date shall result
in a doubling of the fee for each thirty (30) day period for which no
renewal of the permit is obtained.
C. Grounds For Denial Or Non-Renewal. The Building Official (Official) or
his designee shall not issue an outdoor furnace permit when the Official
has reason to believe that the issuance of the permit will result in the
operation of the outdoor furnace in violation of this Code or that the
operation of the outdoor furnace will cause or result in a nuisance.
Section
425.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
425.160
AO:651
Upon the Official making a determination that there may be a violation
of the Code, the Official shall notify the applicant in writing that the
Official will not issue the permit or that the Official will not renew the
permit, stating the reasons for the Official's decision.
D. Procedure For Denial Or Non-Renewal. If the Official determines that
the application for a permit is not to be granted or if the Official
determines not to renew the permit, then a written notice to the person
requesting the permit or renewal thereof shall give the applicant notice
that the applicant may request a public hearing by filing a written
request with the Official within ten (10) days of the date of the Official's
written decision. The public hearing shall be held within twenty (20)
days of the receipt of the written request by the Official. The hearing
shall be conducted as provided in Subsection (G) below.
E. Revocation Or Suspension Of Permit Authorized. The permit may be
revoked by a hearing officer after public hearing and notice for any one
(1) or more of the following reasons:
1. Failure to comply with the manufacturer's requirements or
standards for operation of the outdoor furnace or provisions of this
Article or any other ordinance, building codes, fire codes, health
codes or zoning codes or ordinances of the City.
2. Creation of a public nuisance.
3. Providing false information to obtain a permit.
4. Failure to pay any obligation due and owing to the City.
F. Notice Of Suspension Or Revocation Hearing. Upon determining that a
possible violation of the requirements of this Article has occurred, the
Official shall issue a notice that a hearing relative to the possible
suspension or revocation of the permit is to be held. The permittee shall
have at least five (5) days' written notice of the time and place of such
hearing. The written notice shall be given by personal service, posting
or by certified or registered U.S. mail to the permittee's address on file
with the City and shall specify the grounds upon which the permit is
sought to be suspended or revoked.
G. At the public hearing, a hearing officer appointed by the City
Administrator shall hear evidence, determine the facts based upon the
evidence presented at the hearing and render a decision. The decision
of the hearing officer shall be in writing and shall be issued within ten
(10) days of the hearing unless otherwise ordered by the hearing
officer. The hearing may be continued by the hearing officer for good
cause shown by any party to the proceeding.
H. Hearing On Denial, Suspension Or Revocation — Appeals. The hearing
shall be governed by the procedures of this Chapter and Chapter 430 of
this Code.
Section
425.160
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
425.160
AO:652
Section 425.170. Severability. [Ord. No. 09-28 §2, 9-14-2009]
The provisions of this Article are hereby declared to be severable and
if any clause, sentence, word, Section or provision is declared void or
unenforceable for any reason by any court of competent jurisdiction, it
shall not affect any portion of the ordinance other than said part or portion
thereof.
Section 425.180. Sanctions. [Ord. No. 09-28 §2, 9-14-2009]
I. Conduct Of Hearings. The hearing officer shall have all the powers set
forth in this Article and Chapter 430 of this Code and shall conduct the
hearing in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Article and
Chapter 430. If a procedure in this Article conflicts with a procedure set
forth in Chapter 430, the procedure in the Article shall govern. The
hearing officer shall determine whether or not there is a basis for not
issuing the permit, not renewing the permit, suspending the permit or
revoking the permit. The decision of the hearing officer and the right to
appeal his decision shall be in accordance with this Article and Chapter
430 of this Code. All notices for purposes of this Section shall be
deemed to occur two (2) days after the date the notice is placed in the
United States mail, postage prepaid.
J. Suspension Disposition. If the hearing officer determines that the
violation can be corrected, the hearing officer may issue a suspension
order not to exceed sixty (60) days during which time the permittee
shall correct the violation. Upon expiration of the period of suspension,
the permittee shall submit a written request to the Official for
reinstatement of the permit. If the Official determines that the
permittee is in compliance with the requirements of this Article, the
Official shall issue a written notice of reinstatement. If the Official
determines that the permittee is not in compliance with this Article, the
proceedings for revocation of a permit shall be instituted.
K. Revocation Disposition. If the hearing officer determines that there is a
violation of this Article that is incapable of being corrected or that the
permittee is not actively and continuously working to correct the
violation, the hearing officer shall revoke the permit. Upon revocation
of a permit, a permittee shall not be eligible to apply for a permit in the
City for one (1) year from the date of revocation. After one (1) year, the
permittee may apply for a permit subject to meeting all requirements
set forth in this Article as being eligible to install and use an outdoor
furnace.
A. Any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or entity that
violates any of the provisions of this Article shall be subject to penalty
as set forth in Code Section 100.220.
B. Each day that a violation of this Article or Code continues to exist shall
constitute a separate violation of this Article.
Section
425.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
425.180
AO:653
C. In addition to the procedures set forth in Subsections (A — B), the City
shall have the right to proceed in an administrative action for nuisance
abatement or in any court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of
obtaining an injunction, restraining order or other appropriate remedy
to compel compliance with this Article and said Code.
Section
425.180
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
425.180
AO:654
Chapter 430
ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING PROCEDURES, GENERALLY
Section 430.010. General Application. [Ord. No. 07-62 §2,
10-8-2007; Ord. No. 10-48 §1, 11-8-2010]
Section 430.020. Notice Requirements. [Ord. No. 07-62 §2,
10-8-2007; Ord. No. 10-48 §1, 11-8-2010]
A. Unless a specific procedure is otherwise provided for in an applicable
Chapter or Code Section, the following procedures may be followed
with regard to administrative enforcement where a hearing is required
by State law or ordinance. The hearing may be conducted as a
contested or as a non-contested matter and the notice of hearing shall
state the nature of the proceeding.
B. A contested case is generally governed by the applicable requirements
of Chapter 536 of the State Statutes for procedural matters and by
Sections 536.100 through 536.140, RSMo., for the appeals procedure.
A non-contested case lacks the formal procedural requirements of a
contested case and is subject to the appeal process outlined in Section
536.150, RSMo.
A. Whenever a violation of this Code exists, the person causing,
maintaining or permitting the violation shall be notified to correct or
abate the violation. If the violation is on private property, proof that a
person occupies the property or that a person has possession or the
right to possession of the property shall constitute prima facie evidence
for the purposes of this Chapter that such person has caused,
maintained or permitted the violation and such person shall be
responsible for its abatement. If the property is vacant, evidence as to
the record title owner from the County Recorder's office shall be prima
facie evidence for the purpose of this Chapter that the owner has
caused, maintained or permitted the violation and such person shall be
responsible for its abatement.
B. Delivery of a notice may be made by the following methods:
1. Delivery of the notice to the owner or the person occupying or
having possession of the property;
2. Depositing in the United States mail, postage prepaid, the notice
addressed to the owner or person occupying or having possession
of the property;
3. If service cannot be had by either of these modes of service, then
service may be had by publication in a newspaper qualified to
publish legal notices for two (2) successive weeks; or
Section
425.180
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
430.020
AO:655
Section 430.030. Abatement By City Upon Failure To Comply With
Notice. [Ord. No. 07-62 §2, 10-8-2007; Ord. No. 10-48 §1, 11-8-2010;
Ord. No. 13-09 §2, 2-25-2013]
4. If such property is not occupied and the owner is unknown or
cannot be located, posting the notice in a conspicuous location on
the property where the violation exists.
C. The notice shall be in writing and contain the following information:
1. Identifying caption and number assigned to the proceeding by the
City with a statement as to whether the matter will proceed as a
contested or non-contested matter.
2. A brief statement of the matter involved, describing why the notice
is being issued.
3. A reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires to be
not less than ten (10) days and a description of the remedial actions
required.
4. Whether an answer to the notice is required.
5. A statement that the notice is the writing officially instituting the
proceeding.
D. The notice may also contain a notice of a hearing date to be held upon
failure to comply with the order. No hearing shall be held sooner than
ten (10) days after issuance of notice of hearing except in emergency
situations. If a hearing is scheduled subsequent to this notice being
delivered, a notice of hearing shall be delivered containing the caption
and number as well as the time, date and place of the hearing if not set
forth in the original notice.
A. Administrative procedures set forth in this Section may be used to
abate nuisances as defined by the laws of this State and may be used for
any other violations set forth in this Code and being subject to an
administrative hearing. Procedures for such abatement or violation
shall be as follows:
1. The notice of hearing shall provide for a hearing before a person
(referred to in this Section as the "hearing officer") appointed by
the City Administrator, which hearing officer shall determine if
there is a nuisance or other Code violation subject to abatement
under the laws of this State or this Code.
2. If, upon a hearing for a violation of this Code, the hearing officer
finds that a violation exists and that proper notice has been given
as provided for in this Code and that there has been a failure to
abate or correct the violation, the hearing officer shall make an
order authorizing the City to abate a violation if it is a nuisance or
such other appropriate remedy for a non-nuisance violation. In
Section
430.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
430.030
AO:656
Section 430.040. Assessment of Costs and Lien For Abatement.
[Ord. No. 07-62 §2, 10-8-2007]
addition, the hearing officer may order the property owner or
other responsible party to abate the nuisance by a date certain
after which the City will be authorized to abate the nuisance or
non-nuisance violation pursuant to the order issued under this
Section. The abatement or remedy ordered shall be subject to
appropriated and unencumbered funds being available to perform
the abatement. In addition to the City physically abating the
violation, the City may seek abatement through injunctive relief or
any other available legal remedy.
3. If the matter is a contested matter, the decision of the hearing
officer may be appealed pursuant to appeal procedures set forth in
Section 430.090 by any person who is aggrieved by such decision,
provided such appeal is filed within the thirty (30) day period set
forth in Section 536.110, RSMo. If the matter is a non-contested
matter, the appeal will be pursuant to Section 536.150, RSMo.
A. If a complaint is filed in Municipal Court charging a person with
violating provisions of this Code, the Municipal Court Judge may, if
appointed as the hearing officer, consolidate the administrative
proceedings with actions for violation of provisions of this Code for
hearing purposes. If such actions are consolidated, the Municipal Court
Judge may order the violation to be abated and assess costs against the
violator upon a finding of guilt or a guilty plea.
B. In a case where the owner has failed to remove or abate after notice
conditions or materials which may endanger public safety or any
material or condition which is unhealthy or unsafe and found by the
hearing officer to be a public nuisance, all of the cost of the abatement
of a nuisance, including, but not limited to, costs of notices, inspections
and abatement, shall be reported to the hearing officer if not paid
pursuant to Code Section 425.090(C), who shall certify the amount
thereof to the City Clerk pursuant to Section 425.090(D — E). The City
Clerk may forward the certified amount to the Director of Finance and
the Director of Finance shall have the option of issuing a special tax bill
for the assessment of abatement costs or the Director of Finance may
direct that the cost of such abatement be added to the annual real
estate taxes for the tract of land. If the certified cost is added to the
annual real estate bill for the property and not paid, the real estate
taxes shall be considered delinquent and the collection thereof shall be
governed by the laws applicable to delinquent real estate taxes. Any
special tax bill issued shall be for a term of five (5) years, shall bear
interest until paid at the legal rate and may be foreclosed upon by the
City through appropriate proceedings in Circuit Court. Costs of
collection, including attorney fees, shall be added thereto in the event a
lawsuit is filed to collect the tax bill.
Section
430.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
430.040
AO:657
Section 430.050. Administrative Search Warrants. [Ord. No. 07-62
§2, 10-8-2007]
C. In all cases heard by a hearing officer, the owner of the property at the
time the nuisance was abated and any other person found by the
hearing officer to have caused, maintained or permitted the nuisance
shall be personally liable to the City for the cost of such abatement and
there shall also be from the time of such certification a lien upon the
land where such violation was abated, such lien to run with the land for
the full cost to the City for such abatement and in favor of the City, upon
which the City may take appropriate action in accordance with law.
D. The City of Republic shall record with the County Collector's office a
notice of discharge of the lien in the event it is released or satisfied
through payment or foreclosure.
E. If, upon a trial for the violation of this code, the judge of the Municipal
Court shall find that a violation exists and that the defendant has had
proper notice as provided in the Code and that the defendant has failed
to abate the violation, the judge of the Municipal Court shall, in addition
to any penalty assessed pursuant to Code Section 100.220 for violating
this Code, make an order authorizing the appropriate City
department(s) to abate such violation forthwith and immediately report
the expense thereof to the judge of the Municipal Court who shall, as a
part of the costs of such prosecution, render judgment against the
defendant after opportunity for hearing for the amount of such expense,
which shall be collected as other fines and costs.
A. Search Warrant Defined — Who May Issue, Execute.
1. An administrative search warrant is a written order of the
Municipal Judge commanding the search or inspection of any
property, place or thing and the seizure, photographing, copying or
recording of property or physical conditions found thereon or
therein to determine or prove the existence of violations of any
ordinance or Code Section of the City of Republic relating to the
use, condition or occupancy of property or structures located
within the City of Republic or to enforce the provisions of any such
ordinance or Code Section.
2. The Municipal Judge having original and exclusive jurisdiction to
determine violations against the ordinances of the municipality
may issue an administrative search warrant when:
a. The property or place to be searched or inspected or the thing
to be seized is located with the City of Republic at the time of
the making of the application; and
b. The owner or occupant of the property or place to be searched
or inspected or the thing to be seized has refused to allow same
after official request by the City of Republic.
Section
430.040
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
430.050
AO:658
3. Any such warrant shall be directed to the Chief of Police or any
other Police Officer of the City of Republic and shall be executed by
the Chief of Police or said Police Officer within the City of Republic
limits and not elsewhere.
B. Who May Apply For Warrant — Contents Of Application.
1. Any Police Officer or an attorney of the City of Republic may make
application to the Municipal Judge for the issuance of an
administrative search warrant.
2. The application shall:
a. Be in writing;
b. State the time and date of the making of the application;
c. Identify the property or places to be entered, searched,
inspected or seized in sufficient detail and particularity that
the officer executing the warrant can readily ascertain it;
d. State that the owner or occupant of the, property or places to
be entered, searched, inspected or seized has been requested
by the City of Republic to allow such action and has refused to
allow such action;
e. State facts sufficient to show probable cause for the issuance
of a search warrant, as provided in Subsection (C)(1) hereof,
to:
(1) Search or inspect for violations of an ordinance or Code
Section specified in the application; or
(2) Show that entry or seizure is authorized and necessary to
enforce an ordinance or Code Section specified in the
application and that any required due process has been
afforded prior to the entry or seizure;
f. Be verified by the oath or affirmation of the applicant; and
g. Be signed by the applicant and filed in the Municipal Court.
3. The application may be supplemented by a written affidavit verified
by oath or affirmation. Such affidavit shall be considered in
determining whether there is probable cause for the issuance of a
search warrant and in filling out any deficiencies in the description
of the property or place to be searched or inspected. Oral testimony
shall not be considered.
C. Hearing and Procedure — Contents Of Warrant — Execution And
Return.
1. Hearing and procedure.
Section
430.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
430.050
AO:659
a. The Municipal Judge shall hold a non-adversary hearing to
determine whether probably cause exists to inspect or search
for violations of any City of Republic ordinance or Code Section
or to enforce any such ordinance or Code Section.
b. In doing so the Municipal Judge shall determine whether the
action to be taken by the City of Republic is reasonable in light
of the facts stated. The Municipal Judge shall consider the
goals of the ordinance or Code Section sought to be enforced
and such other factors as may be appropriate, including, but
not limited to, the physical condition of the specified property,
the age and nature of the property, the condition of the area in
which the property is located, the known violation of any
relevant City of Republic ordinance or Code Section and the
passage of time since the property's last inspection. The
standard for issuing a warrant need not be limited to actual
knowledge of an existing violation of a City of Republic
ordinance or Code Section.
c. If it appears from the application and any supporting affidavit
that there is probable cause to inspect or search for violations
of any City of Republic ordinance or Code Section or to enforce
any such ordinance or Code Section, a search warrant shall
immediately be issued.
d. The warrant shall issue in the form of an original and two (2)
copies and the application, any supporting affidavit and one (1)
copy of the warrant as issued shall be retained in the records of
the Municipal Court.
2. Contents of search warrant. The search warrant shall:
a. Be in writing and in the name of the City of Republic;
b. Be directed to any Police Officer in the City of Republic;
c. State the time and date the warrant was issued;
d. Identify the property or places to be searched, inspected or
entered upon in sufficient detail and particularity that the
officer executing the warrant can readily ascertain it;
e. Command that the described property or places be searched or
entered upon and that any evidence of any City of Republic
ordinance violations found therein or thereon or any property
seized pursuant thereto or a description of such property
seized be returned, within ten (10) days after filing of the
application, to the Municipal Judge who issued the warrant, to
be dealt with according to law;
f. Be signed by the Judge, with his title of office indicated.
3. Execution and return.
Section
430.050
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
430.050
AO:660
a. A search warrant issued under this Section shall be executed
only by a City of Republic Police Officer, provided however, that
one (1) or more designated City of Republic officials may
accompany the officer and the warrant shall be executed in the
following manner:
(1) The warrant shall be executed by conducting the search,
inspection, entry or seizure as commanded and shall be
executed as soon as practicable and in a reasonable
manner.
(2) The officer shall give the owner or occupant of the
property searched, inspected or entered upon a copy of
the warrant.
(3) Receipt required — dispositioin of property seized.
(a) If any property is seized incident to the search, the
officer shall give the person from whose possession it
was taken, if the person is present, an itemized receipt
for the property taken. If no such person is present,
the officer shall leave the receipt at the site of the
search in a conspicuous place.
(b) A copy of the itemized receipt of any property taken
shall be delivered to an attorney for the City of
Republic within two (2) working days of the search.
(c) The disposition of property seized pursuant to a
search warrant under this Section shall be in
accordance with an applicable City of Republic
ordinance or Code Section, but in the absence of
same, then with Section 542.301, RSMo.
(4) The officer may summon as many persons as he deems
necessary to assist him in executing the warrant and such
persons shall not be held liable as a result of any illegality
of the search and seized.
(5) An officer making a search pursuant to an invalid warrant,
the invalidity of which is not apparent on its face, may use
such force as he would be justified in using if the warrant
were valid.
(6) A search warrant shall expire if it is not executed and the
required return made within ten (10) days after the date of
the making of the application.
b. (1) After execution of the search warrant, the warrant, with a
return thereon signed by the officer making the search,
shall be delivered to the Municipal Court.
Section
430.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
430.050
AO:661
Section 430.060. Prosecution of Violations — Injunctive Relief.
[Ord. No. 07-62 §2, 10-8-2007]
(2) The return shall show the date and manner of execution
and the name of the possessor and of the owner, when not
the same person, if known, of the property or places
searched or seized.
(3) The return shall be accompanied by any photographs,
copies or recordings made and by any property seized,
along with a copy of the itemized receipt of such property
required by this Section; provided however, that seized
property may be disposed of as provided herein and in
such a case a description of the property seized shall
accompany the return.
(4) The Court Clerk, upon request, shall deliver a copy of the
return to the possessor and the owner, when not the same
person, of the property searched or seized.
D. Warrant Invalid, When. A search warrant shall be deemed invalid:
1. If it was not issued by the Municipal Judge;
2. If it was issued without a written application having been filed and
verified;
3. If it was issued without sufficient probable cause in light of the
goals of the ordinance to be enforced and such other factors as
provided in Subsection (C)(1)(b) hereof;
4. If it was not issued with respect to property or places in the City of
Republic;
5. If it does not describe the property or places to be searched,
inspected, entered upon or seized with sufficient certainty;
6. If it is not signed by the Judge who issued it; or
7. If it was not executed and the required return made within ten (10)
days after the date of the making of the application.
A. If a person violates this Chapter or if a notice of violation is not
complied with within the time specified in any required notice, the City
may cause a Municipal Court summons to be issued and the City
Attorney may be instructed to institute the appropriate legal
proceedings to obtain an injunction to restrain, correct or abate such
violation.
B. If it shall be the opinion of the City Administrator or the Director of
Public Works that any building, structure or other condition is such that
the danger to the traveling public or to the public ways is imminent,
thereupon the City Administrator or City Attorney is hereby authorized
Section
430.050
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
430.060
AO:662
Section 430.070. Notice To Abate Violation. [Ord. No. 07-62 §2,
10-8-2007]
A person notified as provided in this Code shall not fail, neglect or refuse to
comply with the notice within the time specified in such notice. For every
day from the time specified in the notice that such person shall fail, neglect
or refuse to comply with the notice and for every day thereafter that such
person shall fail, neglect or refuse to abate the violation, the person shall
be deemed guilty of a separate offense. If the property has been posted
with a notice to abate the violation, failure to give notice as set forth in this
Chapter shall not in any way invalidate a lien against the land for charges
to abate the violation.
Section 430.080. Emergency Abatement Procedures. [Ord. No.
07-62 §2, 10-8-2007; Ord. No. 13-09 §2, 2-25-2013]
to execute on behalf of the City such bonds or other instruments
that may be necessary to secure immediate injunctive relief from the
maintenance of such imminently dangerous building, structure or
condition.
A. Whenever conditions exist that create an immediate threat to the public
health, welfare and safety by virtue of a violation of this Code, the
Building Commission as established in Section 505.070 of this Code or
such other official authorized by the City Code to deal with emergency
or nuisance situations may, without notice or hearing, issue an order
reciting the existence of an emergency and require that such action be
taken as necessary to summarily abate the threat. Such order shall be
effective immediately and shall direct the appropriate City
department(s) to abate the violation if not forthwith abated by the
property owner or person in control of the property. A copy of such
order shall be delivered to the owner or person in control of the
property where the violation exists. Any person to whom such an order
is directed shall forthwith abate the violation. The inability to deliver
the order to the property owner or person in control of the property
shall not stay the order or prevent execution of the order.
B. Upon an order being issued pursuant to Subsection (A), a notice and
copy of the order shall be sent to all parties involved who have an
interest in the property setting forth the nature of the emergency and
the action to be taken under the order. The notice shall be mailed or
personally delivered within five (5) business days of the order and the
notice shall advise the parties of the right to file a petition with the City
Clerk requesting a hearing. The request for hearing must be made
within fifteen (15) days of the date of the order. The hearing shall be
conducted before a hearing officer appointed pursuant to this Chapter
and shall be held within ten (10) days of the request for hearing. The
burden shall be on the petitioner to present evidence that an immediate
threat to the public health, welfare and safety did not exist. The hearing
officer may continue the order in effect, modify the order or revoke the
Section
430.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
430.080
AO:663
Section 430.090. Appeals. [Ord. No. 07-62 §2, 10-8-2007; Ord. No.
10-48 §1, 11-8-2010]
The decision of the administrative hearing officer shall be made in writing.
In a contested matter, the decision shall be in conformity with Section
536.090, RSMo., and any party aggrieved by the decision of the
administrative hearing officer may appeal to a court of competent
jurisdiction as is set forth in Sections 536.100 and 536.110, RSMo. In a noncontested
matter, any party aggrieved by the decision of the administrative
hearing officer may appeal the decision pursuant to Section 536.150, RSMo.
An appeal of an administrative decision shall not stay the effect of the
hearing officer's decision.
Chapter 435
ANNEXATION
Section 435.010. Annexation Territory. [Ord. No. 07-39 §1,
5-29-2007]
order. The hearing may be continued upon a showing of good cause by
any party.
C. Whenever conditions exist that create a potential danger by virtue of a
violation of this Code which if left unabated could quickly develop into
an immediate threat to the public health and safety as described in this
Section, the Building Commission or such other official authorized by
the City Code to deal with emergency or nuisance situations may
initiate an expedited hearing process. Written notice of the dangerous
condition and of the date and time of the hearing shall be issued
pursuant to Section 430.020 (A) and (C). The hearing may be held not
less than five (5) days after posting and/or mailing of the notice of
hearing. For purposes of this paragraph, a reasonable time in which to
comply with the notice to correct the violation shall be five (5) days
after issuance of the notice.
D. Cost of abatement shall be assessed per Section 425.090.
E. In addition, injunctive relief may be sought as provided for in this
Chapter.
A. Property owners wishing to annex their property into the City of
Republic shall fill out an application and submit it to the Community
Development Department. The current processing fee is two hundred
twenty-five dollars ($225.00) subject to change by ordinance. [Ord. No.
16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
B. All properties annexed into the City shall immediately be classified in
the zoning district that most closely corresponds to the County zoning
district in which it was previously located or a zoning district which
Section
430.080
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
435.010
AO:664
Title V Notes
NOTES AND APPENDIXES
Cross Reference — As to fire prevention and protection, see ch. 205.
Appendix V-A, Fee/Fine/Forfeiture, is included as an attachment to this Title.
Chapter 500
BUILDING CODES AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
most closely defines the existing uses thereon. The existing zoning
classification shall be made known at the time of annexation.
Section
435.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
435.010
AO:665

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Building Codes90
Section 500.001. Adoption of The 2012 Edition of The International
Building Code. [Ord. No. 12-24 §2, 5-29-2012; Ord. No. 17-19 § 3,
5-16-2017]
A certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk of City of Republic, Missouri, being marked and designated as the
International Building Code, 2012 Edition, including Appendix Chapters C,
F, G, H, I, and K, as published by the International Code Council, be and is
hereby adopted as the Building Code of the City of Republic in the State of
Missouri for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all
property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied
utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to
ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and
the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy
and use and the demolition of such structures as herein provided; providing
for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and
all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Building Code on file in the office of the City Clerk are hereby referred
to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this legislation,
with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in
Subsection (A) of this Section.
Section 500.005. Adoption of The 2012 Edition of The International
Residential Code. [Ord. No. 12-24 §3, 5-29-2012]
A certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk of City of Republic, Missouri, being marked and designated as the
International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, including Appendix Chapters
A, B, C, D, E, G, H, J, K, N, O, and Q as published by the International
Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Residential Code of the
City of Republic, in the State of Missouri, for regulating and governing
the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair,
A. The following Sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Insert: City of Republic, Missouri.
Section 1612.3 Insert: City of Republic, Missouri.
Section 1612.3 Insert: 2010.
Chapter 34: Delete in its entirety.
90.Editor's Note — Ord. no. 12-24 §1, adopted May 29, 2012, repealed section 500.010
"international building code, international residential code, international mechanical
code, international plumbing code, international fuel gas code and national electric code"
and section 500.020 "code amendments" and enacted new provisions set out herein.
Former sections 500.010 — 500.020 derived from CC 1999 §§6-1 — 6-2, 6-11, 17-1 — 17-3,
26-14; ord. no. 00-19 §§1, 3, 6-12-2000; ord. no. 03-21 §1, 3-24-2003; ord. no. 03-56 §1,
8-25-2003; ord. no. 05-21 §§1, 3, 6-16-2005; ord. no. 06-74 §§1, 3, 10-9-2006; ord. no.
08-91 §2, 1-12-2009.
Section
500.001
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.005
AO:667
equipment, location, removal and demolition of detached one- and twofamily
dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (town houses) not
more than three (3) stories in height with separate means of egress as
herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of
fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Residential Code on file in the office of the City
Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set
out in this Section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if
any, prescribed in Subsections (A) and (B) of this Section.
A. The following Sections are hereby revised:
Section R101.1 Insert: City of Republic, Missouri.
Section R105.2 Building #2 Delete in its entirety.
Section R105.2 Building #10 Change 200 square feet to 120 square
feet.
Table R301.2(1) Insert: Ground Snow Load = 20, Wind Design Speed
= 90, Topographic Effects = No, Seismic Design Category = B,
Weathering = Severe, Frost Line Depth = 24 inches, Termite =
Moderate to Heavy, Winter Design Temperature = 9°F, Flood Hazards:
Date of Entry into NFIP = 1987, Date of Flood Insurance Study =
December 17, 2010; Panel Numbers = 29077C0295E, 29077C0305E,
29077C0308E, 29077C0313E, 29077C0314E, 29077C0315E,
29077C0316E, 29077C0317E, 29077C0318E, 29077C0407E,
29077C0426E, 29077C0427E, 29077C0435E; Air Freezing Index =
714, and Mean Annual Temperature = 56.1°F.
Section R501.3 Delete Section in its entirety.
Chapter 11 Delete in its entirety and substitute Chapter 11 of the 2006
International Residential Code.
Section P2603.6.1 Insert: 24 inches (in two locations).
Section E4002.14 Delete in its entirety.
B. Based on Missouri State Senate Bill No. 108, a builder of single-family
one- or two-family dwellings or residences or multi-unit dwellings of
four (4) or fewer unit town houses shall offer to any purchaser on or
before the time of entering into the purchase contract the option, at the
purchaser's cost, to install or equip fire sprinklers in the dwelling,
residence, or unit town house. Notwithstanding any other provision of
law to the contrary, no purchaser of such a single-family one- or twofamily
dwelling, residence, or multi-unit dwelling town house shall be
denied the right to choose or decline to install a fire sprinkler system in
such dwelling or residence town house being purchased by any code,
ordinance, rule, regulation, order, or resolution by any County or other
political subdivision. The following Sections are modified unless the
purchaser of the dwelling opts to install a fire sprinkler system:
Section
500.005
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
500.005
AO:668
Section 500.007. Adoption of The 2012 Edition of The International
Mechanical Code. [Ord. No. 12-24 §4, 5-29-2012]
A certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of Republic, Missouri, being marked and designated as the
International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, including Appendix Chapter
A, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted
as the Mechanical Code of the City of Republic in the State of Missouri
regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials,
erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement,
addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems as herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms
of said Mechanical Code on file in the office of the City Clerk are hereby
referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
legislation, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in Section (A) of this Section.
Section 500.010. Adoption of The 2012 Edition of The International
Plumbing Code. [Ord. No. 12-24 §5, 5-29-2012]
A certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk of City of Republic, Missouri, being marked and designated as the
International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, including Appendix Chapters
B, C, D, and F, as published by the International Code Council, be and
is hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of the City of Republic in the
State of Missouri regulating and governing the design, construction, quality
of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems as herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
Section R309.5 Delete in its entirety.
Section R313 Delete in its entirety and substitute Section R317 of the
2006 Edition of the International Residential Code in its entirety.
A. The following Sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Insert: City of Republic, Missouri.
Section 106.5.2 Insert: Refer to Section 500.050 of the Republic
Municipal Code of Ordinances.
Section 106.5.3 Insert: Refer to Section 500.050 of the Republic
Municipal Code of Ordinances.
Section 108.4 Insert: Refer to Section 500.050 of the Republic
Municipal Code of Ordinances.
Section 108.5 Insert: Refer to Section 500.050 of the Republic
Municipal Code of Ordinances.
Section
500.005
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.010
AO:669
conditions and terms of said Plumbing Code on file in the office of the City
Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set
out in this legislation, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes,
if any, prescribed in Subsection (A) of this Section.
Section 500.013. Adoption of The 2012 Edition of The International
Fuel Gas Code. [Ord. No. 12-24 §6, 5-29-2012]
A certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of Republic, Missouri, being marked and designated as
the International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition, including Appendix Chapters
A, B, C, and D, as published by the International Code Council, be and is
hereby adopted as the Fuel Gas Code of the City of Republic, in the State
of Missouri for regulating and governing fuel gas systems and gas-fired
appliances as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Fuel Gas Code on file in the office of
the City Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if
fully set out in this legislation, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in Subsection (A) below.
A. The following Sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Insert: City of Republic, Missouri.
Section 106.6.2 Insert: Refer to Section 500.050 of the Republic
Municipal Code of Ordinances.
Section 106.6.3 Insert: Refer to Section 500.050 of the Republic
Municipal Code of Ordinances.
Section 108.4 Insert: Refer to Section 500.050 of the Republic
Municipal Code of Ordinances.
Section 108.5 Insert: Refer to Section 500.050 of the Republic
Municipal Code of Ordinances.
Section 305.6.1 Insert: 24 inches.
Section 904.1 Insert: 12 inches.
A. The following Sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Insert: City of Republic, Missouri.
Section 106.6.2 Insert: Refer to Section 500.050 of the Republic
Municipal Code of Ordinances.
Section 106.6.3 Insert: Refer to Section 500.050 of the Republic
Municipal Code of Ordinances.
Section 108.4 Insert: Refer to Section 500.050 of the Republic
Municipal Code of Ordinances.
Section
500.010
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
500.013
AO:670
Section 500.015. Adoption of The 2009 Edition of The ICC
A117.1-2009 Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities. [Ord.
No. 12-24 §7, 5-29-2012]
A certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk of City of Republic, Missouri, being marked and designated as the ICC
A117.1-2009 Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities, 2009 Edition,
as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted
as the Building Code of the City of Republic in the State of Missouri for
regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property,
buildings and structures; by providing the standards for facilities and other
physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe,
sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Building Code on file in
the office of the City Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part
hereof, as if fully set out in this legislation.
Section 500.020. Adoption of The 2011 Edition of The National
Electrical Code. [Ord. No. 12-24 §8, 5-29-2012]
A certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of Republic, Missouri, being marked and designated as the
National Electrical Code, 2011 Edition, as published by the National Fire
Protection Association, be and is hereby adopted as the Electrical Code of
the City of Republic in the State of Missouri for regulating and governing
electrical systems and installations as herein provided; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said National
Electrical Code on file in the office of the City Clerk are hereby referred
to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this legislation,
with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in
Subsection (A) of this Section.
Section 108.5 Insert: Refer to Section 500.050 of the Republic
Municipal Code of Ordinances.
A. The following Sections are hereby revised:
Section 80.1 Delete Section in its entirety.
Section 80.23(B) Insert: fifty, $50.00, one thousand, $1,000.00, for a
term not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days.
Section 80.25(C) Insert: 15.
Section 80.27 Delete Section in its entirety.
Section 80.29 Insert: City of Republic, Missouri.
Section 80.35 Insert: one hundred twenty (120).
Section
500.013
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.021
AO:671
Section 500.021. Adoption Of The 2012 Edition Of The
International Existing Building Code. [Ord. No. 17-19 §§ 1 — 2,
5-16-2017]
A certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the
City Clerk of the City of Republic, Missouri, being marked and designated
as the International Existing Building Code, 2012 Edition, as published by
the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Existing
Building Code of the City of Republic, in the State of Missouri, with
Appendixes A and B for regulating and governing the repair, alteration,
change of occupancy, addition and relocation of existing buildings, including
historic buildings, as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits
and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Existing Building Code
on file in the office of the City of Republic, Missouri, are hereby referred
to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this legislation,
with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in
Subsection (A) of this Section.
Section 500.025. Building Inspector — Enforcement Officer.91 [CC
1999 §6-20(e)]
The Building Inspector shall be the officer charged with the administration
and enforcement of the Building Code and this Chapter of the City's Code
of Ordinances.
Section 500.030. Violation and Penalty. [CC 1999 §6-18]
A. The following Sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Insert: City of Republic, Missouri.
Section 1401.2 Insert: 1968.
A. Any person violating the provisions of this Chapter or of any provision
of any Building Code adopted by the City shall upon conviction be
subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or incarceration for a term not to exceed
one hundred eighty (180) days, or both, at the discretion of the court.
Each day that a violation continues after notice has been served shall be
deemed the basis for a separate offense.
B. Any person who having been served with a notice to correct any
violation described herein, and who within ten (10) days after service of
said notice fails to correct the same, or who shall continue to violate any
provision of the regulations made under authority of this Code after
receiving notice thereof shall be subject to a civil penalty of up to five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each day such violation continues.
91.Cross Reference — As to additional duties of the building inspector, see §505.060.
Section
500.021
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
500.030
AO:672
ARTICLE II
Permits and Permit Fees
Section 500.040. Occupancy Permits Within The City of Republic.
Section 500.045. Plan Submitted. [Ord. No. 17-08 § 1, 3-7-2017]
Plans shall be required for submittal as determined by the adopted building
codes and by policy adopted by resolution of the City Council of the City of
Republic, Missouri.
Section 500.050. Building Permit Fees and Certain Fees Associated
Therewith. [Ord. No. 00-09 §1, 3-27-2000; Ord. No. 03-40 §1,
6-9-2003; Ord. No. 06-17 §1, 3-13-2006; Ord. No. 06-90 §1,
12-26-2006; Ord. No. 07-08 §1, 2-26-2007; Ord. No. 07-59 §1,
9-10-2007; Ord. No. 08-81 §1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 09-11 §1,
4-11-2009; Ord. No. 10-09 §1, 3-22-2010; Ord. No. 18-06,
1-16-2018]
A. As used herein, "residence", "residential" and "business" shall be
defined under Chapter 3, Section 3.2 of the International Building
Code, 2000.
B. Before any individual may occupy or reside within or about any newly
constructed building or improvement, the builder or owner of such
building must first obtain a Certificate of Occupancy from the City.
C. The fee for the Certificate of Occupancy shall be included in the cost of
the building permit.
D. Before the City may issue a Certificate of Occupancy, the building and
public improvements serving the building and the lot on which it is
constructed or erected shall be inspected by the Building Inspector
and/or the Construction Inspector on behalf of the City of Republic. If
the Building Inspector and/or the Construction Inspector determine(s)
that there has been non-compliance with any applicable ordinance,
regulation or code adopted by the City of Republic, then no Certificate
of Occupancy shall be issued.
E. Any person who occupies or resides within or about any newly
constructed building or improvement used for residential or business
purposes, and for which a Certificate of Occupancy has not been issued;
or anyone who encourages or permits another to occupy or reside in a
building for residential or business purposes for which a Certificate of
Occupancy has not been issued, shall be, upon conviction, punished as
provided in Title V, Chapter 500, Section 500.030 of the Republic Code
of Ordinances.
A. Validity Of Permit Applications.
1. Applications for permits required by the City of Republic's building
codes or land use regulations shall only be accepted as valid upon
Section
500.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.050
AO:673
the receipt of completed and properly authorized application
documents by the Community Development Department. All
application documents shall be signed by the property owner or
an appropriately authorized designee or representative before they
are valid. Valid applications shall be deemed to have been
abandoned one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of filing
if the application has not been otherwise denied or permitted in
accordance with this policy and the regulations of the City.
2. The validity of applications may be extended by the Community
Development Director and/or their designee for a period not-toexceed
an additional one hundred eighty (180) days. Such an
extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause or
evidence of good faith in pursuing the permit shall be
demonstrated by the applicant before an extension may be granted.
The Community Development Director and/or their designee may
exercise discretion in determining whether the extension is
justified as well as to what length of time the validity shall further
extend.
B. Issuance Of Permits. Permits shall not be issued except upon the proper
signature of the Community Development Director and/or their
designee as well as the applicant and/or their authorized
representative. The Community Development Director may withhold
the issuance of a permit for the following reasons:
1. Failure of the applicant or their contractor to pay any outstanding
fees associated with the subject permit or other permits, licenses
or programs of the City.
2. Existing and continuing violations of the City's building codes for
which the applicant or their contractor are responsible.
C. Validity Of Permits.
1. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Community
Development Director and/or their designee upon the permit
document, the validity of a permit issued pursuant to this policy
shall be for one hundred eighty (180) days from the date the permit
is issued by the Community Development Department and signed
by the applicant and/or their authorized representative.
2. If the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or
abandoned for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days after the
time the work is commenced, the permit shall be deemed invalid.
Work shall be deemed to have been suspended or abandoned if
continuous and substantial progress is not made under the terms of
the permit during any one hundred eighty (180) day period.
Substantial progress is determined by one (1) or more of the
required inspections being passed.
Section
500.050
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
500.050
AO:674
3. The validity of building permits, unless otherwise expressly limited
by the building permit, shall automatically extend for periods of
ninety (90) days upon the passing of required inspections from the
date of that same inspection.
4. The Community Development Director and/or their designee are
authorized to grant, in writing, one (1) or more extensions of time
for periods of not more than one hundred eighty (180) days each.
The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause
must be demonstrated to allow for the granting of an extension. In
no event shall there be more than three (3) one hundred eighty
(180) day extensions granted for a project unless substantial facts
can be shown to justify an extension beyond three (3) extensions.
The burden is on the permit holder to present substantial evidence
of a hardship not caused by the actions or inactions of the permit
holder to justify an extension beyond three (3) one hundred eighty
(180) day extensions.
D. Validity Of Occupancy Certificates. Certificates of Occupancy properly
issued by the Community Development Department in accordance with
the provisions of the adopted building codes shall remain effective until
such time that:
1. Permitted work commences and is completed and all necessary
inspections are passed, after which a new Certificate of Occupancy
shall be issued that supersedes any previous occupancy
certificates.
2. A Change in Use or Occupancy occurs that invalidates or is
otherwise incongruent with the existing occupancy certificate,
including changes in business licensees conducting business or
other uses within the building.
E. Permit Fee Schedule.
1. Local Multiplier. The local multiplier variable employed within the
formulas contained herein shall be recommended annually to the
City Council by the Community Development Director. The
multiplier shall be determined according to careful evaluation and
projection of the ensuing fiscal year in order to determine a
multiplier that, based upon projections, will adequately fund the
Building Services program of the Community Development
Department.
2. Square Foot Construction Cost. The square foot construction cost
variable employed within the formulas contained herein shall be
determined according to the Building Valuation Data table
published semi-annually by the International Code Council (ICC).
Where buildings contain varied square foot construction costs, the
permit formula shall account for varied construction costs for
certain areas of the building.
Section
500.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.050
AO:675
3. Area Modifier. The area modifier variable employed within the
formulas contained here shall be intended to modify the permit fee
in recognition of the economies of scale inherent in reviewing and
inspecting larger commercial buildings. The area modifier shall be
applied to the permit fee according to the following table:
Building Floor Area Area Modifier
0 — 10,000 Square Feet 1.0
10,000 — 20,000 Square Feet 0.5
20,000 — 30,000 Square Feet 0.4
30,000 — 40,000 Square Feet 0.3
40,000 — 50,000 Square Feet 0.2
50,000+ Square Feet 0.1
4. New Residential Buildings (Dwellings) And Additions. The fee for a
new residential dwelling building permit shall be calculated as
follows:
a. Fee = Gross Floor Area x Sq. Ft. Construction Cost x Local
Multiplier.
5. Residential Remodels. The fee for residential remodels, alterations,
or renovations requiring multiple inspections shall be calculated as
follows:
a. Fee = Area of Work x Sq. Ft. Construction Cost x Local
Multiplier x 0.75.
b. The fee for residential remodels, alterations, or renovations
that require only a single inspection shall be fifty dollars
($50.00). Examples of this type of work include the installation,
replacement or repair of individual mechanical, electrical, or
plumbing fixtures or other minor work that would typically only
require a minimal inspection to ensure compliance with the
applicable regulations.
6. New Commercial Buildings Or Additions. The fee for new
commercial buildings or additions shall be calculated as follows:
a. Fee = Gross Floor Area x Sq. Ft. Construction Cost x Local
Multiplier x Area Modifier.
7. Commercial Remodels. The fee for commercial remodels,
alterations, renovations or infills requiring multiple inspections
shall be calculated as follows:
a. Fee = Area of Work x Sq. Ft. Construction Cost x Local
Multiplier x Area Modifier x 0.75.
b. The fee for commercial remodels, alterations, or renovations
that require only a single inspection shall be fifty dollars
Section
500.050
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
500.050
AO:676
($50.00). Examples of this type of work include the installation,
replacement or repair of individual mechanical, electrical, or
plumbing fixtures or other minor work that would typically only
require a minimal inspection to ensure compliance with the
applicable regulations.
8. Accessory Storage Or Utility Buildings. The fee for a permit for
accessory buildings intended solely for storage or utility use that
require a building permit pursuant to the applicable Building Code
shall be calculated as follows:
a. Fee = Gross Floor Area x Sq. Ft. Construction Cost x Local
Multiplier.
9. Miscellaneous Permit Fees. Permit fees for the following types of
work are listed in the table below. The fee for permitted work
unable to be appropriately categorized by the schedule contained
herein shall be charged a fee equal to ten dollars ($10.00) for every
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of estimated construction value.
Type of Permit Permit Fee
Swimming Pool $50.00
Accessory Structure $20.00
Fence < 7 ft. height $20.00
Fence > 7 ft. height $50.00
Demolition $50.00
Occupancy Change $50.00
Unenclosed Porch/Deck (single
level)
$20.00
Unenclosed Porch/Deck (multilevel)
$50.00
Temporary Structures $50.00
10. Renewal Of Permits. Provided that the work subject to the permit
remains in compliance with current regulations, an expired permit
may be renewed by paying a fee equal to fifty percent (50%) of the
original permit fee. Permits that have been expired for longer than
eighteen (18) months shall pay the full amount that would be due
under the current fee schedule.
11. Refund Of Permit Fees.
a. An administrative error resulting in a miscalculated or
otherwise erroneously collected fee will be eligible for a refund
of any fees collected erroneously.
b. Building permits for which construction did not commence
may be eligible for a partial refund provided that:
Section
500.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.050
AO:677
(1) The City shall retain a thirty percent (30%) administrative
fee. If the original permit fee was less than fifty dollars
($50.00), then no refund shall be provided.
(2) The building permit must be valid and not expired.
Building permits that have been granted an extension will
not be considered for refund. The request must be
received by the Planning and Development Department
within the original one hundred eighty (180) day permit
validity timeframe. If a refund is not requested within the
original one hundred eighty (180) day validity period,
eligibility shall be deemed to be waived.
(3) Before any refund is issued by the City, the building site
must be inspected and any stored material or alteration to
the site by pre-construction activity must be undone and
all disturbed soil must be reseeded.
12. Penalty Fees.
a. Work Without A Permit. Work requiring permitting that is
performed prior to the issuance of any necessary permits shall
have the permit fee doubled. The Community Development
Director may suspend the penalty fee under the following
conditions:
(1) The offending party can demonstrate that they were acting
in good faith.
(2) The offending party has not previously committed the
same offense within the prior twelve (12) months.
b. Re-Inspection Penalty. A re-inspection penalty fee of fifty
dollars ($50.00) may be collected for the re-inspections caused
by the following circumstances:
(1) Work not ready for inspection, including, but not limited
to, the work not being installed or constructed when the
Building Official arrives on site.
(2) Re-inspecting previously inspected work that has not been
corrected.
(3) Jobsite not accessible to the Building Official after second
attempt, when the contractor has control of access.
(4) Failure to have a set of approved plans and specifications
on site on two (2) or more occasions.
13. Plan Review Fees. Plan review fees shall be collected according to
the following schedule. Plan review fees may not be collected for
single-inspection projects that require minimal plan review.
Section
500.050
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
500.050
AO:678
Section 500.060. Emergency Notification System Impact Fees.92
[Ord. No. 05-04 §§1 — 2, 1-25-2005]
Type of Permit Review Fee
New Single- or Two-Family
Residential Building or Addition
$50.00
Single- or Two-Family
Residential Remodel (multiinspection
project)
$25.00
Multi-Family Residential 10% of Permit Fee or $50.00,
whichever is more
Commercial 10% of Permit Fee or $50.00,
whichever is more
A. An Emergency Notification System Impact Fee shall be charged for all
new construction beginning May 1, 2005, for the construction of
expanded emergency notification facilities according to the following
schedule:
1. Single-family residential: thirty dollars ($30.00) per acre collected
prior to final plat approval. All other development: thirty dollars
($30.00) per acre collected prior to construction permit approval.
2. No Emergency Notification System Impact Fees shall be assessed
on existing structures or to residential property that is to be
remodeled. All monies will be deposited in an Emergency
Notification System Improvement Fund to be used only for
expansion or dire emergency.
92.Cross Reference — As to sewer and water impact fees, §§705.240 et seq.
Section
500.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.060
AO:679

ARTICLE III
Miscellaneous Building Regulations
Section 500.070. Moving Buildings or Houses — Permits Required.
[CC 1999 §§6-4 — 6-6; R.O. 1916 §271]
Section 500.080. Building Demolition. [Ord. No. 03-80 §1,
11-24-2003]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person in this City to occupy or obstruct any
street, square, avenue, alley or public sidewalk by the removal of any
building or house from one place to another without having first
obtained written permission from the Public Works Director.
B. Contents. Written permission, required by Subsection (A) hereof, shall
specify what portion of the square, street, avenue, alley or sidewalk
shall be used and for what period of time it may be so used in the
removal of the building.
A. In the case of building demolition, an application for a demolition
permit will be completely filled out and turned into the Building
Inspector, all fees will have been paid and the following procedure shall
be followed before demolition is commenced:
1. Demolition permit fee. A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid
upon the issuance of a demolition permit.
2. Contract demolition. In addition to the application for a demolition
permit, the owner/applicant must present one (1) of the following
documents:
a. A contract signed by the owner of the property and the
demolition contractor.
b. A letter from the owner or legal agent stating agreement to
demolish.
3. Address the presence of asbestos or other harmful materials. If
asbestos or other harmful materials are present, the owner/
applicant must contact the appropriate agency to determine the
extent and proper means of disposal.
4. Notify the City of Republic, Water Superintendent. All water
laterals must be shut off and properly terminated. A representative
of the Water Department must authorize the demolition permit.
5. Notify the City of Republic, Wastewater Superintendent. The
owner/applicant is responsible for capping the sewer lateral at the
property line. If the structure is on a septic tank, the owner/
applicant must present a letter stating such. A representative of the
Wastewater Department must authorize the demolition permit.
Section
500.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
500.080
AO:681
Section 500.090. Earthquake and Seismic Design Requirements.
All construction in the City shall comply with the requirements of Sections
319.200 through 319.207, RSMo., and any amendments thereto, relating to
earthquakes and seismic construction requirements.
Section 500.100. Examination of Building Plans Required. [Ord. No.
09-11 §2, 4-11-2009]
All applications for commercial building permits shall be accompanied by
five (5) sets of construction drawings and specifications in addition to at
least three (3) sets of stormwater calculations as required by Chapter 410 of
the Subdivision Regulations. All commercial construction documents shall
comply with the version of the International Building Code adopted by
the City and shall be prepared and stamped by an architect or engineer
registered in the State of Missouri.
6. Notify gas, electric, cable television and telephone companies.
Owner/applicant must contact all applicable utility companies and
notify of intent to demolish. A representative of all applicable
utilities must authorize the demolition permit.
7. Notify adjacent property owners. The owner/applicant must notify
all adjacent property owners. The demolition permit issued by the
City of Republic in no way grants permission to trespass. If it is
necessary to trespass on adjacent property, written permission
must be granted by the property owner(s).
8. Temporary barriers. Temporary barriers must be placed at
sidewalks, alleys, roadways and where pedestrian traffic may come
into contact with debris.
9. Notification of emergency services. The Republic Fire and Police
Departments must be notified a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours
in advance of demolition.
Section
500.080
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
500.100
AO:682
Chapter 505
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
Section 505.010. Purpose and Scope. [CC 1999 §6-20(a); Ord. No.
07-74 §1, 11-13-2007]
It is the purpose of this Chapter to provide a just, equitable and practicable
method for the repairing, vacation or demolition of buildings or structures
that may endanger the life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of
the occupants of such buildings or the general public, and this Chapter
shall apply to all dangerous buildings, as herein defined, that now are in
existence or that may hereafter exist in the City of Republic, Missouri.
Section 505.020. Dangerous Buildings Defined. [CC 1999 §6-20(b);
Ord. No. 07-74 §1, 11-13-2007]
A. All buildings that are detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the
residents of the City of Republic and that have any or all of the following
defects shall be deemed "dangerous buildings":
1. Those with interior walls or other vertical structural members that
list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing
through the center of gravity falls outside the middle third of its
base.
2. Those that, exclusive of the foundation, show thirty-three percent
(33%) or more damage or deterioration of the supporting member
or members, or fifty percent (50%) damage or deterioration of the
non-supporting enclosing or outside walls or covering.
3. Those that have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or
roofs, or in which the same are overloaded or that have insufficient
strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
4. Those that have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as
to become dangerous to life, safety or the general health and
welfare of the occupants or the people of the City.
5. Those that are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary or that
so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living
that they are unfit for human habitation, or are likely to cause
sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, safety or
welfare of those occupying the building.
6. Those having light, air and sanitation facilities that are inadequate
to protect the health, safety or general welfare of human beings
who live or may live therein.
7. Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic
or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or
other adequate means of evacuation.
Section
500.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.020
AO:683
Section 505.030. Dangerous Buildings Declared Nuisances. [CC
1999 §6-20(c); Ord. No. 07-74 §1, 11-13-2007]
All dangerous buildings, as defined by Section 505.020, are hereby declared
to be public nuisances and shall be repaired, vacated or demolished as
provided herein.
Section 505.040. Standards For Repair, Vacation or Demolition. [CC
1999 §6-20(d); Ord. No. 07-74 §1, 11-13-2007]
Section 505.050. Building Inspector. [CC 1999 §6-20(e); Ord. No.
07-74 §1, 11-13-2007]
The Building Inspector shall be the officer charged with the administration
and enforcement of the Building Code and this Chapter of the City's Code
of Ordinances.
Section 505.060. Duties of Building Inspector — Procedure and
Notice. [CC 1999 §6-20(f); Ord. No. 07-74 §1, 11-13-2007; Ord. No.
13-09 §3, 2-25-2013]
8. Those that have parts thereof that are so attached that they may
fall and injure members of the public property.
9. Those that because of their condition are unsafe, unsanitary or
dangerous to the health, safety or general welfare of the people of
this City.
A. The following standards shall be followed in substance by the Building
Inspector and the Building Commissioner/Commission hereafter
"Commission" in ordering repair, vacation or demolition of any
dangerous building:
1. If If the dangerous building reasonably can be repaired so that it no
longer will exist in violation of the terms of this Chapter, it shall be
ordered repaired.
2. If the dangerous building is in such condition as to make it
dangerous to the health, safety or general welfare of its occupants,
it shall be ordered to be vacated and repaired.
3. In all cases where a building cannot be repaired so that it no longer
will exist in violation of the terms of this Chapter, it shall be
demolished.
4. In all cases where a dangerous building is a fire hazard existing or
erected in violation of the terms of this Chapter or any ordinance of
this City or Statute of the State of Missouri, it shall be repaired or
demolished.
A. The Building Inspector shall have the duty under this Chapter to:
Section
505.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
505.060
AO:684
1. Inspect, or cause to be inspected, as often as may be necessary, all
residential, institution, assembly, commercial, industrial, garage,
special or miscellaneous occupancy buildings for the purpose of
determining whether any conditions exist that render such places a
dangerous building if the Building Inspector has reasonable
grounds to believe that any such building is dangerous.
2. Inspect any building, wall or structure about which complaints are
filed by any person to the effect that a building, wall or structure is
or may be existing in violation of this Chapter, and the Building
Inspector determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe
that such building is dangerous.
3. Inspect any building, wall or structure reported by the Fire or
Police Departments of this City as probably existing in violation of
this Chapter.
4. Notify in writing, either by personal service or by certified mail,
return receipt requested, or if service cannot be had by either of
these modes of service, then service may be had by a publication in
a newspaper qualified to publish legal notices, the owner, occupant,
lessee, mortgagee, agent and all other persons having an interest
in said building as shown by the land records of the Recorder of
Deeds of Greene or Christian County or any building found by the
Building Inspector to be a dangerous building within the standards
set forth in Section 505.020.
The notice required shall state:
a. The owner must vacate, vacate and repair or vacate and
demolish said building in accordance with the terms of the
notice and this Chapter.
b. The occupant or lessee must vacate said building or have it
repaired in accordance with the notice.
c. The mortgagee, agent or other persons having an interest in
said building as shown by the land records of the Recorder of
Deeds of the County wherein the land is located may, at his/her
own risk, repair, vacate or demolish or have such work done,
provided that any person notified under this subsection to
repair, vacate or demolish any building shall be given such
reasonable time not exceeding thirty (30) days to commence
the required work.
d. A description of the building or structure deemed dangerous, a
statement of the particulars that make the building or
structure a dangerous building and an order requiring the
designated work to be commenced within the time provided for
in the above Subsection.
Section
505.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.060
AO:685
Section 505.070. Building Commission and Hearing Officer. [CC
1999 §6-20(g); Ord. No. 07-74 §1, 11-13-2007]
Section 505.080. Duties of The Commission. [CC 1999 §6-20(h);
Ord. No. 07-74 §1, 11-13-2007; Ord. No. 13-09 §3, 2-25-2013]
e. The notice may also contain a notice of hearing that complies
with the requirements set forth in Section 505.080 (2)
indicating that a hearing may be held upon failure to comply
with the order.
5. Report in writing to the Commission the non-compliance with any
notice to vacate, repair or demolish or upon the failure to proceed
continuously with the work without unnecessary delay.
6. Appear at all hearings conducted by the Commission and testify as
to the condition of dangerous buildings.
7. Immediately report to the Commission concerning any building
found by the Building Inspector to be inherently dangerous and
that the Building Inspector has determined to be a nuisance per se.
The Commission may direct that such building be marked or posted
with a written notice reading substantially as follows:
"This building has been found to be a dangerous building by the
Building Inspector. This notice is to remain on this building until it
is repaired, vacated or demolished in accordance with the notice
that has been given the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee or
agent of this building and all other persons having an interest in
said building as shown by the land records of the Recorder of
Deeds of Greene or Christian County. It is unlawful to remove this
notice until such notice is complied with."
Provided however, that the order by the Commission and the
posting of said notice shall not be construed to deprive all persons
entitled thereto by this Chapter to the notice and hearing
prescribed herein.
A. The City Administrator shall designate a Building Commissioner or a
Building Commission ("Commission") to act as the Commission under
this Chapter and the Commission may establish such rules or
procedures as needed to accomplish the duties set forth in Section
505.080 and shall cause a copy of such rules or procedures to be filed
with the City Clerk.
B. The City Administrator may designate a hearing officer to conduct
hearings as required by this Chapter. In the absence of such
appointment, the Commission shall act as the hearing officer.
C. To the extent the procedures in Chapter 430 do not conflict with the
procedures in this Chapter, the procedures in Chapter 430 may be used.
Section
505.060
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
505.080
AO:686
A. The Commission shall have the power pursuant to this Chapter to:
1. Supervise all inspections required by this Chapter and cause the
Building Inspector to make inspections and perform all duties
required of the Building Inspector by this Chapter. Upon receiving
a complaint or report from any source that a dangerous building
exists in the City, the Commission shall cause an inspection to be
made forthwith. If the Commission deems it necessary to the
performance of the Commission's duties and responsibilities
imposed herein, the Commission may request an inspection and
report be made by any other City department or retain services of
an expert whenever the Commission deems such service necessary.
2. Upon receipt of a report from the Building Inspector indicating
failure by the owner, lessee, occupant, mortgagee, agent or other
person(s) having interest in said building to commence work of
reconditioning or demolition within the time specified by this
Chapter or upon failure to proceed continuously with work without
unnecessary delay, the Commission shall cause a hearing to be held
giving the affected parties full and adequate hearing on the matter.
a. Written notice, either by personal service or by certified mail,
return receipt requested, or by a publication in a newspaper, at
least ten (10) days in advance of a hearing date, to the owner,
occupant, mortgagee, lessee, agent and all other persons
having an interest in said building as shown by the land
records of the Recorder of Deeds of the County wherein the
land is located to appear before the hearing officer on the date
specified in the notice to show cause why the building or
structure reported to be a dangerous building shall not be
repaired, vacated or demolished in accordance with the
statement of particulars set forth in the Building Inspector's
notice as provided herein.
b. Any party may be represented by counsel and all parties shall
have an opportunity to be heard.
c. Evidence may be received by the hearing officer in the manner
set forth in Section 536.070, RSMo.
d. The notice shall contain:
(1) An identifying caption and number assigned to the
proceeding by the City.
(2) Whether an answer to the notice is required.
(3) That the notice is the writing officially instituting the
proceeding.
3. The hearing officer shall make written findings of fact and
conclusions of law in substantially the form required by Section
Section
505.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.080
AO:687
536.090, RSMo., from the evidence offered at said hearing as to
whether or not the building in question is a dangerous building
within the terms of Section 505.020.
4. If the evidence supports a finding based upon competent and
substantial evidence that the building or structure is a dangerous
building, the hearing officer shall issue an order based upon the
hearing officer's findings of fact and conclusions of law
commanding the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, agent or
other person(s) having an interest in said building as shown by the
land records of the County wherein the land is located to repair,
vacate or demolish any building found to be a dangerous building,
provided that any person so notified shall have the privilege of
either repairing or vacating and repairing said building, if such
repair will comply with the ordinances of this City or the owner or
any person having an interest in said building as shown by the land
records of the County wherein the land is located may vacate and
demolish said dangerous building at his/her own risk to prevent the
acquiring by the City of the lien against the land where the
dangerous building stands. If the findings of fact and conclusions of
law are that the evidence does not support a finding that a building
or structure is a dangerous building, no order shall be issued.
5. If the owner, occupant, mortgagee or lessee fails to comply with the
order within thirty (30) days, the hearing officer shall forward the
order to abate to the Commission and the Commission may direct
the order to the appropriate City department(s) and such
department(s) shall cause such building or structure to be
repaired, vacated or demolished and the property cleaned up as the
facts may warrant. If the hearing officer issues an order whereby
the building or structure is demolished, secured or repaired or the
property is cleaned up, the cost of performance shall be certified
pursuant to the procedure in Section 425.090 (C),(D) and (E) to
establish the cost for the purpose of issuing a special tax bill or
assessment therefor against the property to be prepared and
collected by the City Collector or other official collecting taxes,
unless the building or structure is demolished, secured or repaired
by a contractor pursuant to an order issued by the City and such
contractor files a mechanic's lien against the property where the
dangerous building is located. The contractor may enforce this lien
as provided in Sections 429.010 to 429.360, RSMo. Except as
provided in Section 505.090, at the request of the taxpayer the tax
bill may be paid in installments over a period of not more than ten
(10) years. The tax bill from the date of its issuance shall be
deemed a personal debt against the property owner and shall also
be a lien on the property until paid. Said tax bill or assessment shall
bear interest at a rate of eight percent (8%) per annum until paid.
6. As to damage or loss to a building or other structure caused by or
arising out of any fire, explosion or other casualty loss, if an order is
Section
505.080
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
505.080
AO:688
issued by the hearing officer as provided in Subsection (5) of this
Section, and a special tax bill or assessment is issued against the
property, it shall be deemed a personal debt against the property
owner. If there are proceeds of any insurance policy based upon
a covered claim payment made for damage or loss to a building
or other structure caused by or arising out of any fire, explosion
or other casualty loss, the following procedure is established for
the payment of up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the insurance
proceeds, as set forth in subdivisions (a) and (b) of this Subsection.
This Subsection shall apply only to a covered claim payment that
is in excess of fifty percent (50%) of the face value of the policy
covering a building or other structure:
a. The insurer shall withhold from the covered claim payment up
to twenty-five percent (25%) of the covered claim payment and
shall pay such monies to the City to deposit into an interestbearing
account. Any named mortgagee on the insurance
policy shall maintain priority over any obligation under the
ordinance.
b. The City shall release the proceeds and any interest that has
accrued on such proceeds received under subdivision (a) of
this Subsection to the insured or as the terms of the policy and
endorsements thereto provide within thirty (30) days after
receipt of such insurance monies, unless the City has instituted
legal proceedings under the provisions of Subsection (5) of this
Section, all monies in excess of that necessary to comply with
the provisions of Subsection (5) of this Section for the removal
of the building or structure, less salvage value, shall be paid to
the insured.
7. If there are no proceeds of any insurance policy as set forth in
Subsection (6) of this Section, at the request of the taxpayer, the
tax bill may be paid in installments over a period of not more than
ten (10) years. The tax bill from date of its issuance shall be a lien
on the property and a personal debt against the property owner(s)
until paid.
8. Subsection (6) of this Section shall apply to fire, explosion or other
casualty loss claim arising on all buildings and structures.
9. Subsection (6) of this Section does not make the City a party to any
insurance contract, and the insurer is not liable to any party for any
amount in excess of the proceeds otherwise payable under its
insurance policy.
10. The Commission may certify in lieu of payment of all or part of the
covered claim under Subsection (6) that the Commission has
obtained satisfactory proof that the insured has removed or will
remove the debris and repair, rebuild or otherwise make the
premises safe and secure. In this event, the Commission shall issue
Section
505.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.080
AO:689
Section 505.090. Appeal. [CC 1999 §6-20(i); Ord. No. 07-74 §1,
11-13-2007; Ord. No. 10-48 §1, 11-8-2010]
Any owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent or any other person(s)
having an interest in a dangerous building as shown by the land records of
the Recorder of Deeds of the County wherein the land is located may, within
thirty (30) days from the receipt of the order of the hearing officer, appeal
such decision pursuant to the procedures outlined in Code Section 430.090.
Section 505.100. Emergencies. [CC 1999 §6-20(j); Ord. No. 07-74
§1, 11-13-2007; Ord. No. 13-09 §3, 2-25-2013]
In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to
the health, life or safety of any person, in that event unless a dangerous
building, as defined herein, is immediately repaired, vacated or demolished,
the Building Inspector shall report such facts to the Commission and the
Commission may cause the immediate repair, vacation or demolition of
such dangerous building pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section
430.080. The costs of such emergency repair, vacation or demolition of such
dangerous building shall be collected in the same manner as provided in
Section 505.080(5).
Section 505.110. Violations — Disregarding Notices or Orders. [CC
1999 §6-20(k); Ord. No. 07-74 §1, 11-13-2007]
Section 505.120. Penalties. [CC 1999 §6-20(l); Ord. No. 07-74 §1,
11-13-2007]
Any person violating the provisions of this Chapter is guilty of an ordinance
violation and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day that a person fails to comply with
an order of the hearing officer that has not been properly appealed may be
deemed a separate offense.
a certificate within thirty (30) days after receipt of proof to permit
covered claim payment to the insured without the deduction
pursuant to Subsection (6) of this Section. It shall be the obligation
of the insured or other person making the claim to provide the
insurance company with the written certificate provided from this
Subsection.
A. The owner, occupant or lessee in possession of any dangerous building
who shall fail to comply with an order of the hearing officer to repair,
vacate or demolish said building and if the order has not been properly
appealed shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and upon conviction
shall be punishable as set forth in Section 505.120.
B. Any person removing any notices provided for in this Chapter shall be
guilty of an ordinance violation and upon conviction shall be punished
in accordance with Section 505.120.
Section
505.080
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
505.120
AO:690
Chapter 510
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
Section
505.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
505.120
AO:691

ARTICLE I
In General
Section 510.010. Obstructing Sidewalks, Etc.—By Placing Barrels,
Boxes, Etc. [CC 1999 §19-4]
No person shall encumber any street, alley or sidewalk within this City
by placing or causing to be placed thereon wood, barrels, boxes, crates,
lumber, brick, stone or any other articles and they shall at all times leave a
clear and safe passageway for pedestrians and the handicapped individuals.
But this Section shall not apply to merchants occupying and using three
(3) feet of sidewalk next to and in front of their buildings for the purpose
of displaying their wares and merchandise, nor to persons receiving or
discharging any articles in the way of regular business unless such articles
are permitted to remain more than two (2) hours upon any street, alley
or sidewalk. Any person may use the streets, alleys or sidewalks in the
construction of any new building or in the removal, repair or alteration or
any building, or for the purpose of piling thereon of building materials and
tools for reasonable periods of time. Nor shall any such merchandise so
placed upon a sidewalk be left on such sidewalk after close of business each
day.
Section 510.020. Obstructing Sidewalks, Etc.—Removal of Building
Tools, Etc., Upon Completion of Work. [CC 1999 §19-5; R.O. 1916
§440]
Whoever shall use any portion of any street, avenue, alley or square for
the piling or storage of building tools or materials, to be used in the
construction, removal or repair of any building, and shall neglect, refuse
or fail within three (3) days after the completion or removal thereof to
remove the same together with all remnants thereof, so as to leave such
street, avenue, alley or square clean as found, and whoever shall during
the progress of such work place any of such building material or the refuse
thereof in any gutter so as to obstruct or tend to obstruct the flow of water
therein shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Section 510.030. Obstructing Sidewalks, Etc.—Temporary Sidewalks
During Construction, Etc. [CC 1999 §19-6; R.O. 1916 §509]
Whoever shall encumber any street, alley or sidewalk with any building
material shall construct a temporary sidewalk of good sound plank at least
twenty-four (24) inches wide around such obstruction to connect with the
regular sidewalk on each end or side of such obstruction and shall maintain
the same in good condition for travel so long as such obstruction remains,
and such obstruction shall not remain on such street, alley or sidewalk for a
longer period than the time granted by the Public Works Director.
Section
510.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.040
AO:693
Section 510.040. Gates Projecting Over Streets or Sidewalks. [CC
1999 §19-18; R.O. 1916 §436]
No person shall construct or hang any gate in such a way or manner that
such gate when opened shall project over, into or upon any sidewalk, street,
avenue or alley in the City.
Section 510.045. Public Street Lights. [Ord. No. 11-06 §2,
4-11-2011]
A. Public street lights on residential streets shall be spaced between two
hundred fifty (250) and three hundred fifty (350) feet apart, at street
intersections and cul-de-sacs. Street light spacing on all roads with a
classification of collector or above shall be determined on a case-bycase
basis.
B. Wires and poles on in-fill street lights should match the type of
installation in the neighborhood in which the light is to be located
(underground or overhead).
C. Prior to maintenance being performed on existing street lights, the
Public Works Director shall review the density and placement
requirements for street lights in the vicinity and should the spacing and
location requirements contained herein still be maintained if the
defective street light were removed, the street light shall be removed
from the City inventory.
Section
510.040
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
510.045
AO:694
ARTICLE II
Naming of Streets and Avenues
Section 510.050. Numbering System. [CC 1999 §19-27; Ord. No.
4274 §1]
It shall be the duty of the City Planner to maintain the numbering system
of the City assigning a consecutive street number to each business building
or dwelling presently erected or in the process of erection in the City and
leaving a number available for each twenty-five (25) feet of vacant land
along the streets of the City and assigning one-half (½) numbers to each
second (2nd) story building or dwelling presently occupied by a tenant
different from the first (1st) story tenant. The buildings or dwellings and lots
shall be numbered north and south from the intersection of Elm Street and
Main Street and east and west from such intersection.
Section 510.060. Structure Numbering System. [Ord. No. 98-49
§1(19-28), 11-23-1998]
Section 510.070. Specifications For Attachment of Structure
Numbers. [Ord. No. 98-49 §1(19-29), 11-23-1998]
A. The City Planner, in conjunction with a representative of the postal
service and emergency services, shall constitute a staff committee
responsible for assigning addresses and naming streets within the City
of Republic.
1. The committee shall meet when deemed necessary by the City
Planner.
2. The City Planner shall prepare and maintain a detailed plat of the
City for use by the committee.
B. The committee shall assign a consecutive street number to each
structure presently erected or in the process of erection in the City,
leaving a minimum of one (1) number for each twenty-five (25) feet of
vacant street frontage. Letter prefixes or suffixes shall not be used, with
the single exception of multi-family apartment complexes with more
than four (4) units.
C. All structures on either the north or the west side of City streets shall be
assigned odd-numbered addresses, and all structures on either the
south or the east side shall be assigned even-numbered addresses.
D. All structures shall be numbered north and south of Elm Street and east
and west of Main Street with increasing number units, excluding all
structures facing, and directly adjacent to, U.S. Highway 60, which
shall be numbered east and west of Main Street with increasing
numbers.
A. It shall be the duty of each structure owner to attach the address
number(s) assigned by the committee to the structure(s).
Section
510.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.070
AO:695
Section 510.080. Designation of Public Roadways. [Ord. No. 98-49
§1(19-30), 11-23-1998]
All arterial and collector roadways within the City of Republic shall be
designated as Avenues when running north and south, and as Streets when
running east and west, with exception to Main, which shall be classified as
a street. Local neighborhood roadways may alternatively be designated by
the committee as roads, courts, ways, lanes, circles, drives, and places as
per the following diagram.
1. Single-family and two-family residential structure owners shall
affix the assigned number(s) to a conspicuous location on the front
entrance(s) to each separate dwelling unit.
2. Multi-family apartment structure owners shall affix the assigned
numbers or letters to conspicuous locations on the front entrances
to each separate dwelling unit. If letter designations are used to
distinguish individual apartment units within a single structure, the
owner shall affix the assigned number to a conspicuous location on
either the front or the side of the structure.
3. All commercial structure owners shall affix the assigned number in
a conspicuous location on the front entrance. If the structure has a
rear entrance/exit, the owner shall affix the assigned number in a
conspicuous location on the rear of the structure.
B. Such numbers shall be a minimum of three (3) inches in height and
shall be attached at the expense of the structure owner. If a structure is
set back more than fifty (50) feet from the roadway, such numbers shall
be a minimum of six (6) inches in height.
C. New structures shall have address numbers attached prior to
occupation or use.
D. Structures under construction shall have temporary address numbers
posted along the right-of-way until such time that the permanent
numbers are affixed to the structure.
Section
510.070
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
510.080
AO:696
Section 510.090. Naming of Public Roadways. [Ord. No. 98-49
§1(19-31), 11-23-1998]
It shall be the responsibility of the staff committee to assign names to public
roadways within the City.
Section
510.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.090
AO:697

ARTICLE III
Excavations
Section 510.100. Permit Required. [CC 1999 §§18-15, 19-24; Ord.
No. 99-43 §2(18-15, 19-24), 9-27-1999]
Section 510.110. Barricades and Lights. [CC 1999 §§19-25 — 19-26;
R.O. 1916 §§427 — 428]
A. No person shall dig or excavate on or under any public right-of-way or
easement, for any purpose whatsoever without having first obtained a
permit from the Public Works Director. The cost of said permit shall be
set out in Appendix V-A at the end of this Title.
B. A developer, subdivider or any person or corporation who desires to cut
a street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, easement, or right-of-way in the City of
Republic shall post a bond in an amount as determined by the Public
Works Director from time to time.
C. All repairs shall be completed in accordance with the "Construction
Specifications for Public Improvements, City of Republic" on file at the
offices of the City of Republic Public Works Department and
incorporated herein by reference.
D. All repairs shall be completed within two (2) weeks after the street is
cut unless a two (2) week time extension is authorized by the City of
Republic Public Works Department.
E. The cash bond shall be returned once the repair has been approved by
the City of Republic Public Works Department.
A. Generally. No person shall make any excavation in, on, under, across or
adjoining any square, street, avenue, alley or sidewalk and shall leave
such excavation open and unguarded. Warning devices shall be placed
in accordance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
B. Removal, Etc. No unauthorized person shall remove, break or
extinguish any lantern or danger signal which has been placed on any
street or alley to protect persons against accidents.
Section
510.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.110
AO:699

ARTICLE IV
Streets, Sidewalks, Etc. — Construction and Maintenance —
Assessments, Tax Bills
Section 510.120. Construction Specifications. [Ord. No. 16-23 § 1,
11-28-2016]
All public improvements including modifications to existing streets,
sidewalks and driveways within the City of Republic, or within subdivisions
intended to be annexed into the City of Republic, shall be constructed in
conformance with the latest edition of the "Construction Specifications for
Public Improvements, City of Republic" on file at the offices of the City of
Republic Public Works Department and incorporated herein by reference.
Section
510.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.120
AO:701

ARTICLE V
Miscellaneous Public Improvement Requirements
Section 510.130. Restriction On The Hours of Excavation On City
Easements. [CC 1999 §18-25]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to perform
excavation work on any utility easement within the City of Republic at
any time other than from 6:00 A.M. to 9:00 P.M. Monday through Friday
without prior approval from the City. No work shall be performed during
City holidays or at any other times unless special permission is granted by
the City.
Section
510.130
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
510.130
AO:703
Chapter 515
RIGHTS-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
Section 515.010. Applicability; Preemption. [Ord. No. 17-40 § 2,
10-17-201793]
Section 515.020. Definitions. [Ord. No. 17-40 § 2, 10-17-2017]
For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivatives shall have the meanings set forth in this Section, unless the
context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended.
ABANDONED — Any equipment, materials, apparatuses, devices, or
Facilities that are: 1) declared abandoned by the owner of such equipment
or Facilities, 2) no longer in active use and the owner of such equipment or
A. Applicability. Except as provided for herein and where limited by
applicable law, this Chapter shall apply to all Excavations and use,
construction, operation, and Maintenance of Facilities or structures, in
the ROW of the City. No Person shall commence or continue with the
operation of any Facilities or structures in the ROW except as provided
and in compliance with this Chapter. Because numerous types of users
and uses of the ROW may be subject to various or changing regulatory
schemes under Federal or State law, any such limitation or qualification
that may be applicable to less than all users and uses of the ROW are
not duplicated herein, but are nevertheless incorporated herein,
whenever application is so required by law, including but not limited to
applicable provisions of Chapter 67, RSMo., and other applicable State
and Federal law.
B. Construction Specifications. All public improvements including
modifications to existing Rights-of-Way and driveways within the City of
Republic, or within subdivisions intended to be annexed into the City of
Republic, shall be constructed in conformance with the latest edition of
the "Construction Specifications for Public Improvements, City of
Republic" on file at the offices of the City or Republic Planning and
Development Department and incorporated herein by reference.
C. Preemption. No provision of this Chapter shall apply to any
circumstance in which such application shall be unlawful under
superseding Federal or State law and furthermore, if any Section,
Subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this Chapter is now
or in the future superseded or preempted by State or Federal law or
found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unauthorized, such
provision shall be automatically interpreted and applied as required by
law.
93.Editor's Note: Former Chapter 515, Rights-of-Way Management, containing Sections
515.010 through 515.100, was repealed 10-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-40.
Section
510.130
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
515.020
AO:704
Facilities fails to respond within thirty (30) days to a written notice sent by
the City, or 3) as otherwise may be defined by applicable law.
ANTENNA — Any device that transmits and/or receives electromagnetic
wireless radio waves or signals for voice, data or video communications
purposes including, but not limited to, television, text, AM/FM radio,
microwave, cellular telephone, Communications Service or otherwise.
APPLICANT — Any Person applying for a ROW Use Agreement, Franchise,
License, or any permit or other authorization to install, maintain, repair or
otherwise physically access Facilities in the ROW.
CITY — The City of Republic, Missouri.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — The transmission via Facilities, in whole
or in part, of any writing, signs, signals, pictures, sounds or other forms
of intelligence through wire, wireless or other means, including, but not
limited to, any telecommunications service, enhanced service, information
service, or internet service, as such terms are now, or may in the future, be
defined under applicable law, and including all instrumentalities, Facilities,
apparatus (Communications Facilities), and services (among other things,
the receipt, forwarding, and delivery of Telecommunications) incidental to
such transmission or designed to directly or indirectly facilitate or accept
such transmission and shall also include "video services" as defined in
Section 67.2677, RSMo. The term "Communications Service" does not
include the rental of conduit or physical Facilities.
DIRECTOR — The Public Works Director or his/her designee.
EXCAVATION PERMIT — A permit authorizing Excavation for the
construction or installation of Facilities in the City's Rights-of-Way.
EXCAVATION, EXCAVATING, or EXCAVATE — Any act by which earth,
asphalt, concrete, sand, gravel, rock or any other material in or on the
ground is cut into, dug, uncovered, removed, or otherwise displaced, by
means of any tools, equipment or explosives, except as excluded by
applicable law.
FACILITIES MAINTENANCE or MAINTENANCE — The construction,
installation, repair, upgrade, or other physical access to the Facility in the
ROW that does not involve Excavation.
FACILITIES MAINTENANCE PERMIT — A permit issued by the City for the
ROW User to provide Maintenance to its Facilities or otherwise perform
work in the ROW that does not involve Excavation but requires physical
access to the Facilities in the ROW.
FACILITIES or FACILITY — Any equipment, installation, structure located
in the Rights-of-Way, including without limitation, cables, wires, lines, poles,
towers, Antenna, conduit facilities, vaults, pedestals, transmitters, meters,
fiber, foundations, and any other equipment, infrastructure, structures or
obstruction. Facilities shall not include lawful vehicular parking or use or
lawful minor incidental uses such as mailboxes, driveway aprons, private
utility connections or other incidental Facilities which may be permitted by
license issued by the Director as provided herein.
Section
515.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.020
AO:705
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FRANCHISE — The rights and obligations extended by the City to certain
ROW Users to occupy the Rights-of-Way for the purpose of providing,
transporting or distributing electricity, gas, water, steam, lighting, energy
or sewer service to any Person or area within the City's limits and
boundaries.
GOVERNING BODY — The City Council of the City.
LICENSE — The rights and obligations extended by the City to a Person to
use and occupy the Rights-of-Way for the purpose of installing temporary
Facilities in the Rights-of-Way or incidental uses such as ingress and egress
facilities, lateral utility lines, mailboxes or driveway aprons.
PERMIT — An Excavation Permit or a Facilities Maintenance Permit.
PERSON — Any corporation, partnership, proprietorship, individual,
organization, governmental entity or any natural person.
PSC — The Missouri Public Service Commission.
RIGHTS-OF-WAY or ROW — The area on, below, or above a public roadway,
highway, street or alleyway in which the City has an ownership interest or
right of management, and including such adjacent areas within such public
ways within such City control, except as may be limited herein or by law.
RIGHTS-OF-WAY USE AGREEMENT or ROW USE AGREEMENT — The
rights and obligations extended by the City to a Person to occupy the ROW
for the purpose of providing any form of Communications Service to any
Person or area within the City's limits and boundaries, or any other Person
desiring to use the ROW for which a Franchise or License is not applicable,
subject to the regulations and requirements herein.
ROW USER — All Persons and entities, whether a PSC registered utility
or otherwise, owning, controlling, leasing, maintaining, using or installing
Facilities in the Rights-of-Way of the City, not otherwise expressly exempted.
Section 515.030. ROW Use Agreement, License Or Franchise
Required; Requirements. [Ord. No. 17-40 § 2, 10-17-2017]
A. ROW Use Agreement, License, Or Franchise Required. Except where
otherwise authorized or required by applicable law, no Person may own,
control, lease, maintain, use, or install Facilities in the Rights-of-Way
without a valid Franchise, License, or ROW Use Agreement with the
City as provided herein and as follows:
1. Franchise. A Franchise shall be obtained in conformance with all
applicable Franchise procedures for any ROW User seeking to use
the Rights-of-Way for the purpose of providing, transporting or
distributing electricity, gas, water, steam, lighting, energy, or sewer
service to any Person or area within the City's limits and
boundaries.
Section
515.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
515.030
AO:706
2. ROW Use Agreement. A ROW Use Agreement shall be required for
all other ROW Users, except as provided herein or otherwise
required by law. A ROW Use Agreement shall conform to all
applicable laws and requirements, including as provided herein,
but shall not be subject to procedures applicable only to
Franchises.
3. License For Incidental Uses. Persons desiring to install an
incidental use, which includes installation of temporary structures
or minor incidental uses in the Rights-of-Way, such as ingress or
egress facilities, and similar incidental uses, that utilize a small
area of the Rights-of-Way and serves the principal structure, may
be permitted without a Franchise or Rights-of-Way Use Agreement
pursuant to a License issued by the Director. Mailboxes, driveway
aprons, and landscaping within the Rights-of-Way and having
typical appearance and dimensions are permitted without the need
for a License, Franchise, or Rights-of-Way Use Agreement so long
as they do not cause an interference with vehicular or pedestrian
use of the Rights-of-Way and comply with all other applicable
requirements for ROW use except as may be expressly waived in
writing by the Director. The Director shall have discretion to
establish such application, requirements, and conditions applicable
to such uses (including insurance, bonding, and other
requirements) consistent with the purposes of this Chapter or as
otherwise established by law. Any Person granted a License
hereunder shall be subject to the applicable requirements of this
Chapter.
B. Grant And Nature Of Approval; Terms And Compensation. The authority
granted by the City in any ROW Use Agreement, License or Franchise
shall be for non-exclusive use of the Rights-of-Way. Such grant does not
in any way limit the continuing authority of the City through the proper
exercise of its statutory powers to adopt and enforce ordinances
necessary to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
The City specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such
additional agreements or other rights to use the Rights-of-Way for any
purpose and to any other Person, including itself, as it deems
appropriate, subject to all applicable laws. The granting of any ROW
Use Agreement, License or Franchise shall not be deemed to create any
property interest of any kind in favor of the ROW User nor shall it
create any relationship of agency, partnership, joint venture, or
employment between the parties. All Franchises and ROW Use
Agreements shall be approved by ordinance or resolution of the
Governing Body on a non-discriminatory basis provided that the Person
is in compliance with all applicable requirements. Licenses may be
approved by the Director on a non-discriminatory basis provided that
the Person is in compliance with all applicable requirements. Each
Franchise, License, and ROW Use Agreement shall include terms of use
and be deemed to incorporate the terms of this Chapter and other
applicable laws of the City, except as may be expressly stated in such
Section
515.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.030
AO:707
Use Agreement, License or Franchise. The City may require
compensation for use of the ROW or other public property as may be
reasonably required by the Governing Body, subject to applicable law.
C. No Warranty. The City makes no express or implied representation or
warranty regarding its rights to authorize the installation or
construction of Facilities on any particular segment of Rights-of-Way
and shall not be liable for any damage therefrom. The burden and
responsibility for making all such determinations in advance of
construction or installation shall be entirely upon the ROW User. The
ROW User shall be solely liable for any damages to Facilities or other
property due to Excavation, Facilities Maintenance, or other ROW work
performed prior to obtaining the location of all Facilities within the
work area. The ROW User shall not make or attempt to make repairs,
relocation or replacement of damaged or disturbed Facilities without
the approval of the owner of the Facilities.
D. Use Of City Or Third-Party Facilities. No ROW Use Agreement,
Franchise, or License shall grant the right to use Facilities owned or
controlled by the City or a third party, and no such use shall occur,
without the express written consent of such party (on file with the City
and subject to other applicable requirements), nor shall any Franchise,
ROW Agreement or License excuse such Person from first obtaining a
pole attachment agreement or other express consent for such right or
use before locating on Facilities controlled or owned by the City or a
third party.
E. Lease Required For Public Lands. Unless otherwise provided, use or
installation of any Facilities in non-Rights-of-Way public property of the
City shall be permitted only if a lease agreement or other separate
written approval has been negotiated and approved by the City with
such reasonable terms as the City may require.
F. Condition Precedent To Permit. Unless otherwise required by
applicable law, no Permit may be issued unless or until such Person has
a valid Franchise, License or Rights-of-Way Use Agreement with the
City.
G. Transferability. Except as provided in this Chapter or as otherwise
required by law, no Franchise, ROW Use Agreement, or Permit may be
transferred or assigned without the written application to and consent
of the City based on the requirements and policies of this Chapter. The
City shall not unreasonably withhold its consent as provided herein, but
any costs incurred shall be paid by the ROW User to the extent not
prohibited by applicable law.
H. Forfeiture Of Agreement And Privilege. In case of failure on the part of
the ROW User, including its successors or assigns to comply with any of
the provisions of this Chapter or a ROW Use Agreement, Franchise,
License or other authorization, or if the ROW User, its successors and
assigns should do or cause to be done any act or thing prohibited by or
Section
515.030
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
515.030
AO:708
in violation of this Chapter or the terms of the authorization of such
use, or otherwise loses authority to provide its service in the City,
the ROW User, its successors and assigns shall forfeit all rights and
privileges permitted by this Chapter and any ROW Use Agreement,
Franchise, License or other authorization, and all rights hereunder
shall cease, terminate and become null and void, provided that, unless
other procedures are specifically provided in such franchise or other
authorization which shall then control, said forfeiture shall not take
effect until the City shall carry out the following proceedings: Before
the City declares the forfeiture or revocation of a Rights-of-Way Use
Agreement, Franchise, License or other authorization, it shall first
serve a written notice upon the Person setting forth in detail the neglect
or failure complained of, and the Person shall have thirty (30) days
thereafter, or such other reasonable period established by the
Governing Body, in which to cure the default by complying with the
conditions of the ROW Use Agreement, Franchise, License or other
authorization or requirement and fully remedying any default or
violation. If at the end of such period the City determines that the
conditions have not been complied with and that the Person did not
reasonably and in the public interest require more than thirty (30) days
to cure the default, the City shall take action by an affirmative vote of
the Governing Body present at the meeting and voting to terminate the
ROW Use Agreement, Franchise, License or other authorization, setting
out the grounds upon which said agreement or other authorization
is to be forfeited or revoked. Nothing herein shall prevent the City
from invoking any other remedy or from declaring immediate forfeiture
where the default is incapable of being cured by the ROW User,
including where such defaults or violations have repeatedly occurred.
I. No Interference. All ROW Users shall construct and maintain their
Facilities so as not to interfere with other users of the Rights-of-Way.
Except as may otherwise be provided or as determined by the Director,
the ROW User shall, prior to commencement of work, execute a Cityapproved
resident-notification plan to notify residents affected by the
proposed work. All construction and Maintenance by the ROW User or
its subcontractors shall be performed in accordance with industry
standards. The ROW User shall, in the performance of any Excavation,
Facilities Maintenance, Relocation and/or removal of any of its
Facilities, limit such work to that necessary for efficient operation and
so as not to interfere with other users of the Rights-of-Way. The ROW
User shall not interfere with or alter the Facilities of the City or other
ROW User without their consent and shall be solely responsible for
such.
J. Priority Of Uses. ROW User's use shall be in all situations subordinate
and subject to public municipal use. In situations where multiple users
are within the same location, first the municipal use shall have priority
followed by Persons with a valid and current Rights-of-Way Use
Agreement or franchise executed with the City, followed by all others.
Section
515.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.040
AO:709
Section 515.040. Application For Franchise Or ROW Use Agreement
Required. [Ord. No. 17-40 § 2, 10-17-2017]
A. Application Required. An Applicant shall submit a completed
application for a Franchise or Rights-of-Way Use Agreement on such
form provided by the City. The ROW User shall be responsible for
accurately maintaining the information in the application during the
term of any Franchise or ROW Use Agreement and shall be responsible
for all costs incurred by the City due to the failure to provide or
maintain as accurate any application information. The application shall
provide information necessary to determine compliance with this
Chapter, including but not limited to:
1. Identity and legal status of the Applicant;
2. Name, address, telephone number, and email address of each
officer, agent or employee responsible for the accuracy of the
application. Each officer, agent or employee shall be familiar with
the local Facilities of the Applicant, shall be the Person(s) to whom
notices shall be sent and shall be responsible for facilitating all
necessary communications, including, but not limited to,
certification to the City of any material changes to the information
provided in such completed application during the term of any
Franchise or ROW Use Agreement;
3. Name, address, telephone number, and email address of the local
representative of the Applicant who shall be available at all times to
act on behalf of the Applicant in the event of an emergency;
4. Proof of any necessary permit, license, certification, grant,
registration, franchise, agreement or any other authorization
required by any appropriate governmental entity, including, but not
limited to, the FCC or the PSC;
5. Description of the Applicant's intended use of the Rights-of-Way,
including such information as to proposed services so as to
determine the applicable, Federal, State and local regulatory
provisions as may apply to such User;
6. A list of authorized agents, contractors and subcontractors eligible
to obtain Permits on behalf of the Applicant. The list may be
updated to add such Person at the time of Permit application if the
updated information on the application is submitted by an
authorized representative of the Applicant;
7. Information sufficient to determine the amount of net assets of the
Applicant;
8. Information sufficient to determine whether the Applicant is
subject under applicable law to franchising, service regulation,
payment of compensation for the use of the Rights-of-Way, taxation
or other requirements of the City;
Section
515.040
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
515.040
AO:710
9. Any request including one (1) or more antennas shall also include
all requirements for installation of antennas and wireless facilities
set forth in the Uniform Wireless Communications Infrastructure
Deployment Act (Sections 67.5090 et seq., RSMo.), Article XI of
Chapter 405 of this Code, or other applicable laws; and
10. Such other information as may be reasonably required by the
Director to determine requirements and compliance with
applicable regulation.
B. Application Deposit Fee. A five hundred dollars ($500.00) application
deposit fee for review, documentation, and approval of such Use
Agreement or Franchise shall be established by the City to recover any
actual costs anticipated and incurred by the City in reviewing,
documenting, or negotiating such ROW Use Agreement or Franchise,
provided that no costs shall be included if such inclusion is prohibited
by applicable law as to that Person. If the actual costs are thereafter
determined to be less than the application deposit fee, such amount
shall be returned to the Person, after written request therefrom; if the
actual costs exceed the application deposit fee, such Person shall pay
such additional amount prior to issuance of any final City approval after
written notice from the City. Such application deposit fee shall be
provided to the City at the time of submission of the application to the
City.
C. Approval Process. Applications for ROW Use Agreements or Franchises
may be approved, denied, or approved with conditions consistent with
requirements of applicable law or other applicable requirements as
may be necessary to fulfill the requirements and objectives of this
Chapter. The City may deny or condition any ROW Use Agreement or
Franchise where the proposed use would interfere with the public use
of the Rights-of-Way or otherwise conflict with the legitimate public
interests of the City or as otherwise provided by law. After submission
by the Applicant of a duly executed and completed application,
application deposit fee, and executed Franchise or Rights-of-Way Use
Agreement as may be provided by the Director or as modified by the
Director in review of the specific circumstances of the application, all in
conformity with the requirements of this Chapter and all applicable
laws, the Director shall submit such agreement to the Governing Body
for approval. Upon determining compliance with this Chapter, the
Governing Body may authorize execution of a Franchise or ROW Use
Agreement (or a modified Agreement otherwise acceptable to the City
consistent with the purposes of this Chapter) and such executed
Franchise or ROW Use Agreement shall constitute consent to use the
Rights-of-Way; provided that nothing herein shall preclude the rejection
or modification of any executed Franchise or ROW Use Agreement
submitted to the City to the extent applicable law does not prohibit such
rejection or modification, including where necessary to reasonably and
in a uniform or non-discriminatory manner reflect the distinct
Section
515.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.040
AO:711
Section 515.050. Permit Required; Requirements. [Ord. No. 17-40
§ 2, 10-17-2017]
engineering, construction, operation, maintenance, public work or
safety requirements applicable to the Person.
A. Excavation Permit Required. Except as otherwise provided herein, no
ROW User or other Person shall perform Excavation work in the ROW
without an Excavation Permit. Any Person desiring to Excavate in the
ROW shall first apply for an Excavation Permit, on an application form
provided by the City, and submit the application fee and pay all
applicable fees to obtain an Excavation Permit, in addition to any other
building permit, license, easement, or other authorization required by
law, unless such Excavation must be performed on an emergency basis
as provided herein. The cost of said Permit shall be set out in Appendix
V-1 at the end of Title V. The Director is authorized to draft an
application form consistent with the requirements of this Chapter. An
Excavation Permit should be obtained for each project unless otherwise
provided for in this Chapter. A separate special permit or lease shall be
required for Excavation in or use of any real property interest of the
City that is not ROW. It shall be unlawful for any Person to perform
Excavation work within the City of Republic at any time other than from
6:00 A.M. to 9:00 P.M. Monday through Friday without prior approval
from the City, except in the case of an emergency. No work shall be
performed during City holidays, except in the case of an emergency. All
Excavation Permits shall expire after sixty (60) days from the date of
issuance, unless otherwise specified in the Excavation Permit. An
Applicant whose Excavation Permit application has been withdrawn,
abandoned or denied for failure to comply with this Chapter shall not be
refunded the application fee.
B. Facilities Maintenance Permit; Exemptions. No Person shall perform
Facilities Maintenance in the Rights-of-Way without first obtaining a
Facilities Maintenance Permit from the Director, except where such
Facilities Maintenance is expressly authorized by an existing valid
Excavation Permit for the applicable Maintenance location or is exempt
herein. In addition to the conditions set forth below, conditions of a
Facilities Maintenance Permit shall be as established in such
Maintenance Permit. All Facilities Maintenance Permits shall expire
after sixty (60) days from the date of issuance, unless otherwise
specified in such Maintenance Permit. A Facilities Maintenance Permit
shall not be required for:
1. ROW Users performing routine Maintenance which does not
require Excavation, does not substantially disrupt traffic or
pedestrians, and requires no more than sixteen (16) hours to
complete, provided that the Maintenance is performed between the
hours of 7:00 A.M. and 9:00 P.M.;
2. Emergency situations as more fully described in Subsection (E)
below; or
Section
515.040
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
515.050
AO:712
3. Contractors working on the construction or reconstruction of
public improvements and which are operating pursuant to a
contract with the City for such construction.
C. Bulk Permits. The Director shall have the authority to establish
procedures for bulk processing of applications and periodic payment of
fees.
D. Emergencies. In case of an emergency requiring immediate attention to
remedy defects, and in order to prevent loss or damage to Persons or
property, it shall be sufficient that the Person making such Excavation
or performing such Facilities Maintenance obtain the necessary Permit
as soon as possible and may proceed without a Permit when such
Permit cannot reasonably be obtained before starting such emergency
Excavation or Facilities Maintenance. Notice to the City of the
emergency shall be provided at the earliest possible time and the
appropriate Permit shall be obtained as soon as reasonably possible,
and not later than five (5) business days thereafter, or as otherwise
directed by the City. In the event the City becomes aware of an
emergency requiring Facilities work the City shall attempt to contact a
representative of each ROW User affected, or potentially affected, by
the emergency work. If no response is received by a particular ROW
User to whom contact is attempted, the Director may take whatever
action he/she deems necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost of
which shall be borne by the Person whose action or inaction occasioned
the emergency or by the ROW User if the emergency was occasioned by
an act of nature.
E. Law Compliance Incorporation. Every Permit issued hereunder shall
incorporate the requirements and terms of this Chapter, and all
applicable ordinances, to the extent permitted by law. The ROW User
shall, to the extent allowed by law, perform such work in accordance
with the issued permit, all applicable provisions of this Chapter, any
applicable ordinances or regulations that may be adopted by the City. In
addition, all ROW Users shall be subject to all technical specifications,
design and location criteria, policies, resolutions and ordinances now or
hereafter adopted or promulgated by the City in the reasonable
exercise of its police power relating to Permits and fees, sidewalk and
pavement cuts, Facility location, construction coordination, surface
restoration, and other requirements on the use of the Rights-of-Way,
including specifically the latest edition of the "Construction
Specifications for Public Improvements, City of Republic." A ROW User
shall perform all Excavations or Facilities Maintenance in full
compliance with all applicable engineering codes adopted or approved
by the City, and in accordance with applicable Statutes of the State of
Missouri, and the rules and regulations of the PSC, FCC, and any other
local, State or Federal agency having jurisdiction over the parties. The
ROW User shall comply with the Excavation requirements of Missouri
One Call established by Sections 319.010 et seq., RSMo., as amended. A
ROW User shall be responsible for all Excavations or Facilities
Section
515.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.050
AO:713
Maintenance done in the Rights-of-Way on its behalf, regardless of by
whom the Excavation or Facilities Maintenance is done.
F. Permit Specific Conditions. The Director may also impose reasonable
conditions upon the issuance of a Permit and the performance of
Excavation and ROW work in order to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare, to ensure the structural integrity of the Rights-of-Way, to
protect the property and safety of other users of the Rights-of-Way, and
to minimize the disruption, inconvenience and danger to the traveling
public, including applicable permit requirements and design, location,
appearance, and other reasonable requirements.
G. Above-Ground Facilities. All new Facilities may be located Aboveground
only if approved by the City Council for good cause. Unless
extraordinary circumstances exist, good cause shall not include
authorization for Above-ground Facilities requiring new poles or major
modification to existing Above-ground structures. Above-ground
pedestals, vaults, cabinets, or other Facilities may be installed only if
approved by the City where alternative Underground Facilities are not
feasible or where underground requirements are otherwise waived
pursuant to the provisions of this Subsection. Existing conduit shall be
used where feasible and available. Where reasonable and appropriate
and where adequate Rights-of-Way exists, the ROW User shall place
Above-ground Facilities underground in conjunction with City capital
improvement projects and/or at specific locations requested by the City
provided that such placement is practical, efficient, and economically
feasible.
H. Use Of Existing Facilities Required; Exceptions. All new Facilities or
structures shall collocate on existing structures or within existing
conduit, trenches, or other Facilities to minimize unnecessary use of
Rights-of-Way space, reduce potential existing or future interference
and obstructions, and to reduce the cost to the public or others
therefrom, and to maximize the public's ability to use and license
appropriate private or public uses of the Rights-of-Way in the public
interest (except where preempted by law or where good cause is
established as determined by the City applying these objectives). Where
existing structures or Facilities are available, or exist at or near the
proposed use, unless otherwise approved, the Applicant must either use
such Facilities or file a written request verified by the Applicant for
exception specifying the specific reasons why such Facilities are not
available or feasible to be used and addressing the objectives hereof.
I. Wireless Antennas And Facilities. Pursuant to City authority, including
Section 67.1830(f), RSMo., and to properly manage the limited space in
the City's Rights-of-Way, minimize obstructions and interference with
the use of the Rights-of-Way by the public, and to ensure public safety,
preserve property values, and enforce the public policy to maintain
neutrality as to ownership of wireless locations, while also seeking to
facilitate delivery of broadband technologies to City residents and
businesses, wireless Facilities shall be permitted in the Rights-of-Way
Section
515.050
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
515.050
AO:714
only in compliance with the requirements applicable to other Facilities
and users in the Rights-of-Way, and the additional requirements set
forth in this Section for wireless antennas and Facilities. Any wireless
Facilities authorized in the ROW shall be only as authorized in a binding
approved ROW Use Agreement, pole attachment agreement, or other
written authorization with the City and subject to approval, denial,
or condition relating to location, design, height, appearance, safety,
specifications for use of City structures, and such zoning, building, or
other regulations, including specifically Chapter 405, except as may be
limited by law.
1. General Conditions. Any wireless Facility in the ROW shall be
subject to conditions relating to the location (including prohibited
or limited locations), design, height, appearance, safety, radiofrequency,
and other interference issues as may be lawfully
imposed by the City where necessary or appropriate to protect the
public, and to conform to policies and interests of the public as may
be set forth in special district plans, historic areas, or other policies
as may be reasonably adopted by the Director to address changing
infrastructure, technology, and uses of the Rights-of-Way and/or
City Facilities.
2. Small Wireless Collocation. Any wireless Facility meeting the
requirements of a "Fast Track Small Wireless Facility" as defined by
Sections 405.885 and 405.905 of the Zoning Code, may be
authorized to be located in the Rights-of-Way with approval of the
Director subject to the following additional requirements:
a. Only one (1) Small Wireless Facility shall be permitted per
structure in the ROW;
b. No ground equipment shall be authorized;
c. No Small Wireless Facility shall be located in a manner which
obstructs or causes a safety concern for vehicle or pedestrian
traffic; and
d. If the proposed structure the Applicant proposes to locate its
Small Wireless Facility is not structurally sound, but the
Director finds such to be a desired location, the director can
require the Applicant to install a new substantially similar
structure at its cost.
3. New Structures. Wireless Facilities shall not be permitted in the
Rights-of-Way on new structures, provided that if evidence
warranting an exception is provided by the Applicant pursuant to
Section 515.050(H), the City Council may grant an exception
authorizing a new structure for a wireless Facility if it also
determines on a non-discriminatory basis such proposed
application is in the public interest in light of the purposes of this
Section and Chapter, and provided such use and location has
received prior, separate zoning authorization as required by and in
Section
515.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.050
AO:715
compliance with Chapter 405, to the extent permitted by law. In
such circumstances where any new wireless structure application
is permitted in the Rights-of-Way, such use shall be subject to
reasonable regulations or conditions and including any applicable
specifications, compensation, and other terms established by the
City in such approval or agreement as necessary or appropriate to
preserve the purposes of this Section and Chapter.
4. All Other Wireless In ROW. Any wireless Facility located on an
Existing Structure but not meeting the requirements of
Subsections (I)(2) or (3) above, may be approved, subject to
conditions as may be imposed consistent with the purposes of this
Section, only upon approval by the Council upon a determination by
the Council that such wireless Facility is: (1) in the public interest
to provide a needed service to persons within the City, (2) cannot
feasibly meet all of the requirements of a "Small Wireless" but
varies from such requirements to the minimum extent necessary,
(3) does not negatively impact appearance or property values in
light of the location, design, and circumstances to be approved, (4)
does not create any reasonable safety risk, and (5) complies with all
zoning, ROW, and other applicable requirements.
5. Wireless Facility Compensation. Unless otherwise established by
the City Council, compensation to the City shall be as follows unless
otherwise lawfully provided for in the agreement authorizing such
use:
a. If the Small Wireless Facility is to be located on a City owned
structure, a pole attachment agreement or other authorization
shall be required with terms including insurance,
indemnification, and a monthly payment of two hundred dollars
($200.00) per attachment or such other compensation as may
be lawfully provided for in such agreement or authorization;
b. Pursuant to its authority including under Section 67.1830(6)(f),
RSMo., and as may be authorized by Section 67.5094(11),
RSMo., the ROW User wishing to install Small Wireless
Facilities within the Rights-of-Way shall also pay to the City, in
addition to the fees herein, a one-time administrative and
zoning fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per each wireless
Antenna installation to partly cover the City's costs and risks,
including as may relate to the use of City Rights-of-Way.
6. Application Requirements. Any application including one (1) or
more wireless Antennas or Facilities shall include all requirements:
(1) for installation of any Facilities in the ROW as set forth in this
Chapter, (2) of this Section, and (3) for installation of wireless
Antennas and Facilities set forth in the Uniform Wireless
Communications Infrastructure Deployment Act (Sections 67.5090,
et seq., RSMo.), Zoning Code, and other applicable law including
written proof of consent of landowner (copy of the ROW Use
Section
515.050
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
515.050
AO:716
Agreement) and of structure owner (document authorizing use of
the structure).
J. Limited Space. The City shall have the power to prohibit or limit the
placement of new or additional equipment or Facilities in the Rights-of-
Way if there is insufficient space to accommodate all of the requests of
potential ROW Users, based on the public interest, public health and
safety, the public's priority needs for the particular service, the
condition of the Rights-of-Way, the time of year with respect to essential
utilities, the protection of existing equipment, and future plans for City
projects in the public interest.
K. Exclusion Of Certain Locations/Facilities. To the extent not prohibited
by applicable law, prior to its installation of any Facilities in the Rightsof-
Way, and after Applicant provides the City with its proposed plans,
the City may, in its discretion, designate certain locations or Facilities in
the Rights-of-Way to be excluded from use by the ROW User, including,
but not limited to, ornamental or similar specially-designed street lights
or other Facilities or locations which, in the reasonable judgment of the
Director, do not have electrical service adequate or appropriate for the
provider's Facilities, or cannot safely bear the weight or wind loading
thereof, or any other Facility or location that in the reasonable
judgment of the Director is incompatible with the proposed Facilities, or
would be rendered unsafe or unstable by the installation. The Director
may further exclude certain other Facilities that have been designated
or planned for other use or are not otherwise available for use by the
ROW User due to engineering, technological, proprietary, legal, or
other limitations or restrictions as may be reasonably determined by
the City. In the event such exclusions conflict with the reasonable
requirements of the ROW User, the City will cooperate in good faith
with the ROW User to attempt to find suitable alternatives, if available,
provided that the City shall not be required to incur financial cost nor
require the City to acquire new locations for the ROW User.
L. Location, Type, And Design Of Facilities Subject To Approval. The
design, location, and nature of all Facilities shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Director. Such review shall be on a nondiscriminatory
basis in application of City policy and approvals shall not
be unreasonably withheld. Except as provided herein, all Facilities
constructed after the date of this Chapter shall be placed underground,
and in conduit, where capable. City height limitations, applicable
zoning restrictions, and general City policies with regard to all users of
the Rights-of-Way shall also be applicable to all Facilities. The Director
may establish such regulations or policies as may be deemed necessary
or appropriate to affect this provision.
M. Guarantee Of Work. Every Person to whom an Excavation Permit has
been granted or otherwise performed Excavations, shall guarantee for
a period of four (4) years the restoration of the Rights-of-Way in the area
where such Person conducted an Excavation and performed the
restoration. Such Person shall guarantee and pay for the restoration of
Section
515.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.050
AO:717
the Rights-of-Way against sagging, buckling, deterioration, and other
premature failures of the restoration. During said guarantee period,
the ROW User shall, upon notification from the Director, correct all
restoration, Excavation, or work to the extent necessary, using any
method as required by the Director. All repairs shall be completed
within two (2) weeks after the street is cut (not including days during
which work cannot be done because of circumstances constituting
force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonable or
unreasonable) unless a two (2) week time extension is authorized by
the Director. In the event the ROW User is required to perform new
restoration pursuant to the foregoing guarantee, the Director shall have
the authority to extend the guarantee period for such new restoration
for up to an additional forty-eight (48) months, or other greater period
allowed by law, from the date of the new restoration, if the Director
determines there was action by the ROW User not to comply with the
conditions of the Excavation Permit and any restoration requirements.
The guarantee period shall be applicable to failure of the pavement
surface as well as failure below the pavement surface.
N. Barricades And Lights.
1. Generally. No person shall make any Excavation in, on, across or
adjoining any Rights-of-Way and shall leave such Excavation open
and unguarded. Warning devices shall be placed in accordance
with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
2. Removal, Etc. No unauthorized person shall remove, break, or
extinguish any lantern or danger Digna 1 which has been placed on
any Rights-of-Way to protect persons against accidences.
O. Limit Number Of ROW Users. To the extent not prohibited by law, the
City may limit the number of users in the Rights-of-Way in a
competitively neutral manner, based upon, but not necessarily limited
to, specific local considerations such as:
1. The capacity of the Rights-of-Way to accommodate current or
future Facilities, public improvements, or public use;
2. The impact on the community of the volume of Facilities in the
Rights-of-Way;
3. The disruption arising from the use of or numerous Excavations of
the Rights-of-Way; or
4. Any other consideration based upon the interests of the public
safety and welfare.
P. Interference Control. The Person performing Excavation shall cause the
Excavation to be done with the least possible injury to the pavement,
sidewalk, curbing, parkway, or other surface and shall place the
materials from the Excavation where they will cause the least possible
inconvenience to the public and permit the uninterrupted passage of
Section
515.050
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
515.050
AO:718
Section 515.060. Permit Denial. [Ord. No. 17-40 § 2, 10-17-2017]
water along the gutters. The width of the Excavation shall be no greater
than is necessary for doing the work. No Person shall open or encumber
more of the Rights-of-Way than is reasonably necessary to complete the
Excavation or ROW Work in the most expeditious manner or allow an
Excavation to remain open longer than is necessary to complete the
work.
Q. Erosion Control. Before new Excavation or construction is commenced
and until sodding, planting, concreting, paving, or other final surfacing
is in place, which will avoid washing or spreading of dirt and mud onto
other property, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, streets, and the Rights-of-
Way, the Person performing Excavation shall erect and maintain
approved temporary erosion control measures to prevent such washing
or spreading of materials. At the end of each day and as required
throughout the day during the course of Excavating or construction,
dirt and mud on the sidewalks, curbs, gutters, streets, and the Rightsof-
Way resulting from work must be removed.
R. Mapping Of Facilities. Upon completion of the ROW work involving
installation of new Facilities, the ROW User shall supply the City copies
of as-built and detailed maps showing the exact location of Facilities
installed in the ROW.
A. The Director may deny an application for a Permit if:
1. To the extent permitted by law, the Person does not have a current
Franchise, License, or Rights-of-Way Use Agreement, or other
authorization with the City.
2. The ROW User, or any Persons acting on the behalf of the ROW
User, fails to provide all the necessary information requested by the
City for managing the Rights-of-Way.
3. The ROW User, or any Persons acting on the behalf of the ROW
User, including contractors or subcontractors, has a history of noncompliance
or permitting non-compliance within the City. For
purposes of this Section, "history of non-compliance or permitting
non-compliance within the City" shall include where the ROW User,
or any Persons acting on the behalf of the ROW User, including
contractors or subcontractors, has failed to return the Rights-of-
Way to its previous condition under a previous Permit, or has
violated terms, or is in violation of terms of the ROW Users'
Franchise, Rights-of-Way Use Agreement, License, or other
authorization with the City.
4. The City has provided the ROW User with a reasonable,
competitively neutral, and non-discriminatory justification for
requiring an alternative method for performing the Excavation or
Facilities Maintenance identified in the Permit application, or a
Section
515.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.060
AO:719
Section 515.070. Permit Revocation. [Ord. No. 17-40 § 2,
10-17-2017]
Section 515.080. Relocation Of Facilities. [Ord. No. 17-40 § 2,
10-17-2017]
reasonable alternative route that will not result in additional
installation expense of more than ten percent (10%) to the ROW
User or a declination of service quality.
5. Any other violations or non-compliance caused by or through the
ROW User of any applicable City, State or Federal law or
regulation, except where such violation is prohibited by applicable
law for being a basis for denial.
6. The failure to comply with applicable City ordinances, or any other
violation, unsafe conditions or damage or threatened harm to the
Rights-of-Way or public, except where such circumstance would
otherwise not constitute a lawful basis for denial of a Permit.
A. The Director may, after reasonable notice and an opportunity to cure,
revoke a Permit without fee refund, but only in the event of a
substantial breach of the terms and material conditions of the Permit. A
substantial breach by a ROW User includes but is not limited to:
1. A material violation of a provision of the Permit;
2. An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the
Permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or
deceit upon the City or its citizens;
3. A material misrepresentation of fact in the Permit application;
4. A failure to complete work by the date specified in the Permit,
unless a Permit extension is obtained, or unless the failure to
complete the work is due to reasons beyond the ROW User's
control;
5. A failure to correct, within the time specified by the City, work that
does not conform to applicable national safety codes, industry
construction standards, or local safety codes, upon inspection and
notification by the City of the faulty condition; or
6. Such other lawful reasons.
A. Required By City. The ROW User shall promptly remove, relocate, or
adjust any Facilities located in the Rights-of-Way as directed by the City
when such is required by public necessity, or public convenience and
security require it, or such other findings in the public interest that may
require relocation, adjustment, or removal at the cost of the ROW User.
Such removal, relocation, or adjustment shall be performed by the ROW
User within the time frames established by the City and at the ROW
Section
515.060
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
515.080
AO:720
Section 515.090. ROW User Responsibilities And Requirements.
[Ord. No. 17-40 § 2, 10-17-2017]
User's sole expense without any expense to the City, its employees,
agents, or authorized contractors and shall be specifically subject to
rules, regulations, and schedules of the City pertaining to such. The
ROW User shall proceed with relocations with due diligence upon
notice by the City to begin relocation.
B. Required By Third-Party. The ROW User shall upon request of any other
Person requesting relocation of Facilities and holding a validly issued
building or moving permit of the City, and within a reasonable period of
time and not less than forty-eight (48) hours prior to the date upon
which said Person intends to exercise its rights under said permit,
thereupon temporarily raise, lower or relocate its wires or other
Facilities as may be required for the Person to exercise the rights under
the permit, and the ROW User may require such Person to make
payment in advance for any expenses incurred by said ROW User
pursuant to said Person's request.
C. ROW User Responsible For Damage. Any damages suffered by the City,
its agents or its contractors to the extent caused by the ROW User's
failure to timely relocate, remove or adjust its Facilities, or failure to
properly relocate, remove, or adjust such Facilities, shall be borne by
the ROW User. Where the ROW User shall fail to relocate Facilities as
required by the City, the City may, but shall not be required to, upon
notice to ROW User remove the obstructing Facilities with or without
further delay and ROW User shall bear all responsibility and liability for
the consequences therefrom, and the City shall bear no responsibility to
ROW User or others for damage resulting from such removal.
A. Insurance; Exceptions. Except as provided in this Section, each ROW
User shall provide, at its sole expense, and maintain during the term of
any ROW Use Agreement or Franchise or anytime the ROW User has
Facilities in the ROW, commercial general liability insurance with a
reputable, qualified, and financially sound company licensed to do
business in the State of Missouri, and unless otherwise approved by the
City, with a rating by Best of not less than "A," that shall protect the
ROW User, the City, and the City's officials, officers, and employees
from claims which may arise from such use of the ROW, whether such
operations are by the ROW User, its officers, directors, employees and
agents, or any contractors or subcontractors of the ROW User. This
liability insurance shall include, but shall not be limited to, protection
against claims arising from bodily and personal injury and damage to
property, resulting from all ROW User operations, products, services or
use of automobiles, or construction equipment. The amount of
insurance for single limit coverage applying to bodily and personal
injury and property damage shall be in no event less than the individual
and combined sovereign immunity limits established by Section
537.610, RSMo., for political subdivisions; provided that nothing herein
Section
515.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.090
AO:721
shall be deemed to waive the City's sovereign immunity. An
endorsement which states that the City as an additional insured with
full and equivalent coverage as the insured under the insured's policy
and stating that the policy shall not be cancelled or materially modified
so as to be out of compliance with the requirements of this Section, or
not renewed without thirty (30) days' advance written notice of such
event being given to the Director, along with copies of the policy and
all other documentation, shall be provided. If the Person is self-insured,
it shall provide the City proof of compliance regarding its ability to
self-insure and proof of its ability to provide coverage in the above
amounts. Any self-insurance or deductible above fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) must be declared to and pre-approved by the City. The
insurance requirements in this Section or otherwise shall not apply to
a ROW User to the extent and for such period as the ROW User is
exempted from such requirements pursuant to Section 67.1830(6)(a),
RSMo., and has on file with the City Clerk an affidavit certifying that
ROW User has twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00) in net assets
and is otherwise therefore so exempted unless otherwise provided by a
ROW Use Agreement or Franchise. The City reserves the right to waive
any and all requirements under this Section when deemed to be in the
public interest.
B. Performance Bond; Exceptions. Except as otherwise may be required by
law for ROW Users who have on file with the City Clerk an affidavit
certifying that the ROW User has twenty-five million dollars
($25,000,000.00) in net assets and is otherwise therefore so exempted,
the Person shall at all times during the term of the Excavation Permit,
and for four (4) years thereafter, maintain a performance and
maintenance bond in a form approved by the City Attorney. The amount
of the bond shall be twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or the
value of the restoration as determined by the Director, whichever is
greater, conditioned upon the Person's faithful performance of the
provisions, terms, and conditions conferred by this Chapter. Unless
otherwise established in the Excavation Permit, an annual bond in an
amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) automatically
renewed yearly during this period shall satisfy the requirement of this
Section. The City shall be entitled to recover under the terms of such
bond the full amount of any loss and damage occasioned from violation
of the Excavation Permit or provisions of this Chapter. Copies of the
performance bond and all other documentation demonstrating
compliance with this requirement shall be provided to the City to be on
file with the City Clerk.
C. Indemnification. Every ROW User, as a condition of use of the Rights-of-
Way, shall at its sole cost and expense fully indemnify, protect, defend
(with counsel acceptable to the City) and hold harmless the City, its
municipal officials, officers, employees and agents, from and against
any and all claims, demands, suits, proceedings, and actions, liability
and judgment by other Persons for damages, losses, costs, and
expenses, including attorney fees, arising, directly or indirectly, in
Section
515.090
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
515.090
AO:722
whole or in part, from the action or inaction of the ROW User, its
agents, representatives, employees, contractors, subcontractors or any
other Person for whose acts the ROW User may be liable, in
constructing, operating, maintaining, repairing, restoring or removing
Facilities, or use of the Rights-of-Way or the activities performed, or
failed to be performed, by the ROW User under this Chapter or
applicable law, or otherwise, except to the extent arising from or caused
by the sole or gross negligence or willful misconduct of the City, its
elected officials, officers, employees, agents or contractors. Nothing
herein shall be deemed to prevent the City, or any agent from
participating in the defense of any litigation by their own counsel
at their own expense. Such participation shall not, under any
circumstances, relieve the Person from the duty to defend against
liability or its duty to pay any judgment entered against the City or its
agents. This indemnification shall survive the expiration or termination
of any ROW Use Agreement, Franchise, License, Permit, or other
authorization for a period of five (5) years after the effective date of
expiration or termination.
D. ROW User Responsible For Costs. The ROW User shall be responsible
for all reasonable costs borne by the City that are directly associated
with ROW User's installation, Maintenance, repair, operation, use, and
replacement of its Facilities in the Rights-of-Way that are not otherwise
accounted for as part of the Permit fee established pursuant to this
Chapter, to the extent permitted by law. All such costs shall be itemized
and the City's books and records related to these costs shall be made
available upon request of the ROW User.
E. Maintenance Of Facilities. Each Row User shall maintain its Facilities in
good and safe condition and in a manner that complies with all
applicable Federal, State, and local requirements.
F. Tree And Landscape Protection. Unless otherwise approved in writing
by the City, a ROW User shall neither remove, cut, nor damage any
trees or other landscaping, or their roots, in and along the ROW and
public places of the City. Tree trimming and landscape pruning may be
permitted to occur only after prior written notice to the City of the
extent of trimming and pruning to be performed and the prior written
approval thereof by the City. The type and extent of trimming and
pruning shall be in accordance with the requirements of the City. In the
event the Person severely disturbs or damages any tree or other
landscaping in the Rights-of-Way to the detriment of its health and
safety, the Person shall be required to remove and replace such of like
size at the Person's cost. The location, size, and species of any
replacement landscaping shall be as approved by the Director, unless
the Director approves an equivalent monetary payment in lieu of
replanting. In reviewing any Permit application, the City may require
the Applicant to directionally bore around or otherwise avoid
disturbance to any tree or landscaping, existing Facility, or other
protected area in the Rights-of-Way.
Section
515.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.090
AO:723
Section 515.100. Abandoned Facilities. [Ord. No. 17-40 § 2,
10-17-2017]
G. Zoning, Safety, And Building Code Compliance. ROW Users shall at all
times be subject to the lawful exercise of the police powers of the City,
including but not limited to all police powers regarding zoning,
supervision of the restoration of the Rights-of-Way, building and safety
regulations, and control of the Rights-of-Way. Installation of all Facilities
in the Rights-of-Way are subject to and must be in compliance with all
zoning and safety and building code requirements. For applications for
installation of any Facility in the Rights-of-Way: (1) the most restrictive
adjacent underlying zoning district classification shall apply unless
otherwise specifically zoned and designated on the official zoning map,
and (2) no application shall be submitted for approval without attaching
the City's consent to use the Rights-of-Way for the specific construction
application in accordance with Chapter 67, RSMo. No action or
omission of the City shall operate as a future waiver of any rights of the
City under this Chapter. Except where rights are expressly granted or
waived by a Permit, they are reserved, whether or not expressly
enumerated.
H. Law Compliance. Each ROW User shall comply with all applicable
Federal and State laws and regulations and rules as well as all City
ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations heretofore and hereafter
adopted or established.
I. No Cause Of Action Against The City. A ROW User shall have no
damages remedy or monetary recourse whatsoever against the City for
any loss, cost, expense, or damage arising from any of the provisions or
requirements of any ROW Use Agreement or Franchise, or because of
the enforcement thereof by said City, or from the use of the Rights-of-
Way. Nothing herein shall preclude the ROW User from seeking
injunctive or declaratory judgment relief against the City where such
relief is otherwise available and the requirements therefor are
otherwise satisfied.
J. Responsible For Subcontractors. If Excavation or Facilities
Maintenance is being done for the ROW User by another Person, a
subcontractor or otherwise, the ROW User shall be responsible for
ensuring that the Excavation or Facilities Maintenance of said Person is
performed consistent with its Permit and applicable law (including that
the contractor shall be properly licensed under the State of Missouri
and local ordinances) and shall be responsible for promptly correcting
acts or omissions by said Person.
A. Abandoned Facility Requirements. ROW Users owning Facilities in the
Rights-of-Way shall not Abandon or otherwise cease to use the Facilities
for longer than one (1) year unless, prior to doing so, the ROW Users
satisfies one (1) of the following:
Section
515.090
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
515.100
AO:724
Section 515.110. Inspections, Stop Work Orders, Appeals, And
Penalties. [Ord. No. 17-40 § 2, 10-17-2017]
1. Provides written notice of such intention, and removes its Facilities
in compliance with all requirements and replaces or restores any
damage or disturbance caused by the removal at its own expense;
2. Provide information satisfactory to the City that the ROW User's
obligations for its Facilities in the Rights-of-Way will be lawfully
assumed by another authorized ROW User, including proof of a
Franchise, ROW Use Agreement or License; or
3. Submit to the City a proposal and instruments for transferring
ownership of its Facilities to the City. If the ROW User proceeds
under this Subsection, the City may, at its option: (1) purchase the
equipment, (2) require the ROW User, at its own expense, to
remove it, or (3) require the ROW User to post a bond in an amount
sufficient to reimburse the City for reasonable anticipated costs to
be incurred to remove the Facilities, except as otherwise provided
herein.
B. Nuisance. Facilities Abandoned or otherwise left unused in violation of
this Chapter are deemed to be a nuisance. The City may exercise any
remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited
to: (a) abating the nuisance, (b) taking possession and ownership of the
Facility and restoring it to a usable function, or (c) requiring the
removal of the Facility by the ROW User.
A. Inspections. All ROW work and Facilities shall be subject to inspection
by the City and the supervision of all Federal, State, and local
authorities having jurisdiction in such matters to ensure compliance
with all applicable laws, ordinances, departmental rules and
regulations, and the ROW Permit.
B. Stop Work Orders. The Director shall have full access to all portions of
the ROW work and may issue stop work orders and corrective orders to
prevent unauthorized work or substandard work as established herein.
Except in cases of an emergency or with approval of the Director, no
ROW work may be done in violation of a stop work order issued by the
Director. Such orders:
1. May be delivered personally or by certified mail to the address(es)
listed on the application for the ROW Permit or the Person in
charge of the construction site at the time of delivery;
2. Shall state that substandard work or work not authorized by the
ROW Permit is being carried out, summarize the substandard or
unauthorized work, and provide a period of no longer than thirty
(30) days to cure the problem, which cure period may be immediate
if certain activities must be stopped to protect the public safety;
and
Section
515.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
515.110
AO:725
Section 515.120. Reservation Of Rights. [Ord. No. 17-40 § 2,
10-17-2017]
In addition to any rights specifically reserved to the City by this Chapter,
the City reserves unto itself every right and power which is required to be
reserved by a provision of any ordinance under any registration, Permit, or
other authorization granted under this Chapter, and as may be authorized
by Chapter 67, RSMo., and other authority applicable to regulation of the
use of the Rights-of-Way. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth
herein, the provisions of this Chapter shall not infringe upon the rights of
any Person pursuant to any applicable State or Federal Statutes, including,
but not limited to any right that may exist to occupy the Rights-of-Way.
Chapter 520
FENCES AND WALLS
Section 520.010. General Provisions. [Ord. No. 08-91 §1, 1-12-2009;
Ord. No. 17-13 § 1, 4-4-2017]
3. May be enforced by equitable action in Circuit Court and in such
case the Person responsible for the substandard or unauthorized
work shall be liable for all costs and expenses incurred by the City
in enforcing such orders, including reasonable attorneys' fees, in
addition to any and all penalties established in this Chapter.
C. Appeals. Unless otherwise required by law, the review procedures set
forth in Chapter 430 shall govern appeals by an aggrieved Person of a
final action of the Director or any other City official, officer, Council,
Board, or commission that are claimed by an aggrieved Person to be
unlawful or an unconstitutional taking of property without
compensation. To the fullest extent permitted by law, the review
procedures of Article VIII shall be exhausted before any action may be
filed in any court against the City or its officers, employees, boards,
officials or commissions.
D. Violations; Penalties. In addition to any other penalties and remedies
for violations that may exist in law or equity, any Person that violates
any provision of this Chapter shall be subject to such penalties as set
forth in Section 100.220 of the City Code per day for each and every day
the violation exists or continues.
A. Scope. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the construction,
installation, reinstallation, alteration, replacement, repair, location and
maintenance of fences and walls.
B. Intent. The purpose of this Chapter is to provide minimum
requirements to safeguard life, health, property and public welfare, by
regulating and controlling the construction and location of fences and
walls to provide an aesthetically compatible and pleasing urban
Section
515.110
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
520.010
AO:726
Section 520.020. Applicability. [Ord. No. 08-91 §1, 1-12-2009; Ord.
No. 15-26 § 1, 9-28-201594; Ord. No. 17-13 § 1, 4-4-2017]
Section 520.030. Definitions. [Ord. No. 08-91 §1, 1-12-2009; Ord.
No. 17-13 § 1, 4-4-2017]
For the purposes of interpreting the regulations found here, the certain
words and terms shall have the following meanings:
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in a floodplain within a
community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year, as delineated in the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for
the shelter or enclosure of persons or property.
environment and edify the City of Republic's position as a livable and
desirable community.
A. Jurisdiction. This Chapter shall apply to all real property within the
corporate limits of the City of Republic, Missouri.
B. Required. Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct,
install, substantially alter, or replace a fence or wall, or to cause any
such work to be done, shall first make application to the City's building
official and obtain the required permit.
C. Prohibited. No individual or entity performing any of the actions listed
in Subsection (B) on behalf of the owner or authorized agent of property
shall do so without first verifying with the owner or authorized agent
that the required permit has been issued and is available for inspection
by the City's building official during the duration of the work being
performed. The individual or entity performing the work shall maintain
a copy of the permit at the worksite for inspection purposes and shall be
responsible for performing the work in compliance with the
requirements of this Chapter and any other applicable provisions of the
City Code.
D. Exemptions.
1. All real property that is zoned as Agricultural (AG) or used as a
public utility facility or other public use shall be exempt from the
provisions of this Chapter.
2. Any fence being repaired or replaced with the same type and size of
material shall be exempt as long as the existing fence is not nonconforming.
E. Violation. Any violation of this Section shall be punished pursuant to
Section 520.060.
94.Editor's Note: Section 1 of this ordinance provided for the redesignation of former
Subsection (C) as Subsection (D).
Section
520.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
520.030
AO:727
BUILDING LINE — The line established by laws, beyond which a building
shall not extend, except as specifically provided by law.
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The officer or other designated authority charged
with the administration and enforcement of this Chapter or a duly
authorized representative.
EASEMENT — That portion of land or property reserved for present or
future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the
property.
ELECTRIC — Any material comprising a fence or wall that carries an
electric current intended to generate an electric shock upon contact,
excluding fences comprised of individual wires specifically designed for
conditioning domesticated animals owned as pets and nuisance-rodents to
recognize certain boundaries.
FENCE — An enclosure, wall or partition constructed of approved
materials, which encloses or divides a lot, parcel or tract of land.
FENCE HEIGHT — Any fence or wall measured from the finished grade to
the top of said fence or wall.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP — An official map of a community, on
which the Administrator has delineated both the special flood hazard areas
and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water
from any source.
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR — The officer or other designated
authority charged with the administration and implementation of flood
damage prevention, pursuant to Chapter 420 of the Republic City Code.
LOT — A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use
permitted in this Chapter, including one (1) main building together with
its accessory buildings, the open spaces and parking spaces required by
the ordinance and having its principal frontage upon a street or upon an
officially approved place.
LOT LINE — A line dividing one lot from another, or from a street or any
public way.
ACCESS EASEMENT — That portion of land or property reserved for
present or future use by a person or agency to access utility or drainage
easements or adjacent properties. The easement shall be permitted to
be for use on the lot or lots.
1.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — That portion of land or property reserved for
present or future stormwater run-off. The easement shall be permitted
to be for use under or on the lot or lots.
2.
UTILITY EASEMENT — That portion of land or property reserved for
present or future utility, such as electric, gas, water, etc. The easement
shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above a lot or lots.
3.
Section
520.030
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
520.030
AO:728
OWNER — Any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the property.
PERMIT — An official document or certificate issued by the authority having
jurisdiction that authorizes performance of a specified activity.
PERSON — An individual, heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, and
also includes a firm, partnership or corporation, its or their successors or
assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid.
PUBLIC WAY — Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially
unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or
otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.
REPAIR — The substantial reconstruction or renewal of an existing fence or
wall for the purpose of maintenance.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
more or less ground.
WALL — See "fence."
WALL HEIGHT — See "fence height."
WORKMANLIKE — Executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb,
level, square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work.
YARD — An open space, other than a court, unobstructed from the ground
to the sky, on the same lot, which a building is situated.
FRONT — The open space on the same lot with a residential or
commercial building, between the front wall of the building and the line
of that wall extended to the side property lines of the lot and the front
property line of the lot nearest the street on which the building fronts.
1.
REAR — The open space on the same lot with a residential or
commercial building, between the rear wall of the building and the line
of that wall extended to the side property lines of the lot, and the rear
property line.
2.
SIDE (CORNER LOT — ADJACENT TO STREET) — The open space on
the same lot with a residential or commercial building, between the
sidewall of the building and the side property line of the lot nearest
the adjacent public street and extending from the front yard to the rear
yard.
3.
SIDE (CORNER LOT) — The open space on the same lot with a
residential or commercial building, between the sidewall of the building
and the side property line and extending from the front yard to the rear
yard.
4.
SIDE (REGULAR LOT) — The open space on the same lot with a
residential or commercial building, between the sidewall of the building
and the side property line and extending from the front yard to the rear
yard.
5.
Section
520.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
520.030
AO:729
Section 520.040. Fences And Walls. [Ord. No. 08-91 §1, 1-12-2009;
Ord. No. 09-10 §1, 4-13-2009; Ord. No. 10-11 §1, 4-12-2010; Ord.
No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016; Ord. No. 17-13 § 1, 4-4-2017]
FRONT HALF OF SIDE — The open space on the same lot with a
residential or commercial building, between the sidewall of the building
and the side property line and extending from the midpoint of the
sidewall to the front yard.
6.
REAR HALF OF SIDE — The open space on the same lot with a
residential or commercial building, between the sidewall of the building
and the side property line and extending from the midpoint of the
sidewall to the rear yard.
7.
A. Fences and walls constructed within the City limits shall comply with
the provisions of this Section and be constructed in workmanlike
fashion.
B. Materials.
1. General. All materials, including fasteners, supports, ornamental
decorations, etc., used in construction of fences and walls as
defined herein, shall be resistant to the elements.
2. Prohibited. The following materials shall be prohibited in the
construction or use with fences and walls as defined herein:
a. Chain link (front yard only);
b. Metals, other than wrought iron or its synthetic substitutes;
c. Razor wire (concertina wire);
d. Barb wire;
e. Electric;
f. Cinder block; and
g. Tires, pallets or other material not specifically designed to be
used as a fence.
3. Exceptions.
a. Security fences located in commercial or manufacturing
zoning districts may be comprised of chain link and barbed or
razor wire and may be located in the front, side, and rear yards
of the property, subject to approval by Community
Development Department staff. All barbed or razor wire shall
be placed no less than seven (7) feet above the finished grade.
C. Construction Requirements.
Section
520.030
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
520.040
AO:730
1. Fences and walls can be installed up to the property line; but all
posts, bases and other structural parts shall be located completely
within the boundaries of the lot on which it is located.
2. All fences and walls erected adjacent to a public street shall have
the finished side of the fences facing toward the street.
3. In residential zoning districts, fences and walls located in the front
yard, as defined herein, shall be constructed so as to have a fourinch,
maximum open-spaced, picketed-type pattern.
4. The owner and/or occupant of the property shall maintain his or her
fence or wall in good condition at all times. Fences or walls found to
be in a deteriorated condition and/or in need of repair shall be
subject to the provisions of Chapter 425 of the Republic City Code.
5. Fences or walls shall not be installed in or through a stormwater
detention basin, retention pond, drainage easement or area of
special flood hazard, unless such fences or walls are formally
authorized by the City's Floodplain Administrator through the
issuance of a permit.
6. Fences or walls installed in or through a utility easement shall be
installed at the property owner's risk, and the property owner shall
be responsible for the cost of repair to the fence or wall removed or
damaged by a utility company or the City exercising its rights
under the terms of the easement.
7. Fences or walls erected at the intersection of streets or driveways
shall not be located within a reserved sight triangle, as indicated by
Section 405.910 of the Republic City Code.
8. Exceptions to height requirements in the side yard may be granted
by City staff responsible for plan review where irregular sidewalls
or other unusual circumstances exist.
9. Any application for the construction of a fence or wall that is
proposed to exceed seven (7) nominal feet in height, in residential
zoning districts, shall be constructed in accordance with the design
criteria listed below; or by an alternate design prepared by a
design professional registered in the State of Missouri; or by a
design deemed acceptable by the Building Official.
a. Fence posts shall be a minimum of six-inch-by-six-inch nominal
wood; and
b. Minimum fence post pier shall be twelve (12) inches in
diameter with a minimum depth of thirty-six (36) inches into
undisturbed soil; and
c. The post shall be set into the post pier a minimum of thirty (30)
inches; and
Section
520.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
520.040
AO:731
Section 520.050. Non-Conforming Fences And Walls. [Ord. No.
08-91 §1, 1-12-2009; Ord. No. 17-13 § 1, 4-4-2017]
d. Fence posts shall be a maximum of six (6) feet on center; and
e. Fence rails shall be a minimum of three (3) each two-inch-byfour-
inch nominal wood; and
f. Maximum fence height shall be eight (8) feet.
10. All fence or wall construction with electric materials that carry an
electric current intended to generate an electric shock upon
contact shall install warning signage on the fence. There shall be at
least one (1) clearly visible warning sign located on the exterior of
each side of the fence and every twenty-five (25) feet of the entire
length of the portion of the fence comprised of electric materials as
described above. Each warning sign shall clearly and legibly
indicate that an electric fence is in use and have an area no less
than twenty-five (25) square inches on either side.
11. All fences or walls constructed with electric materials that carry an
electric current intended to generate an electric shock upon
contact shall be located completely within the boundaries of a
separate fence or wall composed of non-electric materials and be
installed at a height no higher than the height of the separate fence
or wall which encloses it.
12. In no case shall a fence encroach into a public space or into a
sidewalk. All fences shall remain a minimum of twelve (12) inches
from the closest sidewalk edge.
13. In no case shall a fence enclose or restrict access to a water meter.
14. In cases where fences are not erected on property lines due to
easement or other restrictions, a pedestrian gate shall be installed
within the fence that allows access to the unenclosed space for
maintenance activities.
D. Fence And Wall Height Requirements.
Maximum Allowable Fence/Wall Height
Fence Location
All Residential
Zoned Districts
(R1-L, R1-M,
R1-MH, R1-H,
R1-Z, R-2, R-3)
All Commercial
Zoned Districts
(C-0, C-1, C-2,
M-1, M-2)
Front yard and front half
of side yard
48 inches 12 feet
Rear yard and rear half of
side yard
8 feet 12 feet
Section
520.040
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
520.050
AO:732
Section 520.060. Violations — Penalties. [Ord. No. 08-91 §1,
1-12-2009; Ord. No. 17-13 § 1, 4-4-2017]
Chapter 525
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY DEPLOYMENT
Section 525.010. Title And Intent. [Ord. No. 19-08, 6-18-2019]
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Small Wireless
Facility Deployment Code," and it is intended to establish a uniform and
consistent approach to handling requests for the deployment of small
wireless facilities in the City, consistent with State and Federal law
including Sections 67.5110 to 67.5121, RSMo., (while in effect) and
Sections 67.1830 to 67.1846, RSMo. City ordinances shall apply to small
wireless deployments except to the extent inconsistent with this Chapter.
This Chapter shall apply to all Persons desiring to construct, operate, or
maintain Small Wireless Facilities within the City.
Section 525.020. Definitions. [Ord. No. 19-08, 6-18-2019]
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall mean:
ANTENNA — Communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless
services.
APPLICABLE CODES — Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or
mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or
the City's amendments to such codes enacted to prevent physical property
A. Authority To Continue. Any fence or wall which does not comply with
the applicable requirements may be continued so long as it remains
otherwise lawful.
B. Enlargement, Repair, Alteration. Any non-conforming fence or wall
shall not be enlarged, repaired or altered without obtaining a building
permit and shall thereafter conform to the regulations of this Chapter.
C. Moving. Non-conforming fences or walls shall not be moved in whole or
part for any distance whatsoever to any other location on the same lot
or any other lot unless the entire fence or wall shall thereafter conform
to the regulations of this Chapter.
A. Unlawful Acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
install, alter, repair or move a fence or wall; or cause the same to be
done, in conflict with or in violation of any provisions of this Chapter.
B. Violation — Penalties. Any person found guilty of violating this Chapter
shall be penalized in accordance with Section 100.220 of the Republic
City Code.
Section
520.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
525.020
AO:733
damage or reasonably foreseeable injury to persons to the extent not
inconsistent with Sections 67.5110 to 67.5121, RSMo., (while in effect).
APPLICANT — Any person who submits an application and is a wireless
provider.
APPLICATION — A request submitted by an applicant to the City for a
permit to collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless
support structure, or to approve the installation, modification, or
replacement of a utility pole.
AUTHORITY or CITY — Republic, Missouri.
AUTHORITY POLE or CITY POLE — A utility pole owned, managed, or
operated by or on behalf of the City, but such term shall not include
municipal electric utility distribution poles.
AUTHORITY WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A wireless support
structure owned, managed, or operated by or on behalf of the City.
COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION — To install, mount, maintain, modify,
operate, or replace small wireless facilities on or immediately adjacent to a
wireless support structure or utility pole, provided that the small wireless
facility antenna is located on the wireless support structure or utility pole.
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — The set of equipment and network
components, including wires, cables, and associated facilities used by a
cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 522(5); telecommunications
carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 153(51); a provider of information
service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 153(24); or a wireless services
provider; to provide communications services, including cable service, as
defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 522(6); telecommunications service, as defined
in 47 U.S.C. Section 153(53); an information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
Section 153(24); wireless communications service; or other one-way or twoway
communications service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER — A cable operator, as defined
in 47 U.S.C. Section 522(5); a provider of information service, as defined in
47 U.S.C. Section 153(24); a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47
U.S.C. Section 153(51); or a wireless provider.
DECORATIVE POLE — A City pole that is specially designed and placed for
aesthetic purposes.
FEE — A one-time, non-recurring charge.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — A group of buildings, properties, or sites that
are either listed in the National Register of Historic Places or formally
determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the
individual who has been delegated the authority by the Federal agency
to list properties and determine their eligibility for the National Register,
in accordance with Section VI.D.1.a.i-v of the Nationwide Programmatic
Agreement codified at 47 C.F.R. Part 1, Appendix C, or are otherwise located
in a district made subject to special design standards adopted by City
Section
525.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
525.020
AO:734
ordinance or under State law as of January 1, 2018, or subsequently enacted
for new developments.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY — A small wireless facility that meets the
following qualifications:
PERMIT — A written authorization required by the City to perform an action
or initiate, continue, or complete a project.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization, including any
government authority.
RATE — A recurring charge.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, sidewalk, alley, or similar property used for public travel, but not
including a Federal interstate highway, railroad right-of-way, or private
easement.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY — A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications.
TECHNICALLY FEASIBLE — By virtue of engineering or spectrum usage,
the proposed placement for a small wireless facility or its design or site
location can be implemented without a reduction in the functionality of the
small wireless facility.
UTILITY POLE — A pole or similar structure that is or may be used in
whole or in part by or for wireline communications, electric distribution,
lighting, traffic control, signage, or a similar function, or for the collocation
of small wireless facilities; provided, however, such term shall not include
Is not larger in dimension than twenty-four (24) inches in length, fifteen
(15) inches in width, and twelve (12) inches in height; and
1.
2. Any exterior antenna no longer than eleven (11) inches.
Each wireless provider's antenna could fit within an enclosure of no
more than six (6) cubic feet in volume; and
1.
All other equipment associated with the wireless facility, whether
ground or pole-mounted, is cumulatively no more than twenty-eight
(28) cubic feet in volume, provided that no single piece of equipment
on the utility pole shall exceed nine (9) cubic feet in volume; and no
single piece of ground mounted equipment shall exceed fifteen (15)
cubic feet in volume, exclusive of equipment required by an electric
utility or municipal electric utility to power the small wireless facility.
The following types of associated ancillary equipment shall not be included
in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, grounding equipment, power transfer
switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs and related conduit for the
connection of power and other services.
2.
Section
525.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
525.020
AO:735
wireless support structures, electric transmission structures, or breakaway
poles owned by the State Highways and Transportation Commission.
WIRELESS FACILITY — Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network,
including equipment associated with wireless communications and radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup
power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological
configuration. The term includes small wireless facilities. The term does not
include:
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER — Any person, including a
person authorized to provide telecommunications service in the State, that
builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment or
wireless facilities but that is not a wireless services provider.
WIRELESS PROVIDER — A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless
services provider.
WIRELESS SERVICES — Any services using licensed or unlicensed
spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided to the public using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER — A person who provides wireless
services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — An existing structure, such as a
monopole or tower, whether guyed or self-supporting, designed to support
or capable of supporting wireless facilities; an existing or proposed
billboard; an existing or proposed building; or other existing or proposed
structure capable of supporting wireless facilities, other than a structure
designed solely for the collocation of small wireless facilities. Such term
shall not include a utility pole.
WIRELINE BACKHAUL FACILITY — A physical transmission path, all or
part of which is within the right-of-way, used for the transport of
communication data by wire from a wireless facility to a network.
Section 525.030. Deployment Of Small Wireless Facilities And
Associated Poles In The Right-Of-Way. [Ord. No. 19-08, 6-18-2019]
The structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated;
1.
Coaxial or fiber-optic cable between wireless support structures or
utility poles;
2.
Coaxial or fiber-optic cable not directly associated with a particular
small wireless facility;
3.
4. A wireline backhaul facility.
A. The provisions of this Section shall only apply to activities of a wireless
provider within the right-of-way to deploy small wireless facilities and
associated utility poles.
Section
525.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
525.030
AO:736
B. Subject to the provisions of this Chapter and Sections 67.5110 to
67.5121, RSMo., (while in effect), a wireless provider may, as a
permitted use not subject to zoning review or approval, collocate small
wireless facilities and install, maintain, modify, operate, and replace
utility poles along, across, upon, and under the right-of-way, except that
the placement in the right-of-way of new or modified utility poles in
single-family residential zoning districts or areas zoned as historic as of
August 28, 2018, shall remain subject to any applicable zoning
requirements that are consistent with Sections 67.5090 to 67.5103,
RSMo., including but not limited to, non-discriminatory requirements
for underground utilities as set forth in the City's ordinances. In order
to maximize compliance with pre-established requirements for
placement of utility facilities underground, to the extent that
components of small wireless facilities functionally cannot be placed
underground in accordance with such requirements they shall instead
be installed in the least conspicuous location as reasonably possible
under the circumstances as determined by the Community
Development Director. Undergrounding shall not be required for
modifications or replacements for existing poles to accommodate small
wireless facilities. Small wireless facilities collocated outside the rightof-
way in property not zoned primarily for single-family residential use
shall be classified as permitted uses and not subject to zoning review or
approval. Such small wireless facilities and utility poles shall be
installed and maintained as not to obstruct or hinder the usual travel or
public safety on such right-of-way or obstruct the legal use of such
right-of-way by the City, other governmental authorities or other
authorized right-of-way users.
C. A wireless provider must obtain a permit from the City and with such
reasonable conditions as may be imposed by the City, for work in a
right-of-way that will involve excavation, affect traffic patterns, obstruct
traffic in the right-of-way, or materially impede the use of a sidewalk.
D. Each new, replacement, or modified utility pole installed in the right-ofway
shall not exceed the greater of ten (10) feet in height above the
tallest existing utility pole in place as of January 1, 2019, located within
five hundred (500) feet of the new pole in the same right-of-way, or fifty
(50) feet above ground level. New small wireless facilities in the rightof-
way shall not extend more than ten (10) feet above an existing utility
pole in place as of August 28, 2018, or for small wireless facilities on a
new utility pole, above the height permitted for a new utility pole. A
new, modified, or replacement utility pole that exceeds these height
limits shall be subject to all applicable zoning requirements that apply
to other utility poles, to the extent consistent with Sections 67.5090 to
67.5103, RSMo., and this Chapter.
E. A wireless provider shall be permitted to replace decorative poles when
necessary to collocate a small wireless facility, but any replacement
pole shall reasonably conform to the design aesthetics of the decorative
Section
525.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
525.030
AO:737
Section 525.040. Permits For Poles In Right-Of-Way And Wireless
Facilities In All Locations. [Ord. No. 19-08, 6-18-2019]
pole or poles being replaced, as determined by the Community
Development Director.
F. Subject to Subsection 525.040(C), and except for facilities excluded
from evaluation for effects on historic properties under 47 C.F.R.
Section 1.1307(a)(4) of the Federal Communications Commission rules,
a wireless provider must use appropriate and reasonable, technically
feasible, non-discriminatory, and technologically neutral design or
concealment measures in a historic district, as determined by the
Director of Community Development. Any such design or concealment
measures shall not have the effect of prohibiting any provider's
technology, nor shall any such measures be considered a part of the
small wireless facility for purposes of the size restrictions in the
definition of small wireless facility.
G. Small wireless facility collocations shall not interfere with or impair the
operation of existing utility facilities, or City, or third-party
attachments. A wireless provider shall repair, at the wireless provider's
expense, all damage to the right-of-way directly caused by the activities
of the wireless provider in the right-of-way and shall return the right-ofway
to its functional equivalence before the damage under the
competitively neutral, reasonable requirements and specifications of
the City. If the wireless provider fails to make the repairs required by
the City within a reasonable time after written notice, the City may
make those repairs and charge the wireless provider the reasonable,
documented cost of such repairs.
A. The provisions of this Section shall apply to the permitting of small
wireless facilities to be installed by or for a wireless provider in or
outside the right-of-way and to the permitting of the installation,
modification, and replacement of utility poles by a wireless provider
inside the right-of-way.
B. Wireless providers or their agents shall apply for and obtain a permit
pursuant to applicable Code and this Chapter to collocate a small
wireless facility or install a new, modified, or replacement utility pole
associated with a small wireless facility as provided in Section 525.030,
above. The City shall receive applications for process, and issue such
permits subject to the following requirements:
1. An applicant shall not be required to perform services or provide
goods unrelated to the permit, such as in-kind contributions to the
City, including reserving fiber, conduit, or pole space for the City;
2. An applicant shall not be required to provide more information to
obtain a permit than communications service providers that are not
wireless providers, provided that an applicant shall include
construction and stamped engineering drawings and information
Section
525.030
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
525.040
AO:738
demonstrating compliance with the criteria in Subdivision (9) of
this Subsection and an attestation that the small wireless facility
complies with the volumetric limitations in the definition of Small
Wireless Facility contained in Section 525.020, above;
3. An applicant shall not be required to place small wireless facilities
on any specific utility pole or category of poles or require multiple
antenna systems on a single utility pole;
4. There is no limit as to the placement of small wireless facilities by
minimum horizontal separation distances;
5. An applicant shall comply with reasonable, objective, and costeffective
concealment or safety requirements as provided herein;
6. An applicant that is not a wireless services provider shall provide
evidence of agreements or plans demonstrating that the small
wireless facilities will be operational for use by a wireless services
provider within one (1) year after the permit issuance date, unless
the City and the applicant agree to extend this period or if delay is
caused by lack of commercial power or communications transport
facilities to the site and the applicant notifies the City thereof. An
applicant that is a wireless services provider shall provide the
information required by this Subdivision by attestation;
7. Within fifteen (15) days of receiving an application, the City shall
determine and notify the applicant, in writing, whether the
application is complete. If an application is incomplete, the City
shall specifically identify the missing information in writing. The
processing deadline in Subdivision (8) of this Subsection shall be
tolled from the time the City sends the notice of incompleteness to
the time the applicant provides the missing information. That
processing deadline may also be tolled by agreement of the
applicant and the City;
8. An application for collocation shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory
basis and deemed approved if the City fails to
approve or deny the application within forty-five (45) days of
receipt of the application. An application for installation of a new,
modified, or replacement utility pole associated with a small
wireless facility shall be processed on a non-discriminatory basis
and deemed approved if the City fails to approve or deny the
application within sixty (60) days of receipt of the application;
9. The City may deny a proposed collocation of a small wireless
facility or installation, modification, or replacement of a utility pole
that meets the requirements in Subsection (B) of Section 525.030,
above, only if the action proposed in the application could
reasonably be expected to:
a. Materially interfere with the safe operation of traffic control
equipment or City-owned communications equipment;
Section
525.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
525.040
AO:739
b. Materially interfere with sight lines or clear zones for
transportation, pedestrians, or non-motorized vehicles;
c. Materially interfere with compliance with the Americans with
Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. Sections 12101 to 12213, or similar
Federal or State standards regarding pedestrian access or
movement;
d. Materially obstruct or hinder the usual travel or public safety
on the right-of-way;
e. Materially obstruct the legal use of the right-of-way by the City,
a utility, or other third party;
f. Fail to comply with reasonable and non-discriminatory spacing
requirements of general application adopted by ordinance or
regulations promulgated by the State Highways and
Transportation Commission that concern the location of
ground mounted equipment and new utility poles, subject to
wireless provider requests for exception or variance;
g. Fail to comply with applicable codes, including nationally
recognized engineering standards for utility poles or wireless
support structures;
h. Fail to comply with the reasonably objective and documented
aesthetics of a decorative pole and the applicant does not
agree to pay to match the applicable decorative elements;
i. Fail to comply with reasonable and non-discriminatory
undergrounding requirements contained in City ordinances as
of January 1, 2018, or subsequently enacted for new
developments, that require all new utility facilities in the area
to be placed underground and prohibit the installation of new
or the modification of existing utility poles in a right-of-way
without prior approval, including by wireless provider requests
for exception or variance.
10. The City shall document the complete basis for a denial, in writing,
and send the documentation to the applicant with the
communication denying an application. The applicant may cure the
deficiencies identified by the City and resubmit the application
within thirty (30) days of the denial without paying an additional
application fee. The City shall approve or deny the revised
application within thirty (30) days. Any subsequent review shall be
limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial;
11. Consolidated Application.
a. An applicant may file a consolidated application and receive a
single permit for the collocation of multiple small wireless
facilities; provided, however, the denial of one (1) or more
Section
525.040
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
525.040
AO:740
small wireless facilities in a consolidated application shall not
delay processing of any other small wireless facilities in the
same batch; and
b. An application may include up to twenty (20) separate small
wireless facilities, provided that they are for the same or
materially same design of small wireless facility being
collocated on the same or materially the same type of utility
pole or wireless support structure, and geographically
proximate. If the City receives individual applications for
approval of more than fifty (50) small wireless facilities or
consolidated applications for approval of more than seventyfive
(75) small wireless facilities within a fourteen-day period,
whether from a single applicant or multiple applicants, the City
may, upon its own request, obtain an automatic thirty-day
extension for any additional collocation or replacement or
installation application submitted during that fourteen-day
period or in the fourteen-day period immediately following the
prior fourteen-day period. The City shall promptly
communicate its request to each affected applicant. In
rendering a decision on an application for multiple small
wireless facilities, the City may approve the application as to
certain individual small wireless facilities while denying it as to
others based on applicable requirements and standards,
including those identified in this Chapter. The City's denial of
any individual small wireless facility or subset of small wireless
facilities within an application shall not be a basis to deny the
application as a whole;
12. Installation or collocation for which a permit is granted under this
Chapter shall be completed within one (1) year after the permit
issuance date unless the City and the applicant agree, in writing, to
extend this period, or the applicant notifies the City, in writing, that
the delay is caused by a lack of commercial power or
communications transport facilities to the site;
13. Approval of an application authorizes the applicant to:
a. Undertake the installation or collocation; and
b. Operate and maintain the small wireless facilities and any
associated utility pole covered by the permit for a period of ten
(10) years, which shall be renewed for equivalent durations so
long as the facilities and poles remain in compliance with the
criteria set forth in Subdivision (9) of this Section, unless the
applicant and the City agree to an extension term of less than
ten (10) years. The provisions of this paragraph shall be
subject to the right of the City to require, upon adequate notice
and at the facility owner's own expense, relocation of facilities
as may be needed in the interest of public safety and
convenience, and the applicant's right to terminate at any time;
Section
525.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
525.040
AO:741
14. Abandoned small wireless facilities shall be removed as provided in
this Chapter and Section 525.130 or an agreement, as applicable;
15. In determining whether sufficient capacity exists to accommodate
the attachment of a new small wireless facility, the City shall take
into account that any grant of access hereunder shall be subject to
a reservation to reclaim such space, when and if needed, to meet a
core utility purpose or documented plan projected at the time of
the application pursuant to a bona fide development plan; and
16. In emergency circumstances that result from a natural disaster or
accident, the City may require the owner or operator of a wireless
facility to immediately remove such facility if the wireless facility is
obstructing traffic or causing a hazard on the City's roadway, at the
expense of the owner or operator of the wireless facility. In the
event that the owner or operator of the wireless facility is unable to
immediately remove the wireless facility, the City may remove the
wireless facility from the roadway or other position that renders
the wireless facility hazardous. Under these emergency
circumstances, the City shall not be liable for any damage caused
by removing the wireless facility and may charge the owner or
operator of the wireless facility the City's reasonable expenses
incurred in removing the wireless facility.
C. A permit is not required for:
1. Routine maintenance on previously permitted small wireless
facilities;
2. The replacement of small wireless facilities with small wireless
facilities that are the same or smaller in size, weight, and height;
or
3. The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or
replacement of micro wireless facilities that are strung on cables
between utility poles, in compliance with applicable codes.
For work described in Subdivisions (1) and (2) of this Subsection
that involves different equipment than that being replaced, the
wireless provider shall submit a description of such new equipment
so that the City may maintain an accurate inventory of the small
wireless facilities at that location.
For work described in Subdivisions (1), (2) and (3) of this
Subsection, the wireless provider shall provide at least five (5)
business days' notice by e-mail to the Public Works Director for any
work that may affect traffic patterns, obstruct traffic in the right-ofway,
or materially impede the use of a sidewalk. All work that may
affect traffic patterns or, obstruct traffic in the right-of-way shall
require an approved traffic management plan and must adhere
to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) for
traffic control in a work zone. In cases of emergency, the wireless
Section
525.040
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
525.040
AO:742
Section 525.050. Collocations On City Poles And Wireless Support
Structures Outside Of The Right-Of-Way. [Ord. No. 19-08,
6-18-2019]
provider may proceed with required work without providing at
least five (5) business days' notice; however, all emergency work
shall be reported as soon as reasonably practicable by e-mail to
the Public Works Director. All emergency work occurring outside
of business hours shall be immediately reported to on-call Public
Works employee. All emergency work which will or may affect
traffic upon a road or vehicular access to a road must be
coordinated with the City's Police Department.
4. No approval for the installation, placement, maintenance, or
operation of a small wireless facility under this Chapter shall be
construed to confer authorization for the provision of cable
television service, or installation, placement, maintenance, or
operation of a wireline backhaul facility or communications facility,
other than a small wireless facility, in the right-of-way.
5. If applicable, the municipal electric utility shall not require an
application for the installation, placement, maintenance, operation,
or replacement of micro wireless facilities that are strung on cables
between utility poles, in compliance with applicable codes.
A. This Section only applies to collocations on City poles and wireless
support structures that are located outside the right-of-way.
B. Subject to Subsection (C) of this Section, the City shall authorize the
collocation of small wireless facilities on City wireless support
structures and poles to the same extent, if any, that it permits access to
such structures for other commercial projects or uses. Such
collocations shall be subject to reasonable and non-discriminatory
rates, fees, and terms as provided in an agreement between the City, or
its agent, and the wireless provider.
C. The City shall not enter into an exclusive agreement with a wireless
provider concerning City poles or wireless support structures,
including stadiums and enclosed arenas, unless the agreement meets
the following requirements:
1. The wireless provider provides service using a shared network of
wireless facilities that it makes available for access by other
wireless providers, on reasonable and non-discriminatory rates and
terms that shall include use of the entire shared network, as to
itself, an affiliate, or any other entity; or
2. The wireless provider allows other wireless providers to collocated
small wireless facilities, on reasonable and non-discriminatory
rates and terms, as to itself, an affiliate, or any other entity.
Section
525.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
525.050
AO:743
Section 525.060. Collocations On City Poles Within The Right-Of-
Way. [Ord. No. 19-08, 6-18-2019]
D. When determining whether a rate, fee, or term is reasonable and nondiscriminatory
for the purposes of this Section, consideration may be
given to any relevant facts, including alternative financial or service
remuneration, characteristics of the proposed equipment or
installation, structural limitations, or other commercial or unique
features or components.
A. The provisions of this Section apply to collocations on City poles within
the right-of-way by a wireless provider.
B. Neither the City nor any person owning, managing, or controlling City
poles in the right-of-way shall enter into an exclusive arrangement with
any person for the right to attach to such poles. A person who
purchases or otherwise acquires a City pole is subject to the
requirements of this Section.
C. The City shall allow the collocation of small wireless facilities on its
poles using the process set forth in Section 525.040 and this Chapter.
D. An application shall include sealed engineering and construction
drawings by a Missouri licensed engineer, as well as plans and detailed
cost estimates for any make-ready work as needed, for which the
applicant shall be solely responsible.
E. Make-ready work shall be addressed as follows, unless the City (or its
successor) and applicant agree to different terms in a pole attachment
agreement:
1. The rates, fees, and terms and conditions for the make-ready work
to collocate on a City pole shall be non-discriminatory,
competitively neutral, and commercially reasonable, and shall
comply with Sections 67.5110 to 67.5121, RSMo., and this Chapter;
2. Unless the City allows the applicant to perform any make-ready
work, the City shall provide a good faith estimate for any makeready
work necessary to enable the pole to support the requested
collocation by a wireless provider, including pole replacement if
necessary, within sixty (60) days after receipt of a complete
application. If applicable, make-ready work, including any pole
replacement, shall be completed by the City within sixty (60) days
of written acceptance of the good faith estimate and advance
payment by the applicant. The City may require replacement of its
pole on a non-discriminatory basis for reasons of safety and
reliability, including a demonstration that the collocation would
make the pole structurally unsound, including, but not limited to, if
the collocation would cause a utility pole to fail a crash test; and
3. The person owning, managing, or controlling the City pole shall not
require more make-ready work than required to meet applicable
Section
525.050
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
525.060
AO:744
Section 525.070. Rates And Fees. [Ord. No. 19-08, 6-18-2019]
codes or industry standards. Fees for make-ready work shall not
include costs related to preexisting or prior damage or noncompliance
unless the City had determined, prior to the filing of
the application, to permanently abandon and not repair or replace
the structure. Fees for make-ready work, including any pole
replacement, shall not exceed actual costs or the amount charged
to other communications service providers for similar work, and
shall not include third party fees, charges, or expenses, except for
amounts charged by licensed contractors actually performing the
make-ready work.
F. When a small wireless facility is located in the right-of-way of the State
Highway System, equipment and facilities directly associated with a
particular small wireless facility, including coaxial and fiber optic cable,
conduit, and ground mounted equipment, shall remain in the utility
corridor except as needed to reach a City or utility pole in the right-ofway
but outside the utility corridor in which the small wireless facility is
collocated.
A. This Section governs the rates and fees to collocate small wireless
facilities and the rates and fees for the placement of utility poles, but
does not limit the City's ability to recover specific removal costs from
the attaching wireless provider for abandoned structures or other rates
or fees allowed under this Chapter or Sections 67.5110 to 67.5121,
RSMo. The rates to collocate on City poles shall be non-discriminatory
regardless of the services provided by the collocating applicant.
B. The City shall not require a wireless provider to pay any rates, fees, or
compensation to the authority or other person other than what is
expressly authorized by this Chapter or Sections 67.5110 to 67.5121,
RSMo., (while in effect) for the use and occupancy of a right-of-way, for
collocation of small wireless facilities on utility poles in the right-of-way,
or for the installation, maintenance, modification, operation, and
replacement of utility poles in the right-of-way.
C. Application fees shall be as follows:
1. The total fee for any application under Subsection (B) of Section
525.040 for collocation of small wireless facilities on existing City
poles shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per small wireless
facility. An applicant filing a consolidated application under
Subdivision (11) of Subsection (B) of Section 525.040 shall pay one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per small wireless facility included in the
consolidated application; and
2. The total application fees for the installation, modification, or
replacement of a pole and the collocation of an associated small
wireless facility shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) per pole.
Section
525.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
525.070
AO:745
Section 525.080. Authority And Rights Reserved. [Ord. No. 19-08,
6-18-2019]
D. Rates.
1. The rate for collocation of a small wireless facility to a City pole
shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per pole per year.
2. The City shall not charge a wireless provider any fee, tax other than
a tax authorized by Subdivision (3) below, or other charge, or
require any other form of payment or compensation, to locate a
wireless facility or wireless support structure on privately owned
property, or on a wireless support structure not owned by the City.
3. The City shall not demand any fees, rentals, licenses, charges,
payments, or assessments from any applicant or wireless provider
for, or in any way relating to or arising from, the construction,
deployment, installation, mounting, modification, operation, use,
replacement, maintenance, or repair of small wireless facilities or
utility poles, if not allowed by this Chapter or Section 67.5116,
RSMo., (while in effect).
A. Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, Sections 67.5110 to 67.5121,
RSMo., (while in effect), and applicable Federal law, the City shall
continue to exercise zoning, land use, planning, and permitting
authority within its territorial boundaries, including with respect to
wireless support structures and utility poles, except that the City shall
not have or exercise any jurisdiction or authority over the design,
engineering, construction, installation, or operation of any small
wireless facility located in an interior structure or upon the site of any
campus, stadium, or athletic facility not owned or controlled by the City,
other than to comply with applicable codes.
B. Nothing herein limits the ability of the City to require an applicant to
obtain one (1) or more permits of general applicability that do not apply
exclusively to wireless facilities in addition to the Permit required by
this Chapter.
C. Each applicant shall comply with all applicable City ordinances,
resolutions, City Charter, rules, and regulations heretofore and
hereafter adopted or established, to the extent that they are consistent
with State and Federal law.
D. Nothing herein shall be deemed to relieve an applicant of the provisions
of an existing franchise, license or other agreement or permit.
E. The exercise of one (1) remedy under this Chapter shall not foreclose
use of another, nor shall the exercise of a remedy or the payment of
damages or penalties relieve an applicant of its obligations to comply
with its permits. Remedies may be used alone or in combination; in
addition, the City may exercise any rights it has at law or equity.
Section
525.070
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
525.080
AO:746
Section 525.090. Prior Agreements. [Ord. No. 19-08, 6-18-2019]
F. The City hereby reserves to itself the right to intervene in any suit,
action or proceeding involving any provisions of this Chapter.
G. No applicant shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the
provisions of this Chapter by reason of any failure of the City to enforce
prompt compliance.
H. The provisions hereof shall specifically apply to any lands or property
annexed as of the date of such annexation.
I. Nothing contained herein shall in any manner be deemed or construed
to alter, modify, supersede, supplement or otherwise nullify any other
ordinances of the City, Charter, or requirements thereof, whether or not
relating to or in any manner connected with the subject written hereof,
unless expressly provided otherwise herein or hereafter.
J. The use of the right-of-way under this Chapter is subject to the police
powers of the City and Charter to adopt and enforce ordinances
necessary to the health, safety and welfare of the public. A person using
the right-of-way pursuant to this Chapter shall comply with all
applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the City pursuant to
its police powers and Charter.
K. In addition to the requirements set forth in this Chapter, the City may
adopt such orders, rules and regulations which are reasonably
necessary to accomplish the purposes of this Chapter and are
consistent herewith.
L. In no event shall any language or requirement in this Chapter be
construed as or constitute a waiver or limitation of City's defenses with
regard to sovereign immunity, governmental immunity, or official
immunity under Federal or State constitutions, Statutes, and/or laws.
A. This Chapter shall not nullify, modify, amend, or prohibit a mutual
agreement between the City and a wireless provider made prior to
August 28, 2018, but an agreement that does not fully comply with
Sections 67.5110 to 67.5121, RSMo., (while in effect) shall apply only to
small wireless facilities and utility poles that were installed or approved
for installation before August 28, 2018, subject to any termination
provisions in the agreement.
B. Such an agreement shall not be renewed, extended, or made to apply to
any small wireless facility or utility pole installed or approved for
installation after August 28, 2018, unless it is modified to fully comply
with Sections 67.5110 to 67.5121, RSMo., (while in effect). In the
absence of an agreement, and until such a compliant agreement or
ordinance is entered or adopted, small wireless facilities and utility
poles that become operational or were constructed before August 28,
2018, may remain installed and be operated under the requirements of
Sections 67.5110 to 67.5121, RSMo., (while in effect).
Section
525.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
525.100
AO:747
Section 525.100. Indemnification, Insurance, And Bonding
Requirements. [Ord. No. 19-08, 6-18-2019]
A. A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the City and its elected
and appointed officers and employees harmless against any damage or
personal injury caused by the negligence of the wireless provider or its
employees, agents, or contractors, including but not limited to
reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the City.
B. A wireless provider shall have in effect insurance coverage as contained
in Section 515.900. A self-insured wireless provider does not need to
name the City or its officers and employees as additional insured. A
wireless provider shall furnish proof of insurance, if applicable, prior to
the effective date of any permit issued for a small wireless facility.
C. The bonding requirements for small wireless facilities shall be one
thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per small wireless facility.
For wireless providers with multiple small wireless facilities within the
City, the total bond amount across all facilities shall be seventy-five
thousand dollars ($75,000.00), which amount may be combined into
one (1) bond instrument. The purpose of such bonds shall be to:
1. Provide for the removal of abandoned or improperly maintained
small wireless facilities, including those that an authority
determines need to be removed to protect public health, safety, or
welfare;
2. Restore the right-of-way in connection with removals under Section
67.5113, RSMo., and this Chapter;
3. Recoup rates or fees that have not been paid by a wireless provider
in over twelve (12) months, so long as the wireless provider has
received reasonable notice from the City of any non-compliance
listed above and been given an opportunity to cure.
D. Applicants that have at least twenty-five million dollars
($25,000,000.00) in assets in the State and do not have a history of
permitting non-compliance within the City shall, under Section
67.1830, RSMo., be exempt from the insurance and bonding
requirements otherwise authorized by this Chapter.
E. Any contractor, subcontractor, or wireless infrastructure provider shall
be under contract or agreement with a wireless services provider to
perform work in the right-of-way related to small wireless facilities or
utility poles, and such entities shall be properly licensed under the laws
of the State and all applicable City ordinances. Each contracted entity
shall have the same obligations with respect to his or her work as a
wireless services provider would have under this Chapter, under
Sections 67.5110 to 67.5121, RSMo., and other applicable laws if the
work were performed by a wireless services provider. The wireless
services provider shall be responsible for ensuring that the work of
such contracted entities is performed consistently with the wireless
Section
525.100
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
525.100
AO:748
Section 525.110. Relocation And Standards. [Ord. No. 19-08,
6-18-2019]
services provider's permits and applicable laws relating to the
deployment of small wireless facilities and utility poles, and responsible
for promptly correcting acts or omissions by such contracted entity at
the wireless services provider's expense.
A. Whenever, by reason of changes in the grade or widening of a street or
in the location or manner of constructing a water pipe, drainage
channel, sewer, or other City-owned underground or above ground
structure, it is deemed necessary by the City, in the interest of public
safety and convenience, to move, alter, or change the location of
underground or above ground facilities of a wireless provider, the
wireless provider shall relocate such facilities, on alternative right-ofway
provided by the City, if available, upon adequate notice, in writing,
by the City, without claim for reimbursement or damages against the
City.
B. The construction, operation, maintenance, and repair of small wireless
facilities shall be in accordance with applicable codes and relevant City
ordinances pertaining to construction, operation, maintenance, and
repair inside or outside the right-of-way.
C. All small wireless facilities shall be installed and located with due
regard for minimizing interference with the public and with other users
of a right-of-way, including the City.
D. An applicant shall not place small wireless facilities where they will
damage or interfere with the use or operation of previously installed
facilities or obstruct or hinder the various utilities serving the residents
and businesses in the City of their use of any right-of-way.
E. Any and all rights-of-way disturbed or damaged during the construction
of small wireless facilities shall be promptly repaired or replaced by the
applicant, at the applicant's expense, to its functional equivalence as
existed before the disturbance or damage.
F. All small wireless facilities and associated utility poles owned, leased,
or controlled by the wireless provider shall be maintained by and at the
expense of the wireless provider in good and clean condition that
includes but is not limited to being free of rust, peeling paint and
graffiti.
G. A small wireless facility shall not be readily noticeable and shall use the
smallest equipment that is technically feasible.
H. For metal utility poles used for a small wireless facility, all cabling shall
be run inside the pole to the maximum extent technically feasible.
I. No generators shall be allowed at any small wireless facility or
associated utility pole.
Section
525.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
525.110
AO:749
Section 525.120. Application For Permit. [Ord. No. 19-08,
6-18-2019]
J. Small wireless facilities and associated utility poles shall not be lighted
nor contain any markings, except for ownership and contact
information to be no larger than two (2) inches in height unless
required by applicable Federal or State agency. Commercial advertising
shall not be allowed.
K. All small wireless facility equipment on the outside of the utility pole
shall be placed at minimum eight (8) feet above the right-of-way.
L. Utility poles associated with a small wireless facility:
1. Shall not be located within one hundred (100) feet of an apron of an
emergency service facility.
2. Shall be placed in alignment with existing trees, utility poles, and
street lights.
3. Shall be located at least five (5) feet away from the widest part of
an alley or driveway, including any flare associated with the alley or
driveway.
4. Shall not be located in such a manner that would negatively impact
any business, residence, or property.
M. Any wireless infrastructure provider, contractor, or subcontractor must
be properly licensed under laws of the State and all applicable local
ordinances.
N. Each wireless infrastructure provider, contractor, or subcontractor
shall have the same obligations with respect to its work as the wireless
services provider would have hereunder and applicable law if the work
were performed by the wireless services provider. The wireless services
provider shall be responsible for ensuring that the work of wireless
infrastructure providers, contractors or subcontractors is performed
consistent with their permits and applicable law, and shall be
responsible for promptly correcting any acts or omissions by a wireless
infrastructure provider, contractor or subcontractor at the wireless
services provider's expense.
A. All applications for a permit shall be filed with the City's Public Works
Department. The Public Works Director is authorized to develop an
application for use by Wireless Service Provider. An Application for a
Permit shall include, at minimum, the following:
1. Construction and stamped engineering drawings by a Missouri
licensed engineer which demonstrate compliance with the criteria
in Section 525.040(B)(9) and this Chapter;
2. An attestation that the small wireless facilities complies with the
volumetric, limitations in the definition of small wireless facility;
Section
525.110
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
525.120
AO:750
Section 525.130. Removal Of Small Wireless Facilities. [Ord. No.
19-08, 6-18-2019]
3. Information on the height of any new, replacement or modified
utility pole;
4. Applicable indemnity, insurance, and performance bond
information required under City ordinances;
5. An applicant that is not a wireless services provider must provide
evidence of agreements or plans demonstrating that the small
wireless facilities will be operational for use by a wireless services
provider within one (1) year after the permit issuance date, unless
the City and the applicant agree to extend this period or if the
applicant notifies the City the delay is caused by lack of commercial
power or communications transport facilities. An applicant that is a
wireless services provider must provide this information by
attestation;
6. Plans and detailed cost estimates for any make-ready work as
needed. The applicant shall be solely responsible for the cost of any
make-ready work; and
7. Projected commencement and termination dates for the permit, or
if such dates are unknown at the time the permit is issued, a
provision requiring the permit holder to provide the Director of
Public Works with reasonable advance notice of such dates once
they are determined.
A. In the event that: 1) the use of any portion of a small wireless facility
and/or associated utility pole is discontinued for a continuous period of
twelve (12) months, and sixty (60) days after no response to written
notice from the City to the last known address of the wireless provider;
or 2) any small wireless facility and/or associated utility pole has been
installed in the right-of-way without complying with the requirements of
this Chapter; a wireless provider shall be deemed to have abandoned
such small wireless facility and/or associated utility pole(s).
B. The City, upon such terms as it may impose, may give a wireless
provider written permission to abandon, without removing, any small
wireless facility, or portion thereof, directly constructed, operated or
maintained. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise
provided in this Chapter, a wireless provider shall promptly remove,
within a reasonable time, the abandoned small wireless facility and
associated utility pole(s) and shall restore, using prudent construction
standards, any affected right-of-way to their former state at the time
such system was installed and in accordance with the then adopted
engineering standards, so as not to impair their usefulness. In removing
its facilities and equipment, a wireless provider shall refill, at its own
expense, any excavation necessarily made by it and shall leave all rightof-
way in as good condition as that prevailing prior to such removal
Section
525.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
525.130
AO:751
Section 525.140. Penalties. [Ord. No. 19-08, 6-18-2019]
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall, upon conviction
by the City's Municipal Court, be punished by a fine not to exceed five
hundred ($500.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day the violation continues may be
charged as a separate offense.
Section 525.150. Expiration. [Ord. No. 19-08, 6-18-2019]
This Chapter shall expire at such time that Sections 67.5110 to 67.5122,
RSMo., expire, except that for small wireless facilities already permitted or
collocated on City poles prior to such date, the rate set forth in this Chapter
for collocation of small wireless facilities on City poles shall remain effective
for the duration of the permit authorizing the collocation.
Section 525.160. Severability. [Ord. No. 19-08, 6-18-2019]
If any provision of this Chapter or the application thereof to anyone or to
any circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of those Sections and the
application of such provisions to others or other circumstances shall not be
affected thereby.
without materially interfering with any authority pole or other utility
wires, poles or attachments. The City shall have the right to inspect and
approve the condition of the right-of-way, attachments and poles prior
to and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions
of this Chapter and any security fund provided shall continue in full
force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance
by a wireless provider with the terms and conditions of this Chapter.
C. Upon abandonment of any small wireless facility, wireless support
structure, or associated utility, pole in place, a wireless provider, if
required by the City, shall submit to the City a written instrument,
satisfactory in form to the City, transferring to the City the ownership of
such poles or equipment allowed to remain within the right-of-way.
D. Upon written approval by City, a wireless provider may abandon
underground portions of a small wireless facility in place so long as it
does not materially interfere with the use of the right-of-way or with the
use thereof by any public utility, cable operator or other person.
E. If a wireless provider defaults under any provision of this Chapter and
such default is not cured within sixty (60) days following notice by the
City to the wireless provider of its default, the City shall maintain all it
rights and remedies, at law and in equity, including the ability to charge
fines, recover fees and costs. The City may also remove the small
wireless facilities' associated equipment, and associated utility pole(s)
and charge the reasonable, documented, actual cost to the wireless
provider.
Section
525.130
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
525.160
AO:752
Title VI Notes
NOTES AND APPENDIXES
Appendix VI-A, Fee/Fine/Forfeiture, is included as an attachment to this
Title.
Chapter 600
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section 600.010. Definitions. [Ord. No. 03-62 §1, 9-8-2003; Ord. No.
09-40 §1, 11-23-2009]
When used in this Chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
BUSINESS — As defined in Code Section 605.005.[Ord. No. 16-06 §1,
3-14-2016]
CLOSED PLACE — A place where all doors are locked and where no patrons
are in the place or about the premises.
INTOXICATING LIQUOR — Alcohol for beverage purposes, including
alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented, malt, or other liquors, or
combination of liquors, a part of which is spirituous, vinous or fermented,
and all preparations or mixtures for beverage purposes containing in excess
of one-half of one percent (0.5%) by volume. All beverages having an
alcoholic content of less than one-half of one percent (0.5%) by volume shall
be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter.
LIGHT WINES — Intoxicating liquor consisting of wine containing not in
excess of fourteen percent (14%) of alcohol by weight made exclusively
from grapes, berries and other fruits and vegetables.
LIQUOR MANUFACTURER — A business engaged in the production of
intoxicating liquor as defined in this Chapter.[Ord. No. 16-06 §1,
3-14-2016]
MALT LIQUOR — An intoxicating liquor containing alcohol in excess of
three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) by weight and not in excess of five
percent (5%) by weight, manufactured from pure hops or pure extract of
hops or pure barley malt or wholesome grains or cereals and wholesome
yeast and pure water.
MICROBREWERY — A business whose activity is the brewing and selling of
beer, with an annual production of 10,000 barrels or less.[Ord. No. 16-06
§1, 3-14-2016]
ORIGINAL PACKAGE — Any package sealed or otherwise closed by the
manufacturer so as to consist of a self-contained unit, and consisting of
one (1) or more bottles or other containers of intoxicating liquor, where the
package and/or container(s) describes the contents thereof as intoxicating
Section
525.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.010
AO:753
liquor. "Original package" shall also be construed and held to refer to any
package containing three (3) or more standard bottles of beer.
PERSON — An individual, association, firm, joint stock company, syndicate,
partnership, corporation, receiver, trustee, conservator, or any other officer
appointed by any State or Federal court.
RESORT — Any establishment having at least thirty (30) rooms for the
overnight accommodation of transient guests, having a restaurant or similar
facility on the premises at least sixty percent (60%) of the gross income
of which is derived from the sale of prepared meals or food, or means
a restaurant provided with special space and accommodations where, in
consideration of payment, food, without lodging, is habitually furnished
to travelers and customers, and which restaurant establishment's annual
gross receipts immediately preceding its application for a license shall not
have been less than seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) per year
with at least fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) of such gross receipts from
non-alcoholic sales, or means a seasonal resort restaurant with food sales
as determined in Subsection (2) of Section 311.095, RSMo. Any facility
which is owned and operated as a part of the resort may be used to sell
intoxicating liquor by the drink for consumption on the premises of such
facility and, for the purpose of meeting the annual gross food receipts
requirements of this definition, if any facility which is a part of the resort
meets such requirement, such requirement shall be deemed met for any
other facility which is a part of the resort.
RESTAURANT BAR — Any establishment having at least forty (40) rooms for
overnight accommodations of transient guests or any establishment having
a restaurant or similar facility on the premises at least fifty percent (50%)
of the gross income of which is derived from the sale of prepared meals or
food consumed on such premises or which has an annual gross income of at
least two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) from the sale of prepared
meals or food consumed on such premises.
SALE BY THE DRINK — Sale of any intoxicating liquor except malt liquor,
in the original package, in any quantity less than fifty (50) milliliters shall
be deemed "sale by the drink" and may be made only by a holder of a retail
liquor dealer's license and when so made, the container in every case shall
be emptied and the contents thereof served as other intoxicating liquors
sold by the drink are served.
WINE — A vinous liquor produced by fermentation of juices of grapes,
berries or other fruits or a preparation of certain vegetables by
fermentation and containing alcohol not in excess of twenty-two percent
(22%) by volume.[Ord. No. 16-06 §1, 3-14-2016]
WINE OR BRANDY MANUFACTURER — A business whose activity is the
production of wine or brandy.[Ord. No. 16-06 §1, 3-14-2016]
Section 600.020. License Required — Classes of Licenses. [Ord. No.
03-63 §§1 — 2, 9-8-2003; Ord. No. 09-40 §1, 11-23-2009]
Section
600.010
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
600.020
AO:754
A. No person shall manufacture, brew, sell or offer for sale intoxicating
liquor in the City of Republic without a currently valid liquor license
issued by the City. A separate liquor license shall be required for each of
the categories and subcategories of liquor sales in which the licensee
desires to engage as set forth herein. No license shall be required if the
manufacture is for personal use as allowed by Section 311.055, RSMo.
B. General Licenses. Any person possessing the qualifications and meeting
the requirements of this Chapter may apply for the following licenses to
sell or manufacture intoxicating liquor: [Ord. No. 16-06 §1,
3-14-2016]
1. Package liquor — malt liquor only: Sales of malt liquor at retail in
the original package not for consumption on the premises where
sold.
2. Package liquor — all kinds: Sales of all kinds of intoxicating liquors
in the original package at retail not for consumption on the
premises where sold, including sales as set forth in Subsection
(B)(1) of this Section.
3. Liquor by the drink — malt liquor/light wine only: Sales of malt
liquor and light wines at retail by the drink for consumption on the
premises where sold, including sales as set forth in Subsection
(B)(1) of this Section.
4. Liquor by the drink — all kinds: Sales of intoxicating liquor of all
kinds at retail by the drink for consumption on the premises where
sold, including package sales as set forth in Subsection (B)(2) of
this Section.
5. Common eating and drinking areas: Sales of intoxicating liquor of
all kinds by the drink at retail not for consumption on the premises
where sold but for consumption in a common eating or drinking
area.
6. Liquor by the drink — resort: Sales of liquor of all kinds by the
drink at retail for consumption on the premises of any resort or
qualified restaurant.
7. Wine or brandy manufacturer: A producer of wine or brandy
through a manufacturing process.
8. Microbrewery license: A producer of beer, with an annual
production of 10,000 barrels or less.
9. Liquor manufacturer: A producer of intoxicating liquor not
otherwise licensed under this Chapter.
C. Sunday Sales. Any person who is licensed under the provisions of this
Chapter or who otherwise possesses the qualifications and meets the
requirements of this Chapter may apply for the following licenses to sell
Section
600.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.020
AO:755
Section 600.030. License Regulations. [Ord. No. 03-64 §§1 — 4,
9-8-2003; Ord. No. 09-40 §1, 11-23-2009]
intoxicating liquor on Sundays between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and
Midnight:
1. Package liquor — all kinds: Sales of liquor of all kinds in the
original package at retail, not for consumption on the premises
where sold.
2. Liquor by the drink — restaurant bar: Sales of liquor of all kinds by
the drink at retail for consumption on the premises of any
restaurant bar.
3. Liquor by the drink — amusement place: Sales of liquor of all kinds
by the drink at retail for consumption on the premises of any
amusement place.
4. Liquor by the drink — place of entertainment: Sales of liquor of all
kinds by the drink at retail for consumption on the premises of any
place of entertainment.
5. Liquor by the drink — common eating and drinking area: Sales of
liquor of all kinds by the drink at retail not for consumption on the
premises where sold but for consumption in a common eating or
drinking area.
D. Permits.
1. Temporary permit for sale by drink. Any person who possesses the
qualifications, meets the requirements and complies with the
provisions of Section 600.030(C) below may apply for a special
permit to sell intoxicating liquor for consumption on premises
where sold.
2. Tasting permit. Any person who is licensed to sell intoxicating
liquor in the original package at retail under Subsections (B)(3) and
(C) of this Section above may apply for a special permit to conduct
wine, malt beverage and distilled spirit tastings on the licensed
premises; however, nothing in this Section shall be construed to
permit the licensee to sell wine, malt beverages or distilled spirits
for on-premises consumption.
A. Package Sales, Limitations. No license shall be issued for the sale of
intoxicating liquor in the original package, not to be consumed upon the
premises where sold, except to a person engaged in, and to be used in
connection with, the operation of one (1) or more of the following
businesses: a drug store, a cigar and tobacco store, a grocery store, a
general merchandise store, a confectionery or delicatessen store, nor to
any such person who does not have and keep in his/her store a stock of
goods having a value according to invoices of at least one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), exclusive of fixtures and intoxicating liquors. Under
Section
600.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
600.030
AO:756
such license, no intoxicating liquor shall be consumed on the premises
where sold nor shall any original package be opened on the premises of
the vendor except as otherwise provided in this Chapter or law.
B. Newly-Opened Restaurant Bars Or Amusement Places.
1. Any new restaurant bar having been in operation for less than
ninety (90) days may be issued a temporary license to sell
intoxicating liquor by the drink at retail for consumption on the
premises between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and Midnight on Sunday
for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days if the restaurant bar can
show a projection of annual business from prepared meals or food
consumed on the premises of at least fifty percent (50%) of the total
gross income of the restaurant bar for the year or can show a
projection of annual business from prepared meals or food
consumed on the premises which would exceed not less than two
hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00). The license fee shall be
prorated for the period of the temporary license based on the cost
of the annual license for the establishment.
2. Any new amusement place having been in operation for less than
ninety (90) days may be issued a temporary license to sell
intoxicating liquor by the drink at retail for consumption on the
premises between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and Midnight on Sunday
for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days if the amusement place
can show a projection of gross receipts of at least one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) of which at least fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000.00) of such gross receipts are in non-alcoholic
sales for the first (1st) year of operation. The license fee shall be
prorated for the period of the temporary license based on the cost
of the annual license for the establishment.
3. Any new resort/restaurant having been in operation for less than
ninety (90) days may be issued a temporary license, for a period not
to exceed ninety (90) days, to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink at
retail for consumption on the premises between the hours of 6:00
A.M. and 1:30 A.M. on weekdays and between the hours of 6:00
A.M. on Saturdays until 1:30 A.M. on Sundays. No intoxicating
liquor may be sold on Sundays except in accordance with the
provisions of Section 600.020(C) of this Code of Ordinances and
except in accordance with the provisions of Subsection (B)(1)
hereof. No such temporary license shall be issued except for an
establishment having at least thirty (30) rooms for the overnight
accommodation of transient guests, having a restaurant or similar
facility on the premises, at least sixty percent (60%) of the gross
income of which is derived from the sale of prepared meals or food;
or which is a restaurant provided with special space and
accommodations where, in consideration of payment, food, without
lodging, is habitually furnished to travelers and customers, and
which restaurant can show a projection of annual gross a receipts
of not less than seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) per year,
Section
600.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.030
AO:757
with at least fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) of such gross
receipts from non-alcoholic sales; or which is a seasonal resort
restaurant as defined and with food sales as established in
Subsection (2) of Section 311.095, RSMo.
C. Temporary Permit For Sale By Drink — Certain Organizations.
1. The City Clerk may issue a permit for the sale of intoxicating liquor
for consumption on premises where sold to any church, school,
civic, service, fraternal, veteran, political or charitable club or
organization for sale at a picnic, bazaar, fair or similar gathering.
The permit shall be issued only for the day or days named therein
and it shall not authorize the sale of intoxicating liquor for more
than seven (7) days by any such club or organization.
2. If the event will be held on a Sunday, the permit shall authorize the
sale of intoxicating liquor on that day beginning at 9:00 A.M.
3. At the same time that an applicant applies for a permit under the
provisions of this Subsection, the applicant shall notify the Director
of Revenue of the holding of the event by certified mail and by such
notification shall accept responsibility for the collection and
payment of any applicable sales tax.
4. No provision of law or rule or regulation of the City shall be
interpreted as preventing any wholesaler or distributor from
providing customary storage, cooling or dispensing equipment for
use by the permit holder at such picnic, bazaar, fair or similar
gathering.
D. Operating Hours, Days.
1. No licensee or any employee of such licensee shall sell, give away
or otherwise dispose of, or allow the same to be done, on or about
the premises, any intoxicating liquor in any quantity between the
hours of 1:30 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. on weekdays and between the
hours of 1:30 A.M. on Sunday and 6:00 A.M. on Monday, except as
otherwise authorized and licensed for Sunday sales. Any person
licensed to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink shall keep a closed
place during the aforementioned prohibited times.
2. When January first (1st), March seventeenth (17th), July fourth
(4th) or December thirty-first (31st) falls on Sunday and on the
Sundays prior to Memorial Day and Labor Day and on the Sunday
on which the national championship game of the National Football
League is played, commonly known as "Super Bowl Sunday", any
person having a license to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink may
be open for business and sell intoxicating liquor by the drink under
the provisions of his/her license on that day from the time and until
the time which would be lawful on another day of the week,
notwithstanding any provisions of this Chapter to the contrary.
Section
600.030
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
600.030
AO:758
E. General License Regulations.
1. Each license issued hereunder shall be conspicuously posted on the
premises for which the license has been issued.
2. A separate license shall be required for each place of business.
Every license issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall
particularly describe the premises at which intoxicating liquor may
be sold thereunder, and such license shall not be deemed to
authorize or permit the sale of intoxicating liquor at any place other
than that described therein.
3. No license issued under this Chapter shall be transferable or
assignable except as herein provided. In the event of the death of
the licensee, the widow or widower or the next of kin of such
deceased licensee, who shall meet the other requirements of this
Chapter, may make application and the Clerk may transfer such
license to permit the operation of the business of the deceased for
the remainder of the period for which a license fee has been paid by
the deceased. Whenever one (1) or more members of a partnership
withdraws from the partnership, the Clerk, upon being requested,
shall permit the remaining partner or partners originally licensed,
to continue to operate for the remainder of the period for which the
license fee has been paid, without obtaining a new license.
4. In the event any licensee desires to change the location of his/her
place of business in the City, it shall be necessary for him/her to file
an application in the same manner as herein provided for an
original application, except that no additional fee shall be charged
and the amended license, describing the new location, shall be
issued immediately upon the approval of the application by the
Council. Any change of location of the enterprise prior to issuance
of such an amended license shall constitute a violation of this
Section.
F. Druggists May Sell And Physicians Prescribe Liquor. Any druggist may
have in his/her possession intoxicating liquor purchased by him/her
from a licensed vendor under a license pursuant to State law, or
intoxicating liquor lawfully acquired at the place of acquisition and
legally transported into this State, and lawfully inspected, gauged and
labeled as provided by State law; such intoxicating liquor to be used in
connection with the business of a druggist in compounding medicines
or as a solvent or preservant; provided, that nothing in this Chapter
shall prevent a regularly licensed druggist, after he/she procures a
license therefor, from selling intoxicating liquor in the original package,
but not to be drunk or the packages opened on the premises where sold;
and provided further, that nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as
limiting the right of a physician to prescribe intoxicating liquor in
accordance with his/her professional judgment for any patient at any
time, or prevent a druggist from selling intoxicating liquor to a person
on prescription from a regularly licensed physician as above provided.
Section
600.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.030
AO:759
G. Certain Persons May Not Be Supplied Intoxicating Liquors.
1. No licensee or his employee shall sell or supply intoxicating liquor,
or permit the same to be sold or supplied, to a habitual drunkard or
to any person who is under or apparently under the influence of
intoxicating liquor. Intoxicating liquor shall not be given, sold or
otherwise supplied to any person under the age of twenty-one (21)
years, but this shall not apply to the supplying of intoxicating liquor
to a person under said age for medicinal purposes only or to the
administering of such intoxicating liquor to any person by a duly
licensed physician. No person under the age of twenty-one (21)
years shall sell, or assist in the sale or dispensing of intoxicating
liquor except as may be authorized under Section 311.300, RSMo.
2. These provisions shall not apply to premises where substantial
quantity of foods are served, premises used primarily as a bowling
alley or premises with licenses prescribed in Section 311.480,
RSMo. For the purpose of this paragraph, "substantial quantities of
food" shall mean the amount of prepared meals and food
wherefrom at least fifty percent (50%) of the gross income of any
establishment has been derived during the three (3) most recent
months preceding. Persons under the age of twenty-one (21) are
restricted from entering premises selling intoxicating liquors, etc.,
except that a person age sixteen (16) through twenty (20) years
may be on said premises if accompanied by a legal guardian, parent
or spouse over the age of twenty-one (21) years. It shall be unlawful
for any licensee holding a sales-by-drink license for intoxicating
liquor or beer, or his employee, agent or servant, to either directly
or indirectly suffer or allow a person under the age of twenty-one
(21) years to enter the premises of said licensee, except that a
person age sixteen (16) through twenty (20) years may be on said
premises if accompanied by a legal guardian, parent or spouse over
the age of twenty-one (21) years.
H. Prohibiting The Use Of Alcoholic Beverages And Drugs By Any Minor At
Open House Parties.
1. No person who is the owner in possession, a tenant or subtenant, or
has temporary charge of any residence or premises shall allow an
open house party to take place at the residence or premises if any
alcoholic beverage or drug is possessed or consumed at the
residence or premises by any minor where the person knew or
reasonably should have known that any alcoholic beverage or drug
was in the possession of or being consumed by a minor at the
residence or premises and where the person failed to take
reasonable steps to prevent the possession or consumption of the
alcoholic beverage or drug at the residence or premises.
The provisions of this Section shall not apply to:
Section
600.030
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
600.030
AO:760
Section 600.040. Schedule of License Fees. [Ord. No. 09-40 §1,
11-23-2009]
a. The consumption, use or possession of a drug by a minor
pursuant to a lawful prescription for each drug.
b. Religious observance or prescribed medical treatments.
c. The possession by a minor of alcoholic beverages or lawfully
prescribed drugs incidental to the lawful employment of such
minor.
2. The following definitions shall be used for the provisions of this
Section:
ADULT — Person seventeen (17) years of age or older.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Any alcoholic liquor as defined now
and hereafter by the Revised Statutes of Missouri (RSMo).
Currently, "alcoholic liquor" is defined by Section 311.020, RSMo.
CONTROL — Any form of authority, regulation, responsibility or
dominion, including a possessory right.
DRUG — A controlled substance as defined and described now or
hereafter by the Revised States of Missouri. Currently "controlled
substances" are defined and described by Sections 195.005 —
195.425, RSMo.
MINOR — A person not legally permitted by reason of age to
possess, consume or purchase alcoholic liquor as described now or
hereafter by the Revised Statutes of Missouri.
OPEN HOUSE PARTY — A social gathering at a residence or
premises of persons in addition to the owner or those with rights of
possession or their immediate family members at which one (1) or
more minors are present.
RESIDENCE OR PREMISES — A motel room, hotel room, home,
apartment, condominium or other dwelling unit, including the
curtilage of a dwelling unit, or a hall, meeting room or other place
of assembly, whether occupied as a dwelling or specifically for
social functions and whether owned, leased, rented or used with or
without compensation.
A. The following categories and subcategories of licenses shall be issued
upon compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and payment of the
license fee indicated:
1. General licenses.
a. Malt liquor — original package: $22.50.
b. Intoxicating liquor (all kinds)—original package: $150.00.
c. Malt liquor and light wines — by drink: $52.50.
Section
600.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.040
AO:761
Section 600.050. Application For License and Renewal. [Ord. No.
03-07 §§1 — 3, 1-27-2003; Ord. No. 09-40 §1, 11-23-2009; Ord. No.
17-33 § 1, 9-19-2017]
d. Intoxicating liquor (all kinds)—by drink: $450.00.
e. Common eating and drinking places: $300.00.
f. Wine and brandy manufacturer: three hundred dollars
($300.00). [Ord. No. 16-06 §1, 3-14-2016]
g. Microbrewery: three hundred dollars ($300.00). [Ord. No.
16-06 §1, 3-14-2016]
h. Liquor manufacturer not otherwise licensed under this
Chapter: three hundred dollars ($300.00). [Ord. No. 16-06
§1, 3-14-2016]
NOTE: Not to exceed Statutory fee limits per Sections
311.180, 311.190 and 311.195, RSMo. [Ord. No. 16-06 §1,
3-14-2016]
2. Sunday sales. (Additional fees)
a. Intoxicating liquor — original package: $300.00.
b. Restaurant bars: $300.00.
c. Amusement places: $300.00.
d. Common eating and drinking places: $300.00.
e. Liquor by the drink — charitable organizations: $300.00.
3. Permits.
a. Temporary permit — by the drink for certain organizations (7
days max.): $37.50.
b. Tasting permit: $37.50.
Of the license fee to be paid for any such license, the
applicant shall pay as many twelfths (12ths) as there
are months (part of a month counted as a month)
remaining from the date of the license to the next
succeeding July first (1st).
A. Filing Of An Application. Each application for an original or renewal
license shall be filed with the City Clerk on a form to be provided by the
City, signed and sworn to by the applicant. Each application shall be
accompanied by a proper remittance reflecting the appropriate license
fee made payable to the City.
Section
600.040
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
600.050
AO:762
B. Qualifications. Neither the applicant nor any officer, director or
shareholder of a corporate applicant shall have been convicted of a
felony or of any distribution, sale or possession of any controlled
substances or dangerous drugs. The applicant shall present with the
application a bona fide sale contract or option duly executed, which
may be subject to the applicant obtaining a liquor license, or a bona fide
lease duly executed by the lessor, or an option for a lease duly executed,
subject to the applicant obtaining a liquor license, covering the
property for which a liquor license is requested. If the applicant is a
corporation, the petition shall set forth all of the above information with
respect to the managing officer or officers, identifying such officer or
officers. The application shall further state the full name of the
corporation, its date of incorporation, its registered agent and
registered address, the names and addresses of all shareholders of the
corporation, and whether said corporation operates any other business
or controls or is controlled by any other corporation or business, and if
so, the application shall further state the name of such controlled or
controlling corporation or business, its registered agent and registered
address, and the location of all businesses operated by it and the name
and address of any such businesses with a liquor license, whether
within or without the City; and the application shall also state if such
controlling corporation or any controlled corporation is doing business
under a fictitious name, and the address where said business is located.
The City Clerk may request such additional information as the Clerk
may deem necessary or appropriate in determining whether or not an
application should be granted or denied.
C. Review Of Application. Upon the submission of an application to the
City, the City Clerk shall review the application and all documents filed
therewith and approve or deny the application in accordance with the
following:
1. No license shall be granted for the sale of intoxicating liquor within
three hundred (300) feet of any school, church or other building
regularly used as a place of religious worship, unless the applicant
for the license shall first obtain the consent, in writing, of the Board
of Directors of the school or hospital, or the consent, in writing, of
the majority of the Managing Board of the church or place of
worship, except that when a school, church or place of worship
shall hereafter be established within three hundred (300) feet of
any place of business licensed to sell intoxicating liquor, the license
shall not be denied for lack of consent in writing as herein
provided. The three hundred (300) feet distance provided for in this
Section shall be measured from the center threshold of the main
public entrances of such premises by the most direct walking route.
No license shall be denied under this Section if a valid license to
sell intoxicating beverages had been issued for the same location or
address within one (1) year immediately preceding the application
for a new license to be issued for the same location.
Section
600.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.050
AO:763
Section 600.060. Minors.95 [Ord. No. 06-19 §1, 3-13-2006; Ord. No.
09-40 §1, 11-23-2009]
2. The City Clerk shall not approve the issuance of a license if in the
opinion of the Clerk extraordinary or unusual circumstances exist
which would result in detrimental harm to the surrounding
community. In such a circumstance, the matter shall be referred to
the City Council for its determination.
3. The City Clerk shall approve the application and issue a license if
after said application is reviewed it is found that:
a. The applicant is a person of good moral character, a native
born or naturalized citizen of the United States of America, a
registered voter and a taxpaying citizen of the City;
b. No license theretofore issued to such applicant to sell
intoxicating liquors has been revoked within two (2) years of
the date of the application;
c. The applicant has not been convicted since the ratification of
the Twenty-First Amendment to the Constitution of the United
States of the violation of any law applicable to the sale of
intoxicating liquor, or that such applicant has not employed in
his/her business any person whose license has been revoked or
who has been convicted of violating the provisions of such law
since the date aforesaid;
d. The applicant plans and proposes to conduct a retail liquor
business in compliance with the laws of the State of Missouri,
the ordinances of the City and the provisions of this Chapter;
e. The provisions of Subdivisions (1) or (2) of this Subsection do
not apply.
D. Upon approval of any application for a license the Clerk shall grant the
applicant a license to conduct business in the City for a term to expire
with the thirtieth (30th) day of June next succeeding the date of such
license, unless such license be revoked or suspended for cause before
the expiration of such time.
E. Applications for renewal of licenses must be filed on or before the first
(1st) day of May of each calendar year. The City Clerk shall review such
renewal applications in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter
and all other ordinances of the City which may affect any such renewal
application. Upon being satisfied that the renewal application is proper
and in order and upon payment of the appropriate license fee, the Clerk
shall renew the license.
95.Cross Reference — As to minors at open parties, alcoholic beverages prohibited, §215.775.
Section
600.050
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
600.060
AO:764
A. Persons Eighteen Years Of Age Or Older May Sell Or Handle Liquor Or
Beer, When.
1. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, no person under the
age of twenty-one (21) years shall sell or assist in the sale or
dispensing of intoxicating liquor.
2. In any place of business licensed in accordance with this Chapter,
persons at least eighteen (18) years of age may stock, arrange
displays, operate the cash register or scanner connected to a cash
register, accept payment for, and sack for carry-out intoxicating
liquor. Delivery of intoxicating liquor away from the licensed
business premises cannot be performed by anyone under the age of
twenty-one (21) years. Any licensee who employs any person under
the age of twenty-one (21) years, as authorized by this Subsection,
shall, when at least fifty percent (50%) of the licensee's gross sales
does not consist of non-alcoholic sales, have an employee twentyone
(21) years of age or older on the licensed premises during all
hours of operation.
3. Persons eighteen (18) years of age or older may, when acting in the
capacity of a waiter or waitress, accept payment for or serve
intoxicating liquor in places of business which sell food for
consumption on the premises if at least fifty percent (50%) of all
sales in those places consists of food; provided that nothing in this
Section shall authorize persons under twenty-one (21) years of age
to mix or serve across the bar, intoxicating beverages.
B. Sales To Minor — Exceptions. No licensee, his/her employee, or any
other person, shall procure for, sell, vend, give away or otherwise
supply any intoxicating liquor in any quantity whatsoever to any person
under the age of twenty-one (21) years, except that this Section shall
not apply to the parent or guardian of the minor nor to the supplying of
intoxicating liquor to a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years
for medical purposes only, or to the administering of such intoxicating
liquor to such person by a duly licensed physician. No person shall be
denied a license or renewal of a license issued under this Chapter solely
due to a conviction for unlawful sale or supply to a minor while serving
in the capacity as an employee of a licensed establishment.
C. Misrepresentation Of Age By Minor To Obtain Liquor — Use Of Altered
Driver's License, Passport Or I.D. Cards, Penalties.
1. No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall represent,
for the purpose of purchasing, asking for or in any way receiving
any intoxicating liquor, that he/she has attained the age of twentyone
(21) years, except in cases authorized by law.
2. In addition to Subsection (C)(1) of this Section, no person under the
age of twenty-one (21) years shall use a reproduced, modified or
altered chauffeur's license, motor vehicle operator's license,
identification card issued by any uniformed service of the United
Section
600.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.060
AO:765
Section 600.070. Miscellaneous Offenses. [Ord. No. 09-40 §1,
11-23-2009]
States, passport or identification card established in Section
302.181, RSMo., for the purpose of purchasing, asking for or in any
way receiving any intoxicating liquor.
D. Minors In Possession Of Intoxicating Liquor. Any person under the age
of twenty-one (21) years, who purchases or attempts to purchase, or
has in his/her possession, any intoxicating liquor as defined in Section
600.010, or who is visibly intoxicated as defined in Section 577.001,
RSMo., or has a detectable blood alcohol content of more than twohundredths
of one percent (0.02%) or more by weight of alcohol in such
person's blood is in violation of this Section. For purposes of
prosecution under this Section, a manufacturer-sealed container
describing that there is intoxicating liquor therein need not be opened
or the contents therein tested to verify that there is intoxicating liquor
in such container. The alleged violator may allege that there was no
intoxicating liquor in such container, but the burden of proof of such
allegation is on such person, as it shall be presumed that such a sealed
container describing that there is intoxicating liquor therein contains
intoxicating liquor.
A. Unlawful For Licensed Retailer To Purchase From Other Than Licensed
Wholesaler. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to purchase any
intoxicating liquor except from, by or through a duly licensed wholesale
liquor dealer in this State. It shall be unlawful for such retail liquor
dealer to sell or offer for sale any intoxicating liquor purchased in
violation of the provisions of this Section.
B. Mixing Liquor With Drugs Prohibited. No licensee, or any other person,
shall for any purpose whatsoever mix or permit or cause to be mixed
with any intoxicating liquor kept for sale, sold or supplied by him/her as
a beverage, any drug or form of methyl alcohol or impure form of
alcohol.
C. Unlawful To Sell Unlabeled Liquor — Penalty. It shall be unlawful for
any person to sell any intoxicating liquor which has not been inspected
and labeled according to the provisions of the Liquor Control Law of
Missouri, and any such person upon conviction shall have his/her
license revoked and shall be ineligible to receive any subsequent liquor
license for a period of two (2) years thereafter.
D. Only Those Liquors Authorized By License To Be Kept On Premises. It
shall be unlawful for any licensee licensed for the sale of intoxicating
liquor at retail by the drink for consumption on the premises to keep in
or upon the premises described in such license any intoxicating liquor
other than the kind of liquor expressly authorized to be sold by such
licensee or any kind of liquor used exclusively as an ingredient in any
foods being prepared and sold on the premises.
Section
600.060
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
600.070
AO:766
E. Off-Premises Consumption.
1. No licensee shall sell intoxicating liquor at retail in the original
package, not to be consumed on the premises where sold, in any
original package containing less than fifty (50) milliliters.
2. No licensee shall permit any person to remove from the licensed
premises any intoxicating liquor in any unsealed glass, bottle, can
or other open container of any type.
3. All licensees shall post a notice at each exit of the premises which is
used by customers or patrons that "NO ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
MAY BE CARRIED IN AN OPEN CONTAINER OUT OF THIS
BUILDING".
F. Drinking In Public Places Prohibited.
1. For purposes of this Section, the term "public place" shall mean any
public street, highway, alley, sidewalk, thoroughfare or other public
way of the City, or any parking lot.
2. No person shall drink or ingest any intoxicating liquor in or on any
public place.
3. No person shall possess or have under his/her control any unsealed
glass, bottle, can or other open container of any type containing
any intoxicating liquor while in or upon any public place.
4. No person shall possess or have under his/her control any unsealed
glass, bottle, can or other open container of any type containing
any intoxicating liquor while within or on any motor vehicle while
the same is being operated upon, or parked or standing in or upon,
any public place. Any person operating a motor vehicle shall be
deemed to be in possession of an open container contained within
the motor vehicle he/she has control of whether or not he/she has
actual physical possession of the open container.
G. Live Entertainment On Premises Prohibited. No person licensed for the
sale of intoxicating liquor by the drink for consumption on the premises
shall permit or allow any live entertainment on the premises. The
playing and singing of music solely shall not be considered
entertainment under this Section.
H. Window Displays. Licensees shall not place or permit the placing of any
object on or within the windows of premises covered by licenses which
shall impede or obstruct vision from the exterior into the interior. This
prohibition shall include illuminated signs, floral decorations, posters,
placards, paintings or writings and all other similar devices or designs.
In case venetian blinds are used in windows, slats shall be removed
entirely across the blind so as to make a visible space beginning at four
(4) feet from the sidewalk, and extending six (6) feet above the
sidewalk, if the venetian blinds are kept closed. If the venetian blinds
Section
600.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.070
AO:767
Section 600.080. Administration of Law — License Suspension.
[Ord. No. 09-40 §1, 11-23-2009; Ord. No. 10-48 §1, 11-8-2010]
are kept open, it shall not be necessary to remove slats provided the
slats at all times shall be adjusted horizontally so that the flat surfaces
of the seats are parallel with the floor of the licensed premises. If
curtains are used, they must be drawn apart so as to permit a clear view
into the interior of the premises.
I. Notice To Police By Retail Licensee Of Certain Conditions. Each retail
licensee under this Chapter or an employee of the licensee shall notify
the Police Department of all conditions which would make the licensed
premises not be an orderly place or house that they are unable to
immediately cause to cease, and shall also notify immediately the Police
Department of the occurrence of any assault or any other act of
violence upon their premises.
A. Suspension Or Revocation Of License — When — Manner. The Hearing
Officer may suspend or revoke the license of any person for cause
shown. In such cases the City Clerk shall schedule a hearing before the
Hearing Officer not less than ten (10) days prior to the effective date of
revocation or suspension, and prior to the hearing the Clerk shall give
not less than ten (10) days' written notice specifying grounds for the
suspension or revocation thereof to the licensee of the grounds upon
which the license is sought to be revoked or suspended and the time,
date and place of the hearing. Notice may be accomplished by personal
delivery, U.S. mail or by posting on the licensed premises. The hearing
shall be conducted in accordance with Section 600.090 of this Chapter.
B. Grounds For Suspension Or Revocation. A license may be suspended or
revoked for any of the following reasons:
1. Violating any of the provisions of either this Chapter, Chapters 311
or 312, RSMo., or any ordinance of the City;
2. Failing to obtain or keep a license from the State Supervisor of
Liquor Control;
3. Making a false affidavit in an application for a license under this
Chapter;
4. Failing to keep an orderly place or house;
5. Selling, offering for sale, possessing or knowingly permitting the
consumption on the licensed premises of any kind of intoxicating
liquors, the sale, possession or consumption of which is not
authorized under the license;
6. Selling, offering for sale, possessing or knowingly permitting the
consumption of any intoxicating liquor which has not been
inspected and labeled according to the laws of the State of
Missouri; or
Section
600.070
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
600.080
AO:768
Section 600.090. Hearings Upon Suspension or Revocation of
Licenses. [Ord. No. 09-40 §1, 11-23-2009; Ord. No. 10-48 §1,
11-8-2010]
7. Selling, giving, or otherwise supplying intoxicating liquor to:
a. Any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years,
b. Any person during unauthorized hours on the licensed
premises,
c. A habitual drunkard or to any person who is under or
apparently under the influence of intoxicating liquor, or
d. Any person on the licensed premises during a term of
suspension as ordered by the Council.
C. Automatic Revocation/Suspension. A license shall be revoked
automatically if the licensee's State liquor license is revoked or if the
licensee is convicted in any court of any violation of Chapter 311 or
Chapter 312, RSMo., or of any felony violation of Chapter 195, RSMo.,
in the course of business. A license shall be suspended automatically if
the licensee's State liquor license is suspended, and the suspension
shall be for a term not less than that imposed by the State.
D. Effect Of Suspension. No person whose license shall have been
suspended by order of the Hearing Officer shall sell or give away any
intoxicating liquor during the time such suspension is in effect. Any
licensee desiring to keep premises open for the sale of food or
merchandise during the period of suspension shall display the Hearing
Officer's order of suspension in a conspicuous place on the premises so
that all persons visiting the premises may readily see the same.
A. Testimony — Evidence. Hearings before the Hearing Officer shall be in
the nature of a contested case. Testimony of witnesses and other
evidence pertinent to the inquiry may be taken in such hearings, and all
proceedings in such hearings shall be recorded. Any person residing or
conducting a business within two hundred (200) feet of the
establishment shall have the right to produce witnesses and testimony.
B. Witnesses — How Summoned. Subpoenas may be issued by the Hearing
Officer for any person whose testimony is desired at any hearing. Such
subpoenas may be served and returns thereon made by any agent and
in the same manner as provided by law for the service of subpoenas in
civil suits in the Circuit Courts of this State. The Hearing Officer also
may issue subpoenas duces tecum requiring the production of
documents or other items pertaining to the subject of the inquiry.
C. Witnesses To Be Sworn. Before any witness shall testify in any such
hearing, he/she shall be sworn by the City Clerk to tell the truth and
nothing but the truth.
Section
600.080
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.090
AO:769
Section 600.100. Wine Sampling and Tasting. [CC 1999 §3-47; Ord.
No. 09-40 §1, 11-23-2009]
Section 600.110. Penalties. [Ord. No. 09-40 §1, 11-23-2009]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall upon
conviction be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding one hundred
eighty (180) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 605
D. Decision — Suspension Or Revocation. If the evidence supports a
finding that the license should be revoked or suspended pursuant to
Section 600.080 of this Chapter, the Hearing Officer shall issue a
written order which shall include specific findings of fact and
conclusions of law setting forth the grounds for the action taken. If the
evidence fails to support a finding that the license should be revoked or
suspended, then no such order shall be issued.
E. Appeal. Any applicant or licensee aggrieved by a decision of the
Hearing Officer may appeal such decision to the Circuit Court pursuant
to the procedure set out in Code Section 430.090. The appeal shall not
stay the effect of the Hearing Officer's decision.
A. A person or entity holding a license granted by the City for the sale of
liquor in the original package not to be opened or consumed on the
premises may provide a sampling or tasting of wine, malt beverages
and distilled spirits to customers upon issuance of a permit by the
Supervisor of Liquor Control and obtaining a City permit for sampling
subject to the following:
1. Such sampling or tasting shall be limited to a serving of one (1)
ounce samples and not more than a total of two (2) ounces to any
one (1) person from any one (1) bottle of product. No person shall
be allowed combined samples in excess of that allowed under the
Division of Alcohol and Tobacco Control Tasting Guidelines for food
demonstrations at any given sampling session whether or not a
food demonstration is occurring.
2. Consumption of the sample must take place within the licensed
premise where the sample is served.
3. No sampling or tasting shall be permitted for any customer under
the age of twenty-one (21) years.
4. Alcoholic beverage samples shall not be consumed during hours or
days when the licensed premise is prohibited by law from being
open to the public.
5. Except as specifically permitted by this Section, all other
requirements of this Chapter shall remain in full force and effect.
Section
600.090
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
600.110
AO:770
BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Cross References — As to requirements that dogs be vaccinated, see ch. 210
of this Code.
Editor's Note — Ord. no. 07-80 §1, adopted December 10, 2007, repealed
sections 605.010 — 605.090 and enacted new provisions set out in this
article. Former sections 605.010 — 605.090 derived from CC 1999 §§13-1 —
13-4, 6 — 9, 21-20; ord. no. 03-18 §§1 — 2, 3-10-2003; ord. no. 3056 §§3 —
8.
Section
600.110
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
600.110
AO:771

ARTICLE I
Business Licenses
Section 605.005. Definitions. [Ord. No. 07-80 §1, 12-10-2007; Ord.
No. 09-37 §1, 11-9-2009]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
APPROVED — Complying with all applicable State laws and City ordinances.
The word "approved" does not give any City Officer or employee discretion
to fail to approve any item or method, except for failure to comply with
applicable City ordinances and State laws.
BUSINESS — Every person, sole proprietorship, corporation, partnership
or other types of business enterprises, contractor, subcontractor,
manufacturer, merchant or wholesaler, excluding charitable and civic
groups, engaged in any business, occupation, pursuit, profession or trade
or in keeping or maintaining an institution, establishment, article, utility or
commodity specified in this Article, except as may be otherwise provided in
this Article.
CITY CLERK — The City Clerk or designated representative.
CITY OFFICER — When duties and responsibilities are given to any City
Officer such as the Finance Director or the Chief of Police, the duties may
be performed by the named officer or any City Officer or employee under
the officer's supervision, if that City Officer or employee has been assigned
by his/her superior to perform the duties in question. Duties concerning
drafting regulations, drafting forms or making recommendations to the City
Council are not to be delegated. Duties concerning administrative appeals
are not to be delegated.
CONTRACTOR — A person who performs, or causes to be performed by
employees or subcontractors, one (1) or more of the categories of building
trades whether for new construction or related to maintenance or repair of
existing structures or buildings.
EMPLOYEE — Any person in the regular employ of a merchant, business or
contractor and whose wages, tips, commissions, fees, draw accounts, salary
or any combination thereof are computed on an hourly, weekly or monthly
basis.
FEES — Unless otherwise provided, all license and permit fees and taxes
levied on or required to be paid, as provided in this Code, by any merchant,
manufacturer, contractor or business.
FINANCE DIRECTOR — The Finance Director or designated representative.
LICENSE — Unless otherwise provided, all licenses and permits required to
be secured or had, as provided in this Code, by any merchant, manufacturer,
business or contractor.
Section
605.005
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.005
AO:773
LICENSE YEAR — Unless otherwise provided, the license year shall begin
on January first (1st) and shall end on December thirty-first (31st) next.
MANUFACTURER — Every person, excluding charitable and civic groups,
engaged in the process of manufacturing, fabricating or refining at any
place occupied for that purpose within the City, except as may be otherwise
provided by ordinance.
MERCHANT — Every person, excluding charitable and civic groups,
engaged in the selling or leasing of any goods (new or used), wares
(including food or beverages) or merchandise at any store, vehicle, stand or
place occupied for that purpose within the City, or from catalog stores and
similar operations within the City, directly to ultimate consumers for use or
consumption except as may be otherwise provided by ordinance.
PERSON — Natural person, firm, partnership, co-partnership, corporation,
company, association, joint stock association and/or their lessees, duly
constituted trustees or receivers, heirs, administrators or assigns.
RETAILER — Any person who sells to a consumer or to any person for any
purpose other than resale.
SAFE — Having no defect in design, materials, workmanship, method of
installation or method of normal use which creates a hazard to any person
or property.
SPECIAL EVENT — An activity that takes place in a short period of time
usually less than one (1) week and generally occurring once per year.
Examples of special events include Pumpkin Daze, the fair and the rodeo.
SUBCONTRACTOR — A licensed contractor under contract or performing
for and not on the payroll of a licensed contractor or owner.
TEMPORARY LICENSE — An extension of time within which the prior year's
license may be used to operate on a temporary basis but not to extend
longer than March second (2nd) of the license year or a license issued for a
brief duration as authorized in this Chapter.
TEMPORARY SEASONAL BUSINESS LICENSE — A business license to a
business that operates during a specific period of time during the year and
operates ninety (90) days or less in a year.
WHOLESALER — Any person engaged in the business of making sales of
merchandise or products to any other person engaged in the business of
making sales of merchandise or products at retail within the City.
Section 605.010. General Provisions. [Ord. No. 07-80 §1,
12-10-2007; Ord. No. 09-37 §1, 11-9-2009]
A. Scope. The provisions of this Section apply to all business licenses of
the City, except where an ordinance concerning a particular business
contains a specific provision to the contrary, in which case the specific
provision shall apply.
Section
605.005
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
605.010
AO:774
B. License Required. It shall be unlawful for a person to operate a business
within the City without first having obtained a valid business license or
permit. It shall be unlawful for a person to continue to operate a
business after the expiration of the license unless an application has
been made for a new license and a new license has been issued.
1. Advertising or soliciting constitutes engaging in business. It shall
be unlawful for any person who is required by the provisions of this
Chapter to secure a license to advertise the activity without first
securing such license. The listing in an advertisement of an address
which is inside the City or a telephone number which is located
inside the City shall constitute prima facie evidence that the person
is engaged in the business activity that is being advertised. For
purposes of this Section, "advertising" means the use of any
handbill, billboard, sign, newspaper, radio, loudspeaker, television,
telephone listing, computer listing or other message or device
whereby the services or products are offered to the public.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person who is required by the provisions
of this Chapter to have a license in order to engage in the licensed
activity to solicit, to accept consideration or to offer the services or
products to the public without first securing a license.
C. Application — Issuance Of License. In the absence of a provision to the
contrary, applications for business licenses shall be made to the City
Clerk on forms supplied by the City Clerk. No license shall be issued to
any merchant, manufacturer, business, occupation or trade until all of
its delinquent financial obligations to the City have been paid. Financial
obligations include, but are not limited to, personal property taxes,
other license fees, water service fees, sewer service fees, permit fees or
inspection fees. If all required information is supplied, the requested
fees have been paid, and it does not appear that any applicable State
law or City ordinance will be violated by the operation of the business,
the license shall be issued.
D. Late Fee. Businesses (except temporary and seasonal businesses)
failing to submit an application for license renewal by January first (1st)
will be deemed to be late. The late fee assessed will be twelve dollars
fifty cents ($12.50) if paid before January thirty-first (31st) and the late
fee will be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) after January thirty-first (31st).
E. License Non-Assignable. No license shall be assignable, transferable or
refundable.
F. Occupancy Permit Required. Licenses required by this Article shall not
be issued until an occupancy permit has been issued and approved by
the Community Development Department unless the business is one
that in common practice would not necessarily have a business location
in the City. In such a case, the business must provide the address of its
business location on its application and must provide the City with
notice of any change of address within a reasonable time after the
Section
605.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.010
AO:775
change. In addition, no occupancy or building permit may be issued
until such time contractors and/or subcontractors have made
application for a business license. [Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
G. Issuing Agency. The City Clerk shall issue all approved licenses and
subsequent licenses.
H. Maintenance And Posting Of License. All licenses granted by the City
shall be carefully preserved at the address for which they were issued
as shown thereon, be prominently posted and be available for
examination during normal business hours by any duly authorized
agent of the City.
I. Denial Of License. No license or permit shall be issued to any applicant
who shall have failed to pay any other obligation then due and owing to
the City, including, but not limited to, sales tax, tourism tax, personal
property tax, inspection fees and sewer connection fees, or be in
violation of any lawfully imposed building, health, safety or zoning code
and/or ordinance; nor shall any license or permit be issued to any
applicant for the purpose of conducting business at any location where
any neighborhood improvement district assessment is delinquent and
unpaid.
J. Inspections. Any business in the City may be inspected by City Officers
and employees authorized to enforce provisions of ordinances relating
to that business. In the absence of an emergency and in the absence of
sound reasons whereby an inspection cannot be made during regular
business hours, inspections shall be made during regular business
hours. Immediately upon arriving at the place of business for the
purpose of making an inspection, the City Officer or employee making
the inspection shall identify himself/herself and shall state that the
purpose of the visit is to make an inspection. No person having control
of any business premises shall refuse to permit a City Officer or
employee to enter for the purpose of making an inspection. If entry is
refused, the City Officer or employee shall leave and seek a search
warrant or other appropriate court order to gain entry.
K. Issuance. Licenses shall be issued to each applicant complying with all
applicable State laws and City ordinances and licenses shall be refused
for any applicant failing to comply with all such applicable laws and
ordinances.
L. Issuance Of Temporary License. Upon application for a new business
license and if the City Clerk determines that the requirements for
obtaining a license have been substantially met except for minor
procedural or ministerial matters, a temporary license may be issued
for a period of thirty (30) days upon payment of a processing fee of
fifteen dollars ($15.00). The temporary license may be extended for one
(1) additional thirty (30) day period upon written application to the City
Clerk and a determination that the applicant is making progress toward
compliance with the requirements of this Code.
Section
605.010
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
605.010
AO:776
Section 605.015. License Fees To Be Paid By Businesses. [Ord. No.
07-80 §1, 12-10-2007; Ord. No. 09-37 §1, 11-9-2009]
M. Issuance Of A Temporary Seasonal License. Upon application for a
temporary seasonal business license and if the City Clerk determines
that the requirements for obtaining a business license have been met, a
temporary seasonal business license shall be issued for a period not to
exceed ninety (90) days upon payment of a processing fee of twenty-five
dollars ($25.00). For purposes of this Chapter, a temporary seasonal
business license is not a renewal of a previous license but is a request
for issuance of a new license. [Ord. No. 14-09 §1, 4-28-2014]
A. Every merchant, manufacturer or business, unless exempted by law or
other provisions of this Code, shall pay the following license fee:
Banks and manufacturing $75.00
All other business $50.00
Home-based business $25.00
Ambulance service per vehicle $50.00
Apartment houses
(including duplexes, triplex,
etc.)
$50.00
Each additional unit $1.00
Hotels and motels, first (1st) unit $50.00
Each additional unit $1.00
B. This Chapter shall not apply to religious, charitable and non-profit civic
organizations, sales made by participants at a special event, or any
business which the City is prohibited from licensing or regulating by
State Statute or other superseding law. This provision will include
teachers, professors in a college, lawyers, certified public accountants,
dentists, chiropractors, optometrists, physicians, surgeons,
veterinarians, architects, professional engineers or land surveyors.
C. No claims or refunds shall be allowed under this Article.
D. Exemptions From Obtaining A Business License. A business license is
not required for delivery within the City for goods purchased or
acquired outside the City where there is no intent to evade the
provisions of this Chapter.
E. No license or permit provided for or required under any provision of the
Code or other ordinance of the City shall be issued by any department
of the City Government to any contractor until such contractor has
provided a certificate of insurance for Workers' Compensation coverage
if said contractor is required to cover such liability under Chapter 287,
RSMo.
Section
605.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.015
AO:777
Section 605.020. Duration of Licenses — Prorating of License Fees,
Etc. [Ord. No. 07-80 §1, 12-10-2007; Ord. No. 09-37 §1, 11-9-2009]
Section 605.030. Separate License For Each Place of Business.
[Ord. No. 07-80 §1, 12-10-2007; Ord. No. 09-37 §1, 11-9-2009]
Section 605.040. Engaging in More Than One Occupation At The
Same Place of Business. [Ord. No. 07-80 §1, 12-10-2007; Ord. No.
09-37 §1, 11-9-2009]
Every person engaged in more than one (1) occupation, where such
occupations are operated as one (1) business under the same management
and at the same location, shall pay an individual license for each of such
businesses.
Section 605.050. Record of Licenses Issued. [Ord. No. 07-80 §1,
12-10-2007; Ord. No. 09-37 §1, 11-9-2009]
The City shall keep a complete record of all licenses issued under this
Chapter showing the name and address of the licensee, the nature of the
license and the dates of issuance and expiration of such licensee.
F. Child Day Care Centers. It shall be unlawful for any person to establish,
maintain or operate a child day care center for children or to advertise
as being able to perform services for a child day care center without
having, in full force and effect, a written license granted by the Missouri
Department of Health and Senior Services (State license).
A. The term of licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be for one (1)
year beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of the same year. All
license fees shall be paid in full and in advance.
B. Every merchant, manufacturer, contractor or business renewing a
license shall submit the required license application and fee on or
before January 1. Any new merchant, manufacturer, contractor or
business commencing operations or business in the last quarter of the
year shall pay a prorated on fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). [Ord.
No. 14-09 §2, 4-28-2014]
A. A separate license shall be obtained for each place of business operated
by a licensee under this Chapter.
B. A license may be amended to authorize the conduct of the same
business or manufacturing at a different location, provided the control
of the business remains with the same person, upon filing with the City
Clerk an amended application, within fifteen (15) days of the change,
showing the change of address and upon paying a fee of ten dollars
($10.00). It shall also be compulsory that all requirements of the
building, health, safety or zoning codes or ordinances be met in respect
to the new location and premises.
Section
605.015
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
605.060
AO:778
Section 605.060. Proof of Taxes Paid Required. [Ord. No. 07-80 §1,
12-10-2007; Ord. No. 09-37 §1, 11-9-2009]
Section 605.070. Violations — Denial, Non-Renewal, Suspension or
Revocation. [Ord. No. 07-80 §1, 12-10-2007; Ord. No. 09-37 §1,
11-9-2009; Ord. No. 10-48 §1, 11-8-2010]
A. Any person, firm or corporation who is required to pay sales tax to the
City of Republic, Missouri, must show proof to the City Clerk that all
sales taxes due to the State of Missouri and the City of Republic,
Missouri, have been paid to the date of the application prior to being
issued a City business license.
B. Any person, firm or corporation failing to provide proof of payment of
such sales tax shall not be issued a City business license until such time
as said State and City sales taxes and penalties and interest thereon are
fully paid and the Department of Revenue for the State of Missouri
certifies that same are fully paid.
A. Delinquent Payments. All license fees provided for in this Article shall
be deemed delinquent if not paid on or before the due date.
B. Safety Precautions. No contractor or trade doing business within the
City limits and actively engaged in the business of electrical work,
paving, plumbing, sewer work or gas fitting shall permit any unsafe
conditions to be left without placement of suitable warning lights, signs
or barriers and recognized suitable trench safety. Any such violation
shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by action for civil
damages or injunction or both such remedies.
C. Grounds For Denial Or Non-Renewal. The City Clerk shall not issue a
business license when the City Clerk has reason to believe that the
issuance of the license will result in the operation of the business in
violation of this Code or that the operation of the business will cause or
result in a nuisance or that a nuisance is on the land where the business
is to be licensed. Upon the City Clerk making a determination that there
may be a violation of this Section, the City Clerk shall notify the
applicant in writing that the City Clerk will not issue the license or that
the City Clerk will not renew the license, stating the reasons for the City
Clerk's decision.
D. Procedure For Denial Or Non-Renewal. If the City Clerk determines
that the application for a license is not to be granted or if the City Clerk
determines not to renew the license, then a written notice to the person
requesting the license or renewal thereof shall give the applicant at
least five (5) days' notice to request an informal meeting with the City
Clerk. The City Clerk shall, if an informal meeting is requested within
that time, hold a meeting with the applicant, informing the applicant of
the basis upon which the decision was made and shall attempt to
informally resolve the matter. The informal meeting shall be held within
five (5) days of receipt of the written request for an informal meeting.
Section
605.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.070
AO:779
After such informal meeting, the City Clerk may reverse the City Clerk's
decision or may reaffirm the prior decision in writing. The City Clerk's
written decision shall be issued within five (5) days of the informal
meeting.
Thereafter, the applicant may request a public hearing by filing a
written request with the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the date of
the City Clerk's written decision. At the public hearing, a hearing officer
appointed by the City Administrator shall hear evidence, determine the
facts upon the evidence presented at the hearing and render a decision.
The public hearing shall be held within twenty (20) days of the receipt
of the written request by the City Clerk. The decision of the hearing
officer shall be in writing and shall be issued within ten (10) days of the
hearing. The hearing may be continued by the hearing officer for good
cause shown by any party to the proceeding.
E. Revocation Or Suspension Of License Authorized. The license of a
merchant, manufacturer, contractor or business may be revoked by a
hearing officer after public hearing and notice for any one (1) or more
of the following reasons:
1. Failure to comply with the provisions of this Article or any other
ordinance pertaining to the business codes, building codes, fire
codes, health codes or zoning codes or ordinances of the City.
2. Failure to operate the business as required by law.
3. Creation of a public nuisance.
4. Providing false information to obtain a license.
5. Failure to pay any obligation due and owing to the City.
F. Notice Of Suspension Or Revocation Hearing. Upon the City Clerk
determining that a possible violation of this Article has occurred, the
City Clerk shall issue a notice that a hearing relative to the possible
suspension or revocation of the business license is to be held pursuant
to this Section. The licensee shall have at least five (5) days' written
notice of the time and place of such hearing. The written notice shall be
directed by certified or registered U.S. mail to the business address of
the licensee on the licensee's application on file in the office of the City
Clerk and shall specify the grounds upon which the license is sought to
be suspended or revoked.
At the public hearing, a hearing officer appointed by the City
Administrator shall hear evidence, determine the facts based upon the
evidence presented at the hearing and render a decision. The decision
of the hearing officer shall be in writing and shall be issued within ten
(10) days of the hearing. The hearing may be continued by the hearing
officer for good cause shown by any party to the proceeding.
Section
605.070
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
605.070
AO:780
G. Hearing On Suspension Or Revocation — Appeals. The licensee may
present such evidence on licensee's behalf as the Hearing Officer
deems relevant. The Hearing Officer's decision may be appealed
pursuant to the procedure set out in Code Section 430.090. The appeal
shall not stay the effect of the Hearing Officer's decision.
H. Conduct Of Hearings. The hearing officer shall have all the powers set
forth in this Article and Chapter 430 of this Code and shall conduct the
hearing in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Article and
Chapter 430. The hearing officer shall determine whether or not there
is a basis for not issuing the license, not renewing the license,
suspending the license or revoking the license. The decision of the
hearing officer and the right to appeal his decision shall be in
accordance with this Article and Chapter 430 of this Code. All notice for
purposes of this Section shall be deemed to occur two (2) days after the
date the notice is placed in the United States mail, postage prepaid.
I. Suspension Disposition. If the hearing officer determines that the
violation has been corrected or that the licensee is actively and
continuously working to correct the violation, then the hearing officer
may issue a suspension order not to exceed sixty (60) days. Upon
expiration of the period of suspension, the licensee shall submit a
written request to the City Clerk for reinstatement of the license. If the
City Clerk determines that the licensee is in compliance with the
requirements of this Article, the City Clerk shall issue a written notice
of reinstatement. If the City Clerk determines that the licensee is not in
compliance with this Article, the proceedings for revocation of a license
shall be instituted.
J. Revocation Disposition. If the hearing officer determines that there is a
violation of this Article that has not been corrected or that the violation
is incapable of being corrected or that the licensee is not actively and
continuously working to correct the violation, the hearing officer shall
revoke the business license. Upon revocation of a license, a business
shall not be eligible to apply for a business license in the City for one (1)
year from the date of revocation. After one (1) year, the licensee may
apply for a license subject to meeting all requirements set forth in this
Article.
K. Discontinuance Of Or Withholding Of City Services. The City, its boards,
commissions or agents shall withhold or discontinue all City
improvements or services of whatsoever nature, including the
furnishing of sewer, water, electricity and gas, and further, no permits
shall be issued by the Community Development Department or Public
Works Department to any entity or persons operating a business within
the City limits without a valid business license issued pursuant to this
Article. Disconnection from the City water utilities may be carried out if
such violation is not corrected within ten (10) days after delivery of a
notice of such violation. [Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
Section
605.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.080
AO:781
Section 605.080. Penalty. [Ord. No. 07-80 §1, 12-10-2007; Ord. No.
09-37 §1, 11-9-2009]
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any activity requiring a
business license without obtaining a license or for any person to knowingly
makes any false statement in applying for a license or for any person to fail
to comply with any provision of this Article and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished as provided by Section 100.220.
Section 605.090. (Reserved)
Section
605.080
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
605.090
AO:782
ARTICLE II
Itinerant Merchants96
Section 605.100. License — Required. [CC 1999 §13-10; Ord. No.
505 §2]
No person shall exercise, carry on or engage in selling, exchanging or
trading personal property, goods, wares or merchandise from a motor
vehicle in the City without first having obtained a license therefor from the
City.
Section 605.110. License — Fees. [CC 1999 §13-11; Ord. No. 505 §2]
Section 605.120. Non-Applicability of Article To Agricultural or
Horticultural Products, Etc. [CC 1999 §13-12; Ord. No. 505 §4]
This Article shall not apply to agricultural or horticultural products, grown
or produced in the State, when the same are offered for sale or exchange
by the producer thereof, nor to their agents or employees; nor shall this
Article apply to motor vehicles used and operated by established merchants
or by persons who have paid an ad valorem tax in the City for the current
year, equal to or more than the prescribed privilege tax levied by Section
605.110; nor to those merchants of the City in delivering goods, wares or
merchandise sold at their establishment or place of business within the
limits of the City.
Section 605.130. Collection and Accounting For Taxes Collected
Under Article. [CC 1999 §13-13; Ord. No. 505 §5]
The license taxes provided for in Section 605.110 shall be collected by the
Director of Finance and accounted for as other license taxes. The license
required by Section 605.100 shall not be issued until the amount prescribed
therefor shall have been paid to the Director of Finance, and no license shall
be assigned or transferred. All licenses shall be signed by the Mayor and
attested by the City Clerk and countersigned by the Director of Finance.
A. The license required by Section 605.100 shall be issued by the City
Clerk upon payment of a fee as follows:
1. For a vehicle with a capacity of one-half (½) ton or less: $20.00 per
year or fraction.
2. For a vehicle with a capacity of one-half (½) ton not exceeding one
and one-half (1½) ton: $30.00 per year or fraction.
3. For a vehicle with a capacity of over one and one-half (1½) ton:
$50.00 per year or fraction.
96.Cross Reference — As to solicitors and canvassers, see ch. 610 of this Code.
Section
605.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.130
AO:783

ARTICLE III
Exchange Telephone Service — Gross Receipts License Tax97
Section 605.140. Exchange Telephone Service — License Tax. [Ord.
No. 4570 §§1 — 4, 10-14-1969; Ord. No. 06-40 §1, 4-24-2006]
A. Every person, firm, company or corporation now or hereafter engaged
in the business of furnishing exchange telephone service in the City of
Republic, Missouri, shall pay the said City as an annual license tax,
three percent (3%) of the gross receipts derived from the furnishing of
such service within said City, as hereinafter set forth.
B. All such persons, firms, companies or corporations mentioned in
Subsection (A) hereof shall file with the City Clerk of the said City on or
before the fifteenth (15th) day of July, 1969, a sworn statement of the
gross receipts derived by such person, firm, company or corporation
from the furnishing of such service during the period from January 1,
1969 to June 30, 1969 and on or before the fifteenth (15th) day of July
and January of each calendar year thereafter a similar statement of the
gross receipts derived by such person, firm, company or corporation
from the furnishing of such service during the six (6) month period
immediately preceding. At the time of filing any such statement, the
person, firm, company or corporation involved shall pay to the City
Collector of the City three percent (3%) of such gross receipts.
C. The first payment of tax provided for herein shall be due and payable on
July 15, 1969 and shall be for the period from January 1, 1969 to June
30, 1969.
D. The payments required by the provisions of this Section shall be in lieu
of all other excises, changes, exactions, rentals, impositions or other
license or occupation taxes heretofore imposed upon any person, firm,
company or corporation engaged in the business described in
Subsection (A) hereof, but nothing herein contained shall be construed
to exempt such person, firm, company or corporation from any general
or special ad valorem tax imposed upon the public generally by said
City.
E. By letter dated April 12, 2006, the Director of Revenue set forth
information as to gross receipts and taxes paid by telecommunications
companies. The figures appear to show a substantial under payment of
taxes to the City of Republic and are at best in need of further analysis
to determine if other inaccuracies in the figures may exist that would
substantially alter the calculation of the revenue neutral rate. That
based upon the most reliable information now before the Board, the
Board determines that the revenue neutral rate for the City of Republic
97.Editor's Note — Ord. no. 06-40 was passed in compliance with HB209 of the 2006 Missouri
legislative session. Provisions contained in HB209 were subsequently deemed
unconstitutional by the Missouri Supreme Court on August 8, 2006 in City of Springfield,
Appellant V Sprint Spectrum, L.P., Respondent Case No. SC87238. Consequently, this
ordinance was not codified.
Section
605.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.140
AO:785
to be three percent (3%) and the percentage set forth in Subsections (A
— B) of this Section is adjusted to reflect the revenue neutral rate and
is to be effective July 1, 2006.
F. It is the intent of the City of Republic to fully comply with the
requirements of law; however, certain Cities in the State of Missouri
have filed suit challenging the validity of Section 92.086, RSMo., and
should a court of law determine in that case or any other case instituted
to establish a different revenue neutral rate for the City of Republic that
a lesser rate should apply, then the City's rate shall be adjusted to meet
the judgment of the court upon exhaustion of all appeals.
Section
605.140
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
605.140
AO:786
ARTICLE IV
Video Services Providers and Utility Use Right-Of-Way and Other
Property
Section 605.150. Current Franchises Not Affected. [Ord. No. 08-07
§1, 1-28-2008]
Nothing herein shall be deemed to alter the continuing obligations of the
current cable franchisee of the City as more fully set forth in Section
605.160(6) of this Article.
Section 605.160. Video Services Providers. [Ord. No. 08-07 §1,
1-28-2008]
A. The following provisions relating to video service providers are hereby
adopted as ordinance provisions of a general and permanent nature:
Video Service Providers.
1. Definitions. The words and phrases used in this Section of this
Article shall have the meaning as set forth in Section 67.2677,
RSMo., or, if not defined therein, shall have such meanings as
established by City Code.
2. Franchise fee. Pursuant to Section 67.2689 RSMo., and as partial
compensation for use of the City's public rights-of-way, each video
service provider or other person providing cable services or video
services within the City shall, to the extent permitted by law, pay to
the City a fee of five percent (5%) of the gross revenues from such
video service provider in the geographic area of the City. Such
payment shall be made as required by Section 67.2689, RSMo. The
City shall have the right to audit any video service provider as
authorized by Section 67.2691, RSMo. Late payments shall accrue
interest due to the City compounded monthly at one and one-half
percent (1.5%) or such other maximum rate as may be established
by law.
3. Customer service requirements. All video service providers
providing service within the City shall adopt and comply with the
minimum customer service requirements set forth in Section
67.2692, RSMo. Notice or receipt of this Article by the video
service provider shall be deemed notice of the City invoking such
customer service requirements.
4. Rights-of-way regulation; indemnification; permits and compliance
with other laws. Video service providers shall comply with the
requirements of Sections 67.2707 and 67.2709, RSMo., and
Chapter 515 of this Code relating to use of the City rights-of-way.
Each video service provider shall indemnify and hold harmless the
City and its officers, employees and agents from any loss or damage
including, but not limited to, attorneys' fees as provided in such
Section
605.150
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.160
AO:787
Section 605.170. Severability. [Ord. No. 08-07 §1, 1-28-2008]
The portions of this Article shall be severable. In the event that any portion
of this Article is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
the remaining portions of this Article are valid, unless the court finds the
ordinances or regulations, but in no event less than the obligation
on video service providers set forth in Section 67.2695, RSMo.
The City may require documentation of such indemnification by
written agreement or other instrument to the extent permitted by
law. In addition, video service providers shall be subject to and
comply with such supplementary provisions relating to placement,
screening and relocation of facilities as provided in Article and
such other applicable laws of the City, except as may be otherwise
validly pre-empted. Notwithstanding any other ordinance to the
contrary, no facilities to be used for video services shall be installed
without obtaining a permit from the City authorizing the location
and plans for such facilities; provided that this provision shall not
apply to installation of otherwise lawful and authorized poles or
wires.
5. Public, educational and governmental channels. Each video service
provider shall designate a number of channels for public,
educational and governmental programming consistent with
Section 67.2703, RSMo.; provided that any greater number of
channels, as may be required in the incumbent cable franchise or
franchise ordinance, shall be required pursuant to Section
67.2703.2, RSMo. The City shall bear no cost relating to the
transmission, availability or maintenance of such channels unless
expressly authorized by the City in writing and approved by the
Governing Body. Incumbent cable operators and other video
service providers shall provide support for such public, educational
and governmental channels consistent with Section 67.2703.8,
RSMo.
6. Continued obligations. The obligations of a cable service provider
or video service provider as set forth in any existing cable services
or video services franchise or ordinance shall also continue to apply
to the full extent permitted by applicable law.
7. Reservation of rights. The City retains all rights in Sections
67.2675 through 67.2714, RSMo., inclusive, and may take any and
all actions permitted by law to exercise such rights or to enforce
such obligations on providers of video service.
8. Notice. A copy of this Article shall be delivered to each video
service provider operating in the City after notice to the City that
such provider is authorized to provide service within the City;
provided that the provisions of this Article shall, to the extent
permitted by law, not be affected by any claimed or actual failure of
a service provider to have received delivery of a copy of this Article.
Section
605.160
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
605.170
AO:788
valid portions of this Article are so essential and inseparably connected
with and dependent upon the void portion that it cannot be presumed that
the City Council would have enacted the valid portions without the invalid
ones or unless the court finds that the valid portions standing alone are
incomplete and are incapable of being executed in accordance with the
legislative intent.
Section
605.170
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
605.170
AO:789
Chapter 610
SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS
Section
605.170
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
605.170
AO:790
ARTICLE I
Solicitors
Section 610.010. Definitions. [CC 1999 §27-1; Ord. No. 13-10 §1,
2-25-2013]
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section:
PROFESSIONAL SOLICITOR — A person who receives compensation in any
form whatsoever for solicitation, sales or offers as described in this Section.
PUBLIC SOLICITATION — The act of soliciting from the public through
professional solicitors money, donations, property or financial assistance
of any kind, selling or offering to sell any article, service, publication,
advertisement, ticket or subscription of any type, including the selling
of any publication or advertisement for the same when such publication
is printed less frequently than quarterly on the direct or implied plea
that such solicitation or sale is for charitable, educational, fraternal, civic,
patriotic, religious or philanthropic purposes on the streets, in office or
school buildings, by house to house canvass, in any public place, by
telephone, by mail or in any other way; provided that the term "public
solicitation" shall not include a solicitation by any established religious
body which secures substantially all of its funds from its own members
and constituents, and neither from the public nor through professional
solicitors.
Section 610.020. Registration of Persons Making Public
Solicitations — Required. [CC 1999 §27-2]
No person shall conduct a public solicitation unless the person for whose
benefit the public solicitation is conducted is registered with the City and
has received a solicitor's identification card.
Section 610.030. Registration — Exemptions. [CC 1999 §27-3]
The following persons shall be exempt from registration in connection with
solicitation for the regular purposes for which they are organized: political,
fraternal, civic and labor organizations which secure all or substantially
all of their funds from their own members and constituency and not from
the public, and through volunteers or persons regularly employed by them
on an annual basis for a fixed wage or salary and for purposes other than
solicitation.
Section 610.040. Identification Card — Application. [CC 1999 §27-4;
Ord. No. 13-10 §2, 2-25-2013]
A. Any person required to register under Section 610.020 shall make
application to the City Clerk upon an approved form for registration. No
application will be accepted until satisfactory evidence is presented to
the City Clerk that:
Section
610.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
610.040
AO:791
Section 610.050. Identification Card — Term of. [CC 1999 §27-5]
Registration will be accepted only for the period of time so specified on the
application not to exceed twelve (12) months.
Section 610.060. Identification Card — Termination.
Section 610.070. Licenses Required. [CC 1999 §27-7]
No professional solicitor shall participate in public solicitation until he/she
has obtained the proper licensing from the City Clerk and has paid the
applicable merchant license fee.
Section 610.080. Background Check. [Ord. No. 13-10 §3,
2-25-2013]
For purposes of ascertaining if criminal convictions have occurred,
fingerprinting of applicants or licensees for the purpose of receiving
criminal history record information shall be required with the applicants or
licensees bearing the cost of obtaining the criminal record history per the
fees established by the State of Missouri. A criminal history shall be good
for a period of January first (1st) through December thirty-first (31st) of the
year of the application.
Section 610.090. Reports By Registrants — Records Open To
Inspection. [CC 1999 §27-9]
All persons registered with the City Clerk must maintain, for his/her
inspection or that of his/her duly authorized agent, complete records of
1. The applicant is of good moral character;
2. Shall not have been convicted of a felony in the last five (5) years;
3. Shall not have had his/her registration revoked within the past
three (3) years; and
4. Shall have paid a non-refundable annual application fee of seventyfive
dollars ($75.00) for a calendar year. In addition, a person may
obtain a quarterly permit for a ninety (90) day period and the
application fee for such permit shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00).
5. The applicant shall deliver the application in person to City Hall.
A. Any registration may be revoked or suspended upon a finding by the
Hearing Officer that the registrant has failed to maintain compliance
with the provisions of this Chapter or the conditions of the City Clerk's
acceptance of the application.
B. The hearing procedures set forth in Code Section 605.070 shall apply to
this Chapter.
Section
610.040
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
610.090
AO:792
all transactions in which the registrant engages and for which the public
solicitation was made.
Section 610.100. Solicitations From Occupants of Motor Vehicles
Prohibited. [CC 1999 §27-10]
Without prior approval from the City Clerk, it shall be unlawful for any
person to engage in any public solicitation from the occupants of any motor
vehicle while said motor vehicle shall be upon the public streets or ways
of the City unless the vehicle shall be lawfully parked at the time of said
solicitation.
Section 610.110. Selling and Soliciting in City-Owned Buildings.
[CC 1999 §27-11]
No person shall offer for sale, solicit sales, or sell any item, including
personal services, to employees of the City in City-owned buildings except
offers or sales made to the City.
Section 610.120. Display of Identification Card. [CC 1999 §27-12]
An identification card shall be (when the individual for whom it was issued
is acting as a solicitor) worn on the outer clothing of the solicitor so as to be
reasonably visible to any person who might be approached by said solicitor.
Section 610.130. General Prohibitions. [CC 1999 §27-13; Ord. No.
13-10 §4, 2-25-2013]
A. No solicitor shall enter upon any private property for the purpose of
soliciting funds or other solicitations where the property is clearly
posted in the front yard of said property by a sign visible from the rightof-
way, public or private, indicating a prohibition against soliciting at
said property. Such sign need not exceed one (1) square foot in size and
contain words "No Soliciting" or "No Solicitors" in letters of at least two
(2) inches in height.
B. Any solicitor who shall enter upon any private property for the purpose
of soliciting funds or other solicitations which property is not posted by
a yard sign, as provided in Subsection (A) above, but where a notice in
the form of a sign or sticker is placed upon any door or entrance way
leading into the residence or dwelling at which guests would normally
enter the residence or dwelling, said sign to contain letters not less
than one (1) inch in height and containing words "No Soliciting" or "No
Solicitors", and which are visible to any solicitor or companion, the
solicitor shall forthwith remove himself/herself from the property
without disturbing the persons living therein.
C. Even though a solicitor obtains the consent of the manager or owner to
solicit in the multi-family dwellings or development, the solicitor shall
not solicit from any tenant therein whose property is posted in the
manner provided in Subsection (B) above. For purpose of this
Section
610.090
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
610.130
AO:793
paragraph, a multi-family dwelling unit shall be any building containing
two (2) or more dwelling units within said building, a multi-family
development shall be construed as two (2) or more multi-family
dwelling buildings owned or managed by the same person(s), firm or
corporation.
D. Any solicitor soliciting funds or other solicitations shall make said
solicitations at the front entrance of the residence or dwelling unit,
unless the residence or dwelling does not have a front entrance or it is
obvious that the front entrance is not used, in which case the solicitor
shall use such entrance as is most obviously used as a guest entrance to
the residence, but no solicitor shall go from door to door in the
residence in an attempt to avoid a "No Solicitation" notice.
E. Public solicitation as defined in Section 610.010, Definitions, shall only
be allowed between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 9:00 P.M. All other
requirements as set out in Chapter 610, Solicitors and Canvassers, shall
apply. [Ord. No. 14-14 §1, 6-23-2014]
Section
610.130
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
610.130
AO:794
Chapter 615
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
610.130
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
610.130
AO:795

ARTICLE I
General
Section 615.010. Definitions.
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall mean:
BOARD — The Board of Therapeutic Massage.
CERTIFIED MENTOR — A practitioner who is qualified for license in this
State pursuant to Sections 324.240 to 324.275, RSMo., and who has
practiced professionally for five (5) years, with an average of four hundred
fifty (450) hours per year of teaching and massage hours and who has been
approved by the Board as a massage therapy instructor.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Division of Professional Registration of
the Department of Economic Development.
DIVISION — The Division of Professional Registration of the Department of
Economic Development.
MASSAGE BUSINESS — Any place of business in which massage therapy is
practiced.
MASSAGE THERAPIST — A health care practitioner who provides or offers
to provide massage therapy, as provided in Sections 324.240 to 324.275,
RSMo., to any person at no cost or for a fee, monetary or otherwise,
implying that the massage therapist is trained, experienced and licensed in
massage therapy, and who holds a current, valid license to practice massage
therapy.
MASSAGE THERAPY — A health care profession which involves the
treatment of the body's tonus system through the scientific or skillful
touching, rubbing, pressing or other movements of the soft tissues of the
body with the hands, forearms, elbows, or feet, or with the aid of mechanical
apparatus, for relaxation, therapeutic, remedial or health maintenance
purposes to enhance the mental and physical well-being of the client,
but does not include the prescription of medication, spinal or joint
manipulation, the diagnosis of illness or disease, or any service or
procedure for which a license to practice medicine, chiropractic, physical
therapy, or podiatry is required by law, or to those occupations defined in
Chapter 329, RSMo.
MASSAGE THERAPY INSTRUCTOR — An individual who possesses
teaching credentials satisfactory to the board for the purpose of teaching
massage therapy.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, association or other legal entity.
Section
615.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
615.010
AO:797

ARTICLE II
Massage Business Licensing
Section 615.020. License Required. [CC 1999 §16-59(4); Ord. No.
17-44, 11-21-2017]
No person shall engage in the massage business within the City unless such
person has first been issued a massage business license by the State of
Missouri, and unless such license remains in effect during the term of the
City license. No person shall engage in the practice of massage business
until such person has been issued a merchants license by the City. Before an
individual engages in providing massage therapy the individual must obtain
a massage therapist license from the State of Missouri and must maintain
the State license so long as the individual is providing massage therapist
services.
Section 615.030. License Fee. [CC 1999 §16-59(9); Ord. No. 15-24
§1, 9-28-2015; Ord. No. 17-44, 11-21-2017]
Section 615.040. Transfer of License. [CC 1999 §16-59(10); Ord.
No. 17-44, 11-21-2017]
No massage business license shall be transferable.
Section 615.050. Suspension or Revocation. [Ord. No. 17-44,
11-21-2017]
A. Any person obtaining a license to act as a massage business shall pay to
the City Clerk a license fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). The term of
licenses issued shall be for one (1) year beginning January 1 and ending
December 31 of the same year. All license fees shall be paid in full and
in advance. Any new massage business commencing business in the last
quarter of the year shall pay a prorated fee of twelve dollars and fifty
cents ($12.50).
B. Every massage business renewing a license shall submit the required
license application and fee on or before January 1.
A. Grounds. The City may, in addition to other penalties provided by
ordinance, deny renew, suspend or revoke the license of any massage
business upon conviction for any of the following offenses:
1. An offense resulting in a conviction involving the use of force or
violence upon the person of another;
2. An offense resulting in a conviction involving provisions of Sections
563.011 through 563.140, 563.270 through 563.290, Revised
Statutes of Missouri, or similar laws in any other jurisdiction;
3. Making any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of fact in the
license application for a massage business or in any other
document required by the City in conjunction therewith.
Section
615.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
615.050
AO:799
B. Notice Of Hearing. The City shall notify the licensee in writing of the
intended action and the reasons therefor and the hearing procedures
set forth in Code Section 605.070 shall apply.
Section
615.050
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
615.050
AO:800
Chapter 620
(RESERVED)
Editor's Note — As a result of the 2007 review and changes directed by the
city attorney, this chapter 620 "utilities" has been deleted.
Chapter 625
CIGARETTE TAX
Section 625.010. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section:
CIGARETTE — Any roll used for smoking made wholly or in part of tobacco,
irrespective of size or shape and whether or not such tobacco is flavored,
adulterated or mixed with any other ingredient, the wrapper or cover of
which is made of paper or any other substance or material except tobacco.
OCCUPATION TAX — The tax imposed by the City under this Chapter upon
the business and for the privilege of selling cigarettes at retail in the City.
PACKAGE — The individual package, box or other container from which
sales of cigarettes are normally made or intended to be made.
RETAIL DEALER — Any person other than a wholesale dealer, jobber or
manufacturer engaged in the business of selling, or offering for sale,
cigarettes at retail, by personal handling or through a vending machine, to
the ultimate consumer or agent.
SALE — Any transfer of title or possession or both, exchange or barter,
conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever for a
consideration or by agreement therefor.
WHOLESALE DEALER — Includes persons whose principal business is that
of a wholesale jobber and, those who sell cigarettes to retail dealers or other
persons for the purpose of resale only; and also includes any person dealing
directly with the manufacturer of cigarettes in their purchase and in the
business of selling cigarettes as a first seller.
Section 625.020. License Required — Tax.
Every wholesale dealer, jobber, retail dealer, manufacturer or other person
engaged in selling cigarettes or offering, delivering or displaying cigarettes
for sale within the City shall procure a business license from the City for
each place of business where cigarettes are so sold, displayed or offered for
sale. In addition to procuring such business license, any retail or wholesale
dealer shall pay an occupation tax at the rate of three cents ($.03) for each
package of cigarettes sold, displayed or offered for sale within the City. This
tax shall be paid but once, as provided in Section 625.030, and only by the
person or entity selling, displaying or offering cigarettes for sale.
Section
615.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
625.030
AO:801
Section 625.030. Manner of Payment.
Section 625.040. Illegal Sale of Cigarettes — Penalty For Violation.
A. Payment Due Date. The tax provided by Section 625.020 shall be paid
by the fifteenth (15th) day of next month following the month for which
said tax is due.
B. Duty Of Dealer. It shall be the duty of every dealer, whether retail or
wholesale, who sells, offers or displays for sale any package of
cigarettes to remit a monthly cigarette tax reporting form together with
full payment of the tax due as required by Subsection (A) immediately
above. The canceled check accompanying the monthly cigarette tax
reporting form shall be proof of payment.
C. Each retail and wholesale dealer doing business in the City shall
procure and retain invoices showing the amount and value of the
shipment of cigarettes received by him/her, the date thereof, and the
name of the shipper. Such invoices shall be retained for a period of
three (3) years subject to the use of and inspection by the City of
Republic.
D. Each retail and wholesale dealer doing business in the City shall
maintain and keep, for a period of three (3) years, such other records of
cigarettes received, sold or delivered within the City as may be required
by the Director of Finance or other agent or employee of the City.
E. The Director of Finance, or his/her duly authorized representative, is
authorized to examine the books, papers, invoices and other records,
stock of cigarettes in and upon any premises where they are placed,
stored or sold, and equipment of any wholesale or retail dealer as the
same pertain to the sale and delivery of cigarettes taxable under this
Chapter.
F. To verify the accuracy of the occupation tax imposed and assessed by
this Chapter, each wholesale or retail dealer is directed and required to
give the Director of Finance, or his/her duly authorized representative,
the means, facilities and opportunity for such examinations as are
herein provided and required.
G. In addition to the powers herein granted to the Director of Finance, he/
she is authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and
enforce rules and regulations relating to the delegation of his/her
powers to a deputy or other employee of the City and any other manner
or thing pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this Chapter.
H. Cigarette tax reporting information received from the State of Missouri
shall be held in confidence and used solely for verifying cigarette tax
payments.
Section
625.030
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
625.040
AO:802
Section 625.050. Refund of Tax.
The Director of Finance is authorized to adopt, prescribe and promulgate
rules and regulations, including a monthly cigarette tax reporting form with
regard to a presentation and proof of claim for refunds and credits as he/
she may deem advisable.
Section 625.060. Dealers Outside of City.
Any wholesale or retail dealer whose place of business is outside the
corporate limits of the City shall be bound by all the provisions of this
Chapter.
Section 625.070. Confiscation of Untaxed Cigarettes.
A. No person or entity shall sell, display or offer for sale at retail, or permit
or encourage the sale, display or offer for sale at retail, any cigarettes
unless the tax described in Section 625.020 has been paid.
B. Any person violating the provisions of this Chapter by selling,
displaying or offering for sale at retail any cigarettes for which the tax
has not been paid, or by permitting or encouraging the same, or who
violates the provisions of this Chapter by failing to file the report and
pay the tax as provided in Section 625.030 hereof, shall, upon
conviction, be punished by imposition of a fine of not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for not more than one
hundred eighty (180) days or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Failure to file each monthly report and make each monthly payment
shall be deemed a separate offense. Each day upon which the tax has
not been paid, and cigarettes are sold, displayed or offered for sale at
retail, shall be deemed a separate offense.
A. Whenever the Director of Finance, or any duly authorized
representative of the City, shall discover any cigarettes subject to the
tax provided by this Chapter and upon which the occupation tax has not
been paid as required in this Chapter, the Director of Finance, or such
representative of the City, is hereby authorized and empowered
forthwith to seize and take possession of such cigarettes, together with
any vending machine or other automatic mechanical device used for
selling and dispensing such cigarettes, or any receptacles in which they
are held for sale, and the cigarettes, machines or devices shall
thereupon be deemed to be forfeited to the City.
B. The Director of Finance may, within a reasonable time thereafter, by
public notice at least five (5) days before the day of sale, sell such
forfeited cigarettes at a place designated and from the proceeds of such
sale shall collect the tax due thereon, together with a penalty of fifty
percent (50%) thereof and the costs incurred in such proceedings. The
Director of Finance shall pay the balance, if any, to the person in whose
possession such forfeited cigarettes were found; provided however, that
such seizure and sale shall not be deemed to relieve any person from
Section
625.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
625.070
AO:803
Section 625.080. Power To Administer Oaths, Take Affidavits, Issue
Subpoenas.
The Director of Finance or such other employees or agents as duly
designated, shall have the power to administer oaths and take affidavits
in relation to any matter or proceedings in the exercise of their powers
and duties under this Chapter. The Director of Finance shall have power
to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production
of books, papers and documents to secure information pertinent to the
performance of the duties under this Chapter and the enforcement of this
Chapter and to examine them in relation thereto.
Section 625.090. Posting of Bond.
The Director of Finance may, at his/her discretion, require any person
selling, displaying or offering cigarettes for sale within the City to post a
bond, with sureties acceptable to the Director of Finance, in such amount
as the Director of Finance deems appropriate, to insure payment of all taxes
due and owing the City under the provisions of this Chapter.
Chapter 630
PAWNSHOPS AND PAWNBROKERS
Section 630.010. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Chapter the following terms, phrases, and words
shall have the following meanings unless otherwise indicated by context:
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the City of Republic Police
Department.
CITY CLERK — The person appointed by Council of the City of Republic to
perform the City Clerk duties.
DIRECTOR OF FINANCE — The Director of Finance of the City of Republic.
MONTH — Period of time from one date in a calendar month to the
corresponding date in the following calendar month, but if there is no such
corresponding date, then the last date of such following month, and when
computations are made for a fraction of a month, a day shall be one-thirtieth
(1/30th) of a month.
NET ASSETS — The book value of the current assets of a person or
pawnbroker less its applicable liabilities as stated herein. Current assets
include the investment made in cash, bank deposits, merchandise inventory,
and loans due from customers, excluding the pawn service charge. Current
assets do not include the investments made in fixed assets of real estate,
furniture, fixtures, or equipment; investments made in stocks, bonds, or
any fine or imprisonment provided in this Code for violation of any
provision of this Chapter.
Section
625.070
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
630.010
AO:804
other securities; or investments made in prepaid expenses or other general
intangibles. Applicable liabilities include trade or other accounts payable;
accrued sales, income, or other taxes; accrued expenses; and notes or other
payables that are unsecured or secured in whole or part by currents assets.
Applicable liabilities do not include liabilities secured by assets other than
current assets. Net assets must be represented by a capital investment
unencumbered by any liens or other encumbrances to be subject to the
claims of general creditors.
PAWNBROKER — Any person engaged in the business of lending money
on the security of pledged goods or engaged in the business of purchasing
tangible personal property on condition that it may be redeemed or
repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time.
PAWNSHOP — The location at which, or premises in which, a pawnbroker
regularly conducts business.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability
company, joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity however
organized.
PERSON OF GOOD MORAL CHARACTER — A person who has not been
convicted of any State, Federal, or municipal offense involving drugs or
narcotics, robbery, burglary, theft, stealing, receiving stolen property,
embezzlement, extortion, forgery, gambling, bribery, perjury, any weapons
offense, or any crime of violence.
PLEDGED GOODS — Tangible personal property other than choses in
action, securities, or printed evidence of indebtedness, which property is
deposited with, or otherwise actually delivered into the possession of, a
pawnbroker in the course of his/her business in connection with a pawn
transaction.
SECURED PERSONAL CREDIT LOAN — Every loan of money made in this
City, the payment of which is secured by a security interest in tangible
personal property which is physically delivered into the hands of the lender
at the time of the making of the loan and which is to be retained by the
lender while the loan is a subsisting obligation.
Section 630.020. Licenses.
A. Licenses Required. No person shall operate a pawnshop in the City of
Republic unless such person obtains a pawnshop license issued by the
City in accordance with the general licensing provisions of the
Municipal Code and the specific provisions of this Chapter. A license is
required for each place where pawnbroking business is transacted, and
no one shall act as an agent, employee, or solicitor for any pawnbroker
while such pawnbroker is engaged in such business at a place other
than that specified in the license. It shall be unlawful for any person to
conduct or transact a pawnbroker business in the City unless he/she
shall keep posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business,
license certificate therefor, and a copy of all ordinances relating to
pawnbrokers.
Section
630.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
630.020
AO:805
B. Licensing Year. All licenses issued under this Chapter are for a period of
one (1) year, or portion of one (1) year, and expire on Midnight of March
fifteenth (15th). The license fee for any license which is issued for a
portion of a year shall be prorated by the City Clerk.
C. Application For New Pawnshop License. An application for a new
pawnshop license shall be under oath and on forms prescribed and
provided by the City Clerk and shall contain other relevant information
sufficient to inform the City Clerk regarding the qualifications of the
applicant for a license as required by the City Clerk. At a minimum, the
application shall include:
1. The full name and address of the applicant, and each prospective
pawnshop employee, if known, for the past two (2) years;
2. The address where the business is to be conducted;
3. A statement as to whether the applicant, and each prospective
pawnshop employee, if known, have ever been convicted of a
felony;
4. The name, address and phone number of at least two (2) persons of
good moral character who may be used as character references for
the applicant, and each prospective pawnshop employee, if known;
and
5. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall include the
required information for each partner, and whether such partner is
a general partner or a limited partner. If the applicant is a
corporation or limited liability company, the application shall
include the required information for each officer, shareholder and
director.
6. The application shall be accompanied by:
a. An investigation fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) if the
applicant is unlicensed at the time of applying for the
pawnshop license, or two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) if the
application involves a second (2nd) or additional license to an
applicant previously licensed for a separate location, or
involves substantially identical principals and owners of a
licensed pawnshop at a separate location;
b. Proof of general liability insurance in the amount of five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00);
c. An annual fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00); and
d. If the applicant is a corporation, a "certificate of good
standing" issued by the Missouri Secretary of State.
D. Non-Use And Transfer Of License.
Section
630.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
630.020
AO:806
1. If a pawnbroker shall not conduct business for any continuous
period of ninety (90) days at any time after the issuance of a
license, the license shall be null and void.
2. Licenses are personal to the licensee and shall not be transferred to
any other person. Any attempt to transfer such license to any other
person shall render said license null and void. It shall be unlawful
for any person to do business, or to attempt to do business under a
license transferred to him.
E. Investigation By City Clerk. The City Clerk shall investigate the facts
contained in an application for a new pawnshop license, and shall
request the assistance of the Chief of Police and any other person who
has knowledge of the facts contained in the application or who is
authorized to investigate these facts.
F. Standards For Issuance. No license shall be issued to any person who:
1. Is not of good moral character, or to any pawnshop employing
persons who are not of good moral character;
2. Makes a false statement of material facts in the application for a
license or a renewal license;
3. Fails to show that the pawnshop will be operated lawfully and fairly
within the purposes of the Chapter;
4. Has a felony or misdemeanor conviction which either directly
relates to the duties and responsibilities of the occupation of
pawnbroker or which otherwise makes the applicant presently unfit
for a license;
5. Does not have net assets of at least fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) readily available for use in conducting business as a
pawnshop for each licensed pawnshop; or
6. Does not file with the City Clerk a bond satisfactory to the City
Clerk in an amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) with a
surety company qualified to do business in this City. The aggregate
liability of such surety shall not exceed the amount stated in the
bond. The bond shall run to the City for the use of the City and of
any person(s) who may have a cause of action against the obligor of
such bond under the provisions of this Chapter. Such bond shall be
conditioned that the obligor will comply with the provisions of this
Chapter and by all rules and regulations adopted by the City Clerk
and will pay to the City and to any such person(s) any and all
amounts of money that may become due or owing to the City or to
such person(s) from such obligor under and by virtue of the
provisions of this Chapter or any rules adopted by the City Clerk
pursuant to this Chapter during the time such bond is in effect.
Section
630.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
630.020
AO:807
If the City Clerk is unable to verify that the applicant meets the
net assets requirement for a licensed pawnshop as required by
Subparagraph (5) of this Subsection, the City Clerk may require
a finding, including the presentation of a current balance sheet,
by an independent certified public accountant, that the accountant
has reviewed the books and records of the applicant, and that the
applicant meets the net assets requirement of this Chapter.
G. Exemption From Requirement For New Pawnshop License. No person
who is lawfully operating a pawnshop on the date of the enactment of
this Chapter shall be required to obtain a license under this Section in
order to continue operating such pawnshop, so long as such person
does not violate any other provisions of Sections 367.011 to 367.060,
RSMo., or this Chapter. Such persons may continue to operate those
pawnshops then in existence, but thereafter must receive annual
renewal licenses even though the operation of such pawnshop might
cause the number of pawnbrokers in the City to exceed the number
determined by operation of Subsection (H) hereof. Such persons shall
be required to pay the five hundred dollar ($500.00) annual fee
prescribed in Subsection (I), but such payment shall be in lieu of any
occupational license fee.
H. Limitation On Number Of Pawnbrokers In The City. Subject to the
provisions of Subsection (G) hereof, no license for engaging in the
business of pawnbroker shall be issued when the issuance thereof
would increase the number of such licenses outstanding and in force at
that time to more than one (1) per each twelve thousand (12,000)
inhabitants residing in the City.
I. Subsequent License Applications. Subsequent to the first year for which
a license is issued to a pawnbroker, each pawnbroker shall make a
renewal application to the City Clerk. The application shall be filed by
March first of the current licensing year, and shall be on the forms, and
shall contain such information, as the City Clerk may require. The forms
shall contain such information as will assist the City Clerk in
determining whether conditions have changed and whether a renewal
license should be issued for the subsequent licensing year. The City
Clerk may request the assistance of the Chief of Police or any other City
employee or person having knowledge of the truth or falsity of the
matters contained in the application, or who is able to investigate those
matters. The annual fee for the issuance of a renewal license is five
hundred dollars ($500.00). [Ord. No. 17-44, 11-21-2017]
J. Denial, Suspension Or Revocation Of License.
1. If the City Clerk believes that any condition prevents issuance of a
license or such condition has changed in the case of a renewal of a
license such that the licensee would not be eligible to receive a
pawnbroker's license, or that the licensee is in violation of this
Chapter or any State or municipal law, the City Clerk shall notify
the licensee in writing of the intended action and the reasons
Section
630.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
630.020
AO:808
therefor and the hearing procedures set forth in Code Section
605.070 shall apply.
2. If the City Clerk believes that the licensee is capable of remedying
the adverse change in conditions, and if the licensee has not
previously been in violation of this Chapter or State or municipal
law, the City Clerk shall notify the licensee in writing of the
intended action and the reasons therefor and the hearing
procedures set forth in Code Section 605.070 shall apply. If the City
Clerk believes that the changed condition(s) are such that, if true,
the licensee would not be able to remedy the situation in a
reasonable time, or if the licensee has previously been in violation
of this Chapter or State or municipal law, then the City Clerk shall
notify the licensee in writing of the intended action and the reasons
therefor and the hearing procedures set forth in Code Section
605.070 shall apply.
3. If the City Clerk believes that the safety, morals, or peace of
residents of the City is immediately affected by the change in
conditions, the City Clerk may suspend or revoke the license prior
to the hearing called for below, but he/she shall afford the licensee
an informal meeting to determine if the emergency suspension
should continue in place and the informal meeting will be within
five (5) business days of the suspension or revocation. If the City
Clerk believes that the changed condition is not of such imminent
hazard to the safety, morals, or peace of the residents of the City,
he/she shall notify the licensee in writing of the intended action and
the reasons therefor and the hearing procedures set forth in Code
Section 605.070 shall apply. This procedure shall apply to a hearing
as a result of an emergency suspension described above.
K. Issuance Of Pawnshop Licenses Prohibited, When. [Ord. No. 14-09 §3,
4-28-2014]
1. No license shall be issued for the operation of a pawnshop as
defined within this Chapter wherein said pawnshop will be located
within one thousand (1,000) feet of any church or other building
regularly used as a place of religious worship, school, or
residentially zoned property. The one-thousand-foot distance
provided for in this Section shall be measured from the center
threshold of the main entrances of such premises by the most
direct walking route.
2. No license shall be issued for the operation of a pawnshop as
defined in this Chapter wherein said pawnshop will be located
within one thousand (1,000) feet of property on which there is
located another pawnshop. The one-thousand-foot distance
provided for in this Section shall be measured from the center
threshold of the main entrances of such premises by the most
direct walking route.
Section
630.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
630.020
AO:809
Section 630.030. Record Requirements of Pawnshop Operations.
3. No license shall be issued for the operation of a pawnshop as
defined in this Chapter wherein said pawnshop will be located
within one thousand (1,000) feet of any residence, unless the
licensee shall provide to the City Clerk written authorization for
such operation from the owner of record of such property and each
adult resident thereof. The one-thousand-foot distance provided for
in this Section shall be measured from the center threshold of the
main entrances of such premises by the most direct walking route.
A. Pawn Number. The pawnbroker shall affix to each item of tangible
personal property a tag upon which shall be inscribed a pawn number
of legible characters which shall correspond to the number on any pawn
ticket or receipt for payment.
B. Pawn Ticket For Pledged Property, Contents, Loss Of, Effect. At the time
of making the secured personal credit loan, the lender shall execute
and deliver to the borrower a pawn ticket for, and describing, the
tangible personal property subjected to the security interest to secure
the payment of the loan. The receipt shall contain the following:
1. The name and address of the pawnshop;
2. The name and address of the pledgor, date of birth, height, weight,
sex, race or nationality, and the driver's license number, military
identification number, identification certificate number, or other
official number capable of identifying the pledgor;
3. The date of the transaction;
4. An identification and description of the pledged goods, including
but not limited to serial numbers, if reasonably available, and an
estimated value of each item pledged;
5. The amount of cash advanced or credit extended to the pledgor;
6. The amount of the pawn service charged;
7. The total amount which must be paid to redeem the pledged goods
on the maturity date;
8. The maturity date of the pawn transaction;
9. A statement to the effect that the maximum legal interest rate may
not exceed two percent (2%) per month on the amount of any loan;
and
10. A statement to the effect that the pledgor is not obligated to
redeem the pledged goods, and that the pledged goods may be
forfeited to the pawnbroker sixty (60) days after the specified
maturity date.
Section
630.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
630.030
AO:810
C. Employee Registration. Every employee of a pawnshop shall, within
thirty (30) days from the issuance of any license, register his/her name
and address with the Police Department of the City and shall have had
his/her thumbprints, fingerprints, and photograph taken and filed with
the City, and such employee shall receive a certificate showing
compliance therewith, except that employees registered with the City
need not register a second (2nd) time. The term "employee" means all
persons working in a pawnshop, including any owner, any officer,
treasurer, or stockholder if the owner is a corporation, any partner or
any other person who receives income in any manner from engaging in
the operation of said pawnshop.
D. Affidavit Of Lost Ticket. If a pawn ticket is lost, destroyed, or stolen, the
pledgor may so notify the pawnbroker in writing, and receipt of such
notice shall invalidate such pawn ticket, if the pledged goods have not
previously been redeemed. Before delivering the pledged goods or
issuing a new pawn ticket, the pawnbroker shall require the pledgor to
make a written affidavit of the loss, destruction, or theft of the ticket.
The pawnbroker shall record on the written statement the identifying
information required, the date the statement is given, and the number
of the pawn ticket lost, destroyed, or stolen. The affidavit shall be
signed by a notary public appointed by the Secretary of State pursuant
to Section 486.205, RSMo., to perform notarial acts in this State.
E. Receipt For Payment To Be Furnished. Upon any payment by a pledgor,
or upon the redemption of any pledge, the pawnbroker shall furnish to
the pledgor a written signed receipt indicating the exact amount paid
on principal, interest and any other charges. Said written receipt shall
be either printed or stamped with the name of the pawnbroker and the
address, shall include the date of payment and shall be legibly written
so that the figures thereon are clearly discernible.
F. Pawn Register. Each pawnbroker shall keep a register of all items
pawned at each pawnshop, which register shall contain the information
listed in Subsections (A) and (B) of this Section. This record shall be
kept in a bound book, or in a continuous sheet of paper or tape,
handwritten in ink or typed using a ribbon other than carbon, so that it
will be obvious if an entry has been erased, obliterated or defaced. Such
information may be made on cards, individual sheets or order pads if
each sheet or card is numbered, so that if an entry is removed it will be
obvious.
G. Daily Report. Each pawnbroker must, before the hour of 6:00 P.M. of
every day, except Sunday and days the pawnbroker is closed all day,
make and deliver to the Chief of Police, at the Police Station, a full, true
and detailed copy of that day's pawn register. If no article or thing has
been pawned or received during said day, a report must be made to that
effect.
H. Photographic Records.
Section
630.030
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
630.030
AO:811
Section 630.040. Operational Regulations. [Ord. No. 12-22 §1,
2-27-2012]
1. All pawnbrokers shall install a proper camera in operative
condition and shall use such equipment to photograph every person
and the receipts of pawnshop tickets given to such persons with all
loans and with all purchases of items from persons.
2. All pawnbrokers shall display, in a prominent place, a notice to
customers that they are required to be photographed when they
pawn, sell, or offer as a part or full payment, any item to the
pawnbroker.
3. All such photographs shall be available for development, and
developed by the pawnbroker, upon request by the Chief of Police.
a. Retention and use of records. Each licensee shall keep and
maintain the originals of the foregoing records, or an original
copy as may be appropriate, for a period of at least two (2)
years from the date of the last transaction recorded therein,
and each such record shall at all reasonable times be open to
inspection by the Chief of Police or at his/her direction.
A. Interest Rates. It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to charge
interest exceeding two percent (2%) per month on any pledge. All
pawnbrokers shall display, in a prominent place, a notice to customers
that the maximum legal interest rate may not exceed two percent (2%)
per month on the amount of any loan.
B. Safekeeping Of Pledges.
1. Every pawnbroker licensed under the provisions hereof shall
provide a safe place for the keeping of the pledges received by him
and shall have sufficient insurance on the property held on pledges,
for the benefit of the pledgors, in case of destruction by fire or loss
by theft. A pawnbroker shall not fail to exercise reasonable care to
protect pledged goods from loss or damage.
2. In the event such pledged goods are lost or damaged as a result of a
pawnbroker's negligence while in the possession of the
pawnbroker, it shall be the responsibility of the pawnbroker to
replace the lost or damaged goods with like kind of merchandise.
Pawnbrokers shall not be responsible for loss of pledged articles
due to acts of God, acts of war, or riots. Each lender shall employ a
reputable company for the purpose of fire and theft security.
C. Loans Due, When — Return Of Collateral, When — Restrictions.
1. Every secured personal credit loan shall be due and payable in
lump sum thirty (30) days after the date of the loan contract, or if
extended, thirty (30) days after the date of the last preceding
extension of the loan, and if not so paid when due, it shall, on the
Section
630.030
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
630.040
AO:812
next day following, be in default. The pawnbroker shall retain
possession of the tangible personal property subjected to the
security interest to secure payment of any secured personal credit
loan for a period of sixty (60) days next following the date of
default. If during the period of sixty (60) days the pledgor shall
pay to the pawnbroker the principal sum of the loan, with the
loan fee(s), and the interest due thereon to the date of payment,
the pawnbroker shall thereupon deliver possession of the tangible
property to the pledgor. But if the pledgor fails during the period
of sixty (60) days to make payment, then the title to the tangible
personal property shall, on the day following the expiration of
the period of sixty (60) days, pass to the pawnbroker, without
foreclosure, and the right of redemption by the pledgor shall be
forever barred.
2. A pledgor shall have no obligation to redeem pledged goods or
make any payment on a pawn transaction.
3. Any person properly identifying himself/herself and presenting a
pawn ticket to the pawnbroker shall be presumed to be entitled to
redeem the pledged goods described therein.
D. Hold Orders.
1. Whenever any Peace Officer has probable cause to believe that
property in possession of a pawnbroker licensed by the City is
stolen or embezzled, said officer may place a written hold order on
the property. A hold order required by this Section shall contain the
following:
a. Name of the pawnbroker;
b. Name, title and identification number of the Peace Officer
placing the hold order;
c. Name and address of the agency to which the Peace Officer is
attached and the offense number;
d. Complete description of the property to be held, including
model number, serial number and transaction number;
e. Name of the agency reporting the property to be stolen or
embezzled; and
f. Mailing address of the pawnshop where the property is held.
2. The pawnbroker or his/her designee shall sign and date a copy of
the hold order as evidence of its receipt.
3. While the hold order is in effect, the pawnbroker may consent to
release, upon written receipt, the stolen or embezzled property to
the custody of the law enforcement agency to which the Peace
Officer placing the hold order is attached. Such consent shall not
Section
630.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
630.040
AO:813
be considered a waiver or release of the pawnbroker's property
rights or interest in the property.
4. Except as provided in Subparagraph (3) of this Subsection, the
pawnbroker shall not release or dispose of the property except
pursuant to a court order or the termination or expiration date, if
any, of the hold order including any extensions thereof.
5. In the event criminal charges have been filed in any Missouri court
involving property which is in the possession of a pawnbroker
licensed by the City and which may be needed as evidence, the
appropriate Prosecuting Attorney's office may place a written hold
order on the property. Such order shall contain the case number,
the style of the case and a description of the property. The
pawnbroker shall hold such property until receiving notice of the
disposition of the case from the Prosecuting Attorney's office. The
Prosecuting Attorney's office shall notify the pawnbroker in writing
within fifteen (15) days of the disposition of the case.
6. Willful non-compliance by a pawnbroker with a written hold order
shall be cause for the pawnbroker's license to be suspended or
revoked. A hold order may be terminated at any time by written
release from the law enforcement agency or Prosecuting Attorney
placing the initial hold order.
E. Embezzled, Stolen Or Encumbered Property — Police Cooperation.
1. Each pawnbroker shall notify the Police of any article pledged, or
attempted to be pledged, if the pawnbroker has reason to believe
that said article was stolen or embezzled.
2. A pawnbroker shall have no recourse when a customer has pledged
goods for the receipt of money except the pledged goods
themselves, unless the pledged goods are found to be stolen,
embezzled, mortgaged or otherwise pledged or encumbered. When
a customer is notified by a Peace Officer that the goods he/she
pledged or sold to a pawnbroker were stolen,
embezzled,mortgaged or otherwise pledged or encumbered, the
customer shall be liable to repay the pawnbroker the full amount
the customer received from the pawn or buy transaction. A
pawnbroker shall not charge any fee relating to the restoration of
such property to its rightful owner.
3. Every pawnbroker shall give the Chief of Police notice of all
pawned goods to be shipped out of town, which notice shall state
the name of the pledgee and the destination and date of shipment.
Such goods shall not be shipped for at least seven (7) days after
delivery of the copy of the register to the Chief of Police.
4. Every pawnbroker shall, upon request, show and exhibit to any
Peace Officer any article purchased, taken, or received by the
pawnbroker if the item is still in the possession of the pawnbroker.
Section
630.040
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
630.040
AO:814
F. Miscellaneous Regulations.
1. Pawnshop not to be used as a residence. No pawnbroker or
member of the pawnbroker's family, or employee, or any other
person shall be permitted to live in a pawnshop or in rooms
connecting therewith.
2. Hours of operation. No pawn shop shall be open for business or
receive as pawned, pledged, or purchased, or upon any condition
whatsoever, any article of personal property or other valuable thing
between the hours of 8:00 P.M. on any day and 7:00 A.M. on the
following day.
3. Keeping items seven (7) days. No pawnbroker shall destroy, melt
down, dispose of, sell or deliver to any other person any item of
tangible personal property until seven (7) days have passed from
the date the item was received.
4. Dealing in weapons prohibited, when. No pawnbroker shall receive
as security or otherwise conduct any transaction involving any kind
of firearm, revolver, pistol, rifle, bowie knife, spring back knife,
razor, metal knuckles, billy, sword, cane, dirk, dagger, or other
similar weapon, unless said pawnbroker is otherwise licensed by
applicable State and Federal law to purchase and sell such
weapons.
5. Secondhand goods. A pawnbroker shall not purchase or take in
trade used or secondhand personal property unless a record is
established that contains:
a. The name, address, physical description, and the driver's
license number, military identification number, identification
certificate number, or other official number capable of
identifying the seller;
b. A complete description of the property, including the serial
number, if reasonably available, or other identifying
characteristic; and
c. A signed document from the seller providing that the seller has
the right to sell the property.
6. No barred windows or doors on exterior of building. No building in
which a pawnbroker shall conduct business shall have any bars or
similar security features or structures installed on the exterior of
any window or door.
7. Additional restrictions. A pawnbroker shall not:
a. Accept a pledge from a person who is under eighteen (18)
years of age;
Section
630.040
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
630.040
AO:815
Section 630.050. Enactment of Rules and Regulations.
The Director of Finance may issue such rules and regulations as he/she
deems necessary to implement this Chapter and the policies contained
herein.
Section 630.060. Penalty.
Any person operating a pawnshop without a license or otherwise in violation
of the standards and requirements provided herein shall be guilty of a
violation of this Section and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
provided in Section 100.220 of this Code.
Chapter 631
REGULATIONS ON BUSINESSES PURCHASING PRECIOUS
METALS, PRECIOUS OR SEMI-PRECIOUS STONES, AND/OR
JEWELRY
Section 631.010. Purchase Documentation. [Ord. No. 12-48 §1,
8-13-2012]
b. Make any agreement requiring the personal liability of a
pledgor in connection with a pawn transaction;
c. Accept any waiver, in writing or otherwise, of any right or
protection accorded a pledgor under this Chapter or other law;
or
d. Fail to exercise reasonable care to protect pledged goods from
loss or damage;
e. Fail to return pledged goods to a pledgor upon payment of the
full amount due the pawnbroker on the pawn transaction.
A. Any business offering payment for the purchase of gold, silver or other
precious metal, including, but not limited to, aluminum, copper, bronze
or precious or semi-precious stones and/or jewelry shall, prior to
accepting any such items:
1. Every person required to make and maintain records shall make a
daily report to the Chief of Police, giving a complete description of
all articles purchased or taken in barter or exchange by him or
pledged with him, including the date of the transaction, any
number, letter, marking or engraving that may be on such property
for the purposes of identification, including any owner-applied
markings, and the first and last name, residential address, driver's
license number, military identification number, identification
certificate number, or other official number capable of identifying
the seller or pledger, race, sex, color of eyes and hair, and height
and weight of the person from whom a purchase was made. For all
Section
630.040
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
631.010
AO:816
property purchased or taken in barter or exchange, an
acknowledgment that the seller provided the dealer at the time of
the sale or barter or exchange with a signed document that the
seller had the right to sell the property.
a. Any person selling any of the items listed in this Section must
provide the person taking such goods a valid governmentissued
identification to complete required forms.
b. No person or business, either wholesale or retail, shall receive
any personal property from any minor without written consent
of such minor's parents or guardian.
2. Every person regularly engaged in or conducting business for the
purchase, sale, barter, exchange, recycling, reselling of antiques,
coins, any metal including, but not limited to, aluminum, copper,
gold, silver, brass, bronze and platinum, gems and semi-precious
stones, watches, both wholesale and retail, shall keep a substantial
and well-bound book or other form of permanent record in which
he/she shall legibly and permanently enter a description of all
personal property, including precious gems or metals, pledged or
purchased by him/her, except those items purchased from
wholesale dealers, including any number, letter, marking or
engraving that may be on such property for purposes of
identification, including any owner- applied markings. For purposes
of this Chapter, the term "offering payment" means the purchase,
sale, barter or exchange of any item mentioned in this Subsection,
including the advertising thereof, and including such business
conducted by an established dealer in a permanent location, and
including any temporary, transient or itinerant business, whether
or not such dealer is engaged in other business activities at such
locations.
a. If such property contains in whole or in part a precious gem or
metal and such property is difficult to describe, the property
shall be photographed and the photograph shall be attached to
the record book or kept with the other permanent record
describing the property. The amount of the loan or purchase
price and, if a loan, the time when the loan shall be due, and
the interest charged therefore shall also be recorded.
b. Such records shall not be defaced or erased and shall be open
to any Peace Officer as defined in Section 590.010, RSMo.,
together with the articles purchased or pledged, provided that
the articles shall be still in the possession of the dealer or
merchant. For purposes of this Chapter, a secondhand dealer
shall include, but not be limited to, those persons who
purchase items for resale at flea markets and persons other
than wholesale dealers in such items.
Section
631.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
631.010
AO:817
c. Every person or business required to keep permanent records
under this Section shall keep those records for a period of at
least two (2) years from the date of the last transaction
recorded therein.
d. Every person or business shall make their reports of such
property (pledged, taken in barter or exchange, or purchased)
electronically as set out in Section 367.031, RSMo., and shall
report the information prescribed by that Statute and
Subsection 90-3(a) to the electronic database as authorized by
the Statute. If more than one (1) such electronic database is
available for such reporting, each dealer or person so licensed
shall make their reports to the database directed for such
reporting by the Chief of Police. The database designation
information shall be on file with and available at the Police
Department headquarter and the City Clerk.
B. Each dealer or person licensed by the City and engaged in such
business as described in this Subsection, in lieu of making the daily
report to the Chief of Police as described in the preceding Subsection,
shall make their daily reports of such property (pledged, taken in barter
or exchange, or purchased) electronically as set out in Section 367.031,
RSMo., and shall report the information prescribed by that Statute and
in the preceding Subsection to the electronic database as authorized by
the Statute. If more than one (1) such electronic database is available
for such reporting, each dealer or person so licensed shall make their
reports to the database directed for such reporting by the Chief of
Police. This database designation information shall be on file with and
available at the Police Department headquarters and the City Clerk.
1. Every person required to make and maintain records pursuant to
this Section, in addition to the report required in Subsection (B),
shall make a report of any purchase, sale, barter or exchange of
scrap metal, including aluminum, copper, platinum and all other
metals regardless of kind or type, with a value of fifty dollars
($50.00) or more within twenty-four (24) hours of the purchase,
sale, barter or exchange to the Chief of Police in an electronic
database designated by such Chief. The electronic database form
or report shall be completed in full without missing data or
information.
C. No gold, silver, diamonds or other precious or semi-precious gems or
precious metals received or purchased by any person subject to
Subsection (A), including, but not limited to, all persons license by the
City and engaged in such business as described in Subsection (A), shall
be removed from a designated location within the City within ten (10)
days after receipt thereof, except when redeemed by the owner, nor
shall any such precious gems or precious metals be melted or recut
within ten (10) days from the receipt thereof, except when redeemed by
the owner. Further, no person subject to Section 631.010, including, but
not limited to, all persons licensed and engaged in such business as
Section
631.010
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
631.010
AO:818
Title VII Notes
NOTES AND APPENDIXES
Editor's Note — Ord. no. 02-14 adopted April 22, 2002, superseded this
entire Title and enacted the new provisions set out herein. Former Title VII
derived from CC 1999 §§24-1, 24-2, 24-4–24-74; ord. no. 1719 §1, 6-29-1952;
ord. no. 1813 §§2–4, 7 — 9; ord. no. 1923 §5; ord. no. 2099 §§1–5; ord. no.
3090 §§1–26; ord. no. 99-18 §§1–2, 4-12-1999; ord. no. 99-19 §1, 4-12-1999;
ord. no. 99-20 §§1–2, 4-12-1999; ord. no. 99-43 §2(24-55), 9-27-1999; ord.
no. 00-08 §§1–2, 2-28-2000; ord. no. 00-22 §1, 6-26-2000.
Cross Reference — As to identity theft prevention policy see Section
135.150.
Appendix VII-A, Fee/Fine/Forfeiture, is included as an attachment to this
Title.
Chapter 700
GENERAL PROVISIONS
described in Subsection (A), shall sell, transfer ownership or possession
of, or otherwise remove from said designated location any goods of
any kind or type, including, but not limited to, all items described
in Subsection (A), received in purchase, sale, barter, exchange for
seventy-two (72) hours from the time of the receipt of such goods,
except for redemption of such goods by the owner.
D. The requirements of this Section are in addition to any other
requirements on businesses found elsewhere in the Republic Municipal
Code.
E. Violations of this Section shall be punishable by the general punishment
provisions set forth in Section 100.220 of the Republic Municipal Code.
Section
631.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
631.010
AO:819

ARTICLE I
Establishment of Combined Systems
Section 700.010. Combined Waterworks and Sewerage System —
Established. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
The existing waterworks and the sewerage system of the City, and all future
improvements and extensions thereto, are combined and they shall be
operated and maintained as a combined waterworks and sewerage system.
Section
700.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
700.010
AO:821

ARTICLE II
Definitions
Section 700.020. Specific Abbreviations and Definitions. [Ord. No.
02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section:
ABBREVIATIONS — The following abbreviations shall have the designated
meanings.
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
CSR Code of State Regulations
MoDNR Missouri Department of Natural Resources
EPA United States Environmental Protection Agency
gpd Gallons per day
gpm Gallons per minute
L Liter
mg Milligram
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIC Standard Industrial Classification
SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C., 6901 et seq.
TSS Total Suspended Solids (total non-filterable residue)
USC United States Code
ACCURACY (AS IT PERTAINS TO METERS) — The registered flow being
within tolerances expected of the meter when compared to the actual flow.
ACT OR "THE ACT" — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known
as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.
AIR-GAP — A backflow prevention assembly consisting of a physical
separation between the free flowing discharge end of a public water system
pipeline and an open or non-pressurized receiving vessel.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Missouri Department of Natural Resources;
otherwise, the Regional Administrator of the U.S. EPA Region VII or his/her
designee.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER —
1. If the user is a corporation:
Section
700.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
700.020
AO:823
AVAILABILITY OF SEWERS — Sanitary sewer shall be considered available
when the property line is abutting any street, alley, easement or right-ofway
to which a public sanitary sewer is located and extended to a point
equal or past the property line. An owner or occupant of property shall have
sewers available whenever the property or premises is located in a sewer
district established by the ordinance of the City of Republic, or whenever
public sewers are available to the property or premises in any jurisdiction
with which the City has an interjurisdictional sewage treatment agreement,
or the City has notified the owner or occupant of the property pursuant to
Section 715.130 of this Chapter.
BACKFLOW — The undesirable reversal of the flow of water or mixtures of
water and other liquids, gases or substances into the public water system
from any source(s).
BACKFLOW HAZARD — Any facility which, because of the nature and
extent of activities on the premises or the materials used in connection with
the activities or stored on the premises, would present an actual or potential
health hazard to customers of the public water system or would threaten to
degrade the water quality of the public water system should backflow occur.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE — An assembly designed to prevent the
reverse flow of water or other substances from a customer facility back into
the public water distribution system.
The President, Secretary, Treasurer or a Vice President of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other
person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions
for the corporation; or
a.
The manager of one (1) or more manufacturing, production or
operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250)
persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding
twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00), if authority to sign
documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.
b.
If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: general partner or
proprietor, respectively.
2.
If the user is a Federal, State or local governmental facility: a director
or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility or their
designee.
3.
The individuals described in Subparagraphs (1) through (3), above,
may designate another authorized representative if the authorization
is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to
the City of Republic, Missouri.
4.
Section
700.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
700.020
AO:824
BACKWATER VALVE — A device or valve installed on the building drain or
building sewer where a sewer is subject to backflow and which prevents
drainage or waste from backing into a low level or fixtures and causing a
backflow or flooding situation.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD5) — The quantity of dissolved
oxygen required for the biochemical degradation of organic material
(Carbonaceous Demand) and the oxygen used to oxidize inorganic material
such as sulfides and ferrous iron. It may also be the quantity of dissolved
oxygen used to oxidize reduced forms of nitrogen (Nitrogenous Demand)
unless an inhibitor prevents their oxidation. Such BOD5 shall be determined
as described under the heading "Oxygen Demand (Biochemical)" in the
Standard Methods of the Examination of Water and Wastewater (latest
edition) as published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association and the Water Environment Federation.
BUILDING DRAIN — The part of the lowest piping of a drainage system
which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys the drainage to the building
sewer, and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally
admitted.
BUILDING SEWER — The part of the drainage system which extends from
the building drain and conveys wastewater to a POTW, private sewer,
individual wastewater treatment system, or other point of discharge.
BUILDING SUB-DRAIN — The portion of a drainage system that does not
drain by gravity into the building sewer. The sewage is usually transported
into the building drain or building sewer by mechanical means.
CITY — The City of Republic, Missouri, a municipal corporation, the City
Council thereof, or one (1) or more of the officers, agents and servants of
such City.
CITY ENGINEER — The City Engineer, engineer for the City of Republic or
an authorized member of his/her staff.
CITY SERVICE LINE — The portion of pipe between the water main and the
inlet of the meter setter. In cases where there is no in-ground meter, the
City service line is the portion of pipe between the main and the customer's
property line or if the main is on the customer's property, the service line is
customer owned.
CLEANOUT — The vertical portion of the building sewer that extends
above ground level for the purpose of access to the building sewer for
maintenance purposes.
COMMERCIAL — Any business for pay or profit within the City limits of
Republic which has been licensed to do business.
COMMERCIAL USER — A customer of the water or POTW systems, which
is in the business of providing private or public services. This includes,
but is not limited to, locations of food preparation, retail/wholesale
establishments, laundromats and laundry services, car washes, multi-family
dwellings, schools and churches.
Section
700.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
700.020
AO:825
COMMERCIAL WASTE — Any waste borne or liquid waste from a
commercial user.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended
solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria; plus any additional pollutants
identified in the POTW's NPDES permit, which the POTW is designed to
treat.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — The sample resulting from the combination of
individual sanitary sewer samples taken at selected intervals based on an
increment of either flow or time.
COOLING WATER —
DIRECTOR — The Public Works Director of the City of Republic, Missouri,
or his/her authorized representative.
DOMESTIC WASTE — The waterborne wastes derived from ordinary
household living processes including, but not limited to, waters from water
closets, urinals, lavatories, sinks, bathtubs, showers, household laundries,
household garbage grinders and drinking fountains.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA) — The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency or where appropriate the term may also
be used as a designation for the Administrator of the EPA or that person's
designee. The EPA is responsible for the environmental quality for the
United States of America.
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge, the construction or
operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed
categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source
if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of
the Act.
FUNDAMENTALLY DIFFERENT FACTORS — Factors relating to a user
which are different from those factors considered during development of a
categorical pretreatment standard or requirements as defined in 40 CFR
403.13.
GARBAGE — The solid animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
domestic or commercial handling, storage, dispensing, preparation, cooking
and serving of foods.
Contaminated. Water used for cooling purposes only which may become
contaminated either through the use of water treatment chemicals used
for corrosion inhibitors or biocides, or by direct contact with process
materials and/or wastewater.
1.
Uncontaminated. Water used for cooling purposes only which has no
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate, or final product and
which does not contain a level of contaminants detectable higher than
that of the intake water.
2.
Section
700.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
700.020
AO:826
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream without
regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to
exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
GREASE INTERCEPTOR — An interceptor whose rated flow exceeds fifty
(50) gpm and is located outside the building.
GREASE TRAP — An interceptor whose rated flow is fifty (50) gpm or less.
HOLDING TANK — An approved watertight receptacle for collecting and
holding sewage.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — The waterborne wastes from holding tanks such
as vessels, chemical toilets, recreational vehicles, septic tanks, vacuumpump
vehicles, aircraft or buses.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any non-residential user identified in Division A,
B, D, E or I of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual or any user
which discharges wastewater containing toxic or poisonous substances or
any substance(s) which cause(s) interference or pass through in the POTW.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any waterborne or liquid waste from an industrial
user, other than domestic waste and commercial waste.
INFRASTRUCTURE — The basic structure or framework that must be in
place for the proper function of the overall structure. This may include,
but is not limited to, transportation systems, distribution systems, collection
systems, communication systems, etc.
INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT — The
maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time,
determined from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected,
independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling
event.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources:
INTERCEPTOR — A device designed and installed to separate and retain for
removal, automatic or manual means, deleterious, hazardous or undesirable
Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or
its sludge processes, use or disposal;
1.
Therefore is a cause of violation of the POTW's NPDES permit or of
the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with
any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued
thereunder (or more stringent State or local regulations): Section 405
of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including
Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA); any State regulations contained in any State
sludge management plan and prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the
SWDA, the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the
Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries ACT.
2.
Section
700.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
700.020
AO:827
matter from normal waste, while permitting normal sewage or waste to
discharge into the drainage system by gravity.
MAIN — Any piping owned and maintained by the City for purposes of water
distribution.
MANHOLE — An opening in a sewer provided for the purpose of permitting
operators or equipment to enter or leave the sanitary sewer.
MAY — Defined as optional.
MEDICAL WASTE — Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and
blood by-products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, rubber gloves, face masks, potentially
contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes.
METER — A device used to measure and record the quantity of water that
has passed through it.
METERING — The use or application of a meter.
METER SETTER — A device that allows a meter to be installed in a water
line and includes a shut-off valve.
MISSOURI DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES (MoDNR) — The
Missouri Department of Natural Resources or where appropriate the term
may also be used as designation for the Director of the MoDNR or that
person's designee. The MoDNR is responsible for regulating environmental
quality for the State of Missouri.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR
PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with 307(b) and (c)
of the Act, which applies to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive
discharge limits established pursuant to Section 403.5 of the Act,
categorical pretreatment standards, restricted discharges and local limits.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES
PERMIT) — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act.
NEW SOURCE —
Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is
(or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards
under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source
if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that
Section provided that:
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a
site at which no other source is located; or
a.
The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the
process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
b.
1.
Section
700.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
700.020
AO:828
NON-POTABLE WATER — Water not safe for drinking or personal or
culinary utilization.
NON-RESIDENTIAL USER — All premises, other than residential as herein
defined, used for other than or in combination with human residency and
which is connected, or has availability, to the POTW.
ON-SITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM — See Private Wastewater
Treatment System.
PASS THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into the waters of
the State in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with
a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of or significantly
contributes to a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit
(including an increase in the magnitude of a violation). An industrial user
significantly contributes to such permit violation where it:
The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing
plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the
same general type of activity as the existing source, should be
considered.
c.
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does
not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the
criteria of Subsection (1)(a) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces
or adds to existing process or production equipment.
2.
Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site
construction program.
(1) Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
(2) Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation,
or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is
necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new
source facilities or equipment; or
(3) Entering into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its
operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without
substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and
design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under
this paragraph.
3.
Section
700.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
700.020
AO:829
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall
include the plural where indicated by the context.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration
expressed as grams per liter of solution as determined by standard
methods.
POLLUTANT — Anything discharged into the POTW which causes any
alteration of chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity of water
including, but not limited to, dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical
wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat,
wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal,
agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of
wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity
or odor).
POTABLE WATER — Water that does not contain objectionable pollution,
contamination, minerals or infective agents and is considered satisfactory
for drinking.
PREMISE — Any tract of land, consisting of one (1) or more lots, under
single or multiple ownership, which operates as a functional unit. When
developed, a premise shall also possess one (1) or more of the following
criteria:
Discharges a pollutant loading in excess of that allowed by permit with
the POTW or by Federal, State or local laws.
1.
Discharges wastewater which substantially differs in nature and
constituents from the user's average discharge;
2.
Knows or has reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction
with discharges from other sources, would result in an NPDES permit
violation; or
3.
Knows or has reason to know that the POTW is, for any reason, violating
its final effluent imitations in its NPDES permit and that such industrial
user's discharge, either alone or in conjunction with discharges from
other sources, increases the magnitude or duration of the POTW's
NPDES violation.
4.
1. Shared parking,
2. Common management,
3. Common identification,
4. Common access,
5. Shared circulation.
Section
700.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
700.020
AO:830
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, discharging or otherwise
introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration may be
obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes; by process changes;
or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants
unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. Appropriate
pretreatment technology includes control equipment, such as equalization
tanks or facilities, for protection against surges or slug loadings that might
interfere with or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW. However, where
wastewater from a regulated process is mixed in an equalization facility
with unregulated wastewater or with wastewater from another regulated
process, the effluent from the equalization facility must meet an adjusted
pretreatment limit calculated in accordance with 40 CFR, Section 403.6(e).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a
pretreatment standard.
PRIVATE WELL — Any well owned by any person for their private use.
PRIVATE WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITIES — A wastewater
treatment and disposal system serving a structure(s) with a septic tank and
soil absorption field located on the same parcel as the structure(s) which
it is to serve. This term also means an alternative sewage disposal system,
including a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption field, holding
tank, a system serving more than one (1) structure(s) or a system located
on a different parcel than the structure(s). A private sewage wastewater
treatment system is permitted to be owned by the property owner or a
special-purpose district.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — Garbage that has been shredded
to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in the POTW with no particle greater than
one-half (½) inch in any dimension.
PROPER NOTIFICATION — In order of preference as follows: Notification
in writing to the appropriate City office, notification in person to City
personnel authorized to receive such notification, or verbal notification to
City personnel authorized to receive such notification.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment works as
defined by Section 212 of the Act, which is owned by the City of Republic.
This definition includes the sanitary sewers of the City of Republic and
any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and
reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature.
It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey
wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. "POTW" shall also include any
sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the
City limits of Republic who are by contract or agreement with the City of
Republic users of a City of Republic POTW. The term "wastewater system"
can be substituted.
Section
700.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
700.020
AO:831
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of a POTW which is designed to
provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste.
RECORDS — Includes books, documents, papers, apparatus, data, reading,
sampling records, analysis results, plans, graphs and other information
pertinent.
RESIDENTIAL USER — A single- or two-family dwelling unit used only for
human residence and which is connected, or has availability, to the POTW.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The industrial waste, commercial or domestic waste
from any source, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.
The word "wastewater" often refers to the same.
SANITARY SEWAGE MAIN — A sewer which carries sanitary sewage and to
which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SANITARY SEWAGE DEPARTMENT — A division of the City responsible
for the maintenance and operation of the POTW. For the purposes of this
Chapter, this definition includes any City employee(s) authorized to perform
water and sanitary sewer system(s) related tasks including meter reading
or billing. May also be called the Wastewater Department.
SEPTIC TANK — A tank that receives and partially treats sewage through
processes of sedimentation, floatation, and bacterial action so as to separate
solids from the liquid in the sewage and which discharges the liquid to a soil
absorption system.
SERVICE LATERAL OR SERVICE LINE — See "Building Sewer."
SEWAGE TANK — A watertight tank used in the treatment of sewage which
includes, but is not limited to, septic tanks and aeration units.
SHALL — Is defined as mandatory.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU) —
1. A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
A user that:
Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd or
more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact
cooling, and boiler blow-down wastewater);
a.
Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent
(5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic
capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or
b.
Is designated as such by the POTW on the basis that it has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation
or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
c.
2.
Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in Subsection (2) has no
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for
violating any pretreatment standards or requirements, the POTW may
at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received
3.
Section
700.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
700.020
AO:832
SLUG DISCHARGE — Any discharge which in concentration of any given
constituent or in quantity of flow may cause or may significantly contribute
to cause interference with the operation and performance of the POTW
or may cause or may significantly contribute to cause pass through of
pollutants through the POTW into waters of the State in sufficient quantities
or concentrations to cause or significantly contribute to cause a violation of
the POTW's NPDES permit.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, latest
edition.
STATE — The State of Missouri.
STORM DRAIN OR STORM SEWER — A pipe or conduit which carries storm
water, surface water, drainage and cooling water, and to which wastewater
is not intentionally admitted.
STORM WATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
SUMP — A tank or pit that receives sewage or liquid waste located below
the normal grade or the gravity system and that must be emptied by
mechanical means.
SUMP PUMP — An automatic water pump powered by an electric motor
for the removal of water drainage except sewage from a sum, pit or low
point. A connection of sump pump to the City's sanitary sewer system is not
permissible.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Wastewater or Water Superintendent
(department head) of the City or his/her authorized representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The dry weights of matter physically suspended in
a flow of water or wastewater, as determined by the method of determining
total non-filterable residue dried at one hundred three degrees (103°) to
one hundred five degrees (105°) described under the heading "Residue" in
the Standard Methods of the Examination of Water and Wastewater (latest
edition) as published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association, and the Water Environment Federation
and expressed in milligrams per liter by weight.
TOXIC POLLUTANTS — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental
Protection Agency under the provision of Section 307(a) of the Act or other
Acts.
USER — The owner or occupant of property or premises that is connected
directly or indirectly or has available to the property or premises the
facilities of the POTW.
from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6),
determine that such user should not be considered a significant
industrial user.
Section
700.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
700.020
AO:833
UTILITY(IES) — The water and/or sanitary sewer services of the City of
Republic.
WASTEWATER — See "Sanitary Sewage."
WASTEWATER DEPARTMENT — See "Sanitary Sewer Department."
WATER DEPARTMENT — A division of the City responsible for the
maintenance and operation of the water system. For the purposes of this
Chapter, this definition includes any City employee(s) authorized to perform
water system related tasks including meter reading or billing.
WATER HAULING — The vehicular transportation of water.
WATERS OF THE STATE — All rivers, streams, lakes and other bodies
of surface and subsurface water lying within or forming a part of the
boundaries of the State which are not entirely confined and located
completely upon lands owned, leased or otherwise controlled by a single
person or by two (2) or more persons jointly or as tenants in common and
includes waters of the United States lying within the State.
WATER SYSTEM — Any part of infrastructure related to water pumping,
treatment, storage, distribution, fire protection, backflow prevention, and
metering.
Section
700.020
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
700.020
AO:834
Chapter 705
ADMINISTRATION
Section
700.020
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
700.020
AO:835

ARTICLE I
Utility Billing and Administration
Section 705.010. Rules and Regulations Relating To Utility Service.
[Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
Section 705.020. Conditions Requiring New Application For Utility
Service. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
Any change in the identity of the contracting customer at a premises shall
require a new application and the City may discontinue the utility supply
until such new application has been made.
Section 705.030. Duration of Customer's Responsibility For Utility
Service. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
A customer who has made application for utility services to premises shall
be held liable for all utility services furnished to such premises until such
time as the customer properly notifies the Utility Billing Department to
discontinue the services for customer's account.
Section 705.040. Duration of Customer's Responsibility For Utility
Service — Determination of Date Presented. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 —
2, 4-22-2002]
Utility bills and notices to any customer shall be deemed to have been
presented and given when deposited in the United States mail addressed
to the last known address of such customer as shown on the records of the
Utility Billing Department.
Section 705.050. Bills For Utility Services — Due Date —
Delinquency — Effect of Non-Payment. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
A. No agent, employee, servant or representative of the City shall have
any right or authority to make any promise, commitment or agreement
not expressly authorized by these rules and regulations:
1. All contract for utility service shall be subject to the rules and
regulations adopted by the City.
2. All applicants for utility service shall be required to sign such form
of service contract as may be acceptable to the City.
3. All contracts for utility service shall be signed in the true name of
the customer desiring such service and the use of a fictitious name
shall be sufficient reason for the refusal or termination of service.
4. The City shall collect wastewater service charges for the use of,
and the services rendered by, the POTW from the owners or
occupants of every lot, parcel of real estate, or building that has
availability to the POTW or which discharges, either directly or
indirectly, wastes to the POTW.
Section
705.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.050
AO:837
4-22-2002; Ord. No. 02-41 §§1 — 2, 10-14-2002; Ord. No. 05-14 §1,
2-14-2005; Ord. No. 06-55 §1, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 08-86 §1,
12-22-2008; Ord. No. 10-08 §1, 3-8-2010]
A. Each bill for water and sewer service shall be due and payable upon
mailing and shall become delinquent if not paid by 5:00 P.M. on the due
date contained on the bill. If the due date falls upon a Saturday, Sunday
or City-observed holiday, such bill shall become delinquent if not paid
by 5:00 P.M. on the first day thereafter which is not a Saturday, Sunday
or City-observed holiday. All delinquent accounts shall be subject to an
additional five-dollar fee to cover the cost of collection and processing,
and such amount shall be added to each delinquent water and sewer
bill. The five-dollar delinquency fee may be waived, if requested by the
customer, if they have had no payment delinquencies during the last
twelve (12) consecutive months. [Ord. No. 18-50, 1-8-2019]
B. Water and sewer bills which remain delinquent at 5:00 P.M. on the 10th
day after the due date or at 5:00 P.M. on the first business day
thereafter if the 10th day falls on a Saturday, Sunday or City-observed
holiday, if the past due amount is $25.01 or greater, shall result in the
immediate disconnection of water service and subject to a twenty-fivedollar
reconnection/processing fee. Payment of delinquent water/sewer
bills subject to disconnection of service, but before the physical act of
disconnection shall not serve to prevent the assessment of the
reconnection/processing fee. Service shall not be restored until
payment is made of all amounts past due plus applicable reconnection/
processing fees. Upon receipt of payment of all amounts due, service
shall be restored no later than 5:00 P.M. on the next business day.
Payments after disconnection must be made in cash, money order,
credit card, debit card, or approved check. Water service shall not be
re-established on weekends, or City holidays, or on such other days as
the City may be operating with a reduced staff. [Ord. No. 18-50,
1-8-2019]
C. Partial payments for the continuance of services in lieu of full amount
due or delinquent may be approved at the discretion of the City
Administrator or his designee. The City Administrator is authorized to
develop and implement the terms of the partial payment which shall be
set forth and agreed to in writing by the customer and the City
Administrator or his designee. [Ord. No. 17-21 § 1, 5-16-2017]
D. When necessary, utility deposits may be applied to delinquent accounts.
Prior to utility service being restored, if a delinquent account has an
insufficient deposit, the utility customer will be required to replenish
his or her utility deposit at the current rate, as well as any additional
costs associated herein. [Ord. No. 17-21 § 1, 5-16-2017]
1. The City may waive the requirements of this Subsection for
customers with twelve (12) months of continuous service with no
payment delinquencies.
Section
705.050
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
705.050
AO:838
Section 705.060. Adjustments. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002;
Ord. No. 04-31 §1, 5-10-2004; Ord. No. 05-67 §1, 8-22-2005; Ord.
No. 07-66 §1, 10-22-2007; Ord. No. 08-90 §1, 1-12-2009; Ord. No.
17-21 § 1, 5-16-2017]
Section 705.070. Resale Prohibited — Separate Bill For Each Meter.
[Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
Utility service to each customer shall be for the sole use of such customer
on the premises described in the service application and resale or submetering
of water by such customer is prohibited. A separate bill shall be
rendered for each meter unless specified otherwise by the City.
Section 705.080. Bad Checks — Place of Payment. [Ord. No. 02-14
§§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
A service charge of twenty dollars ($20.00) is hereby imposed upon any
person or entity who, in an attempt to discharge any indebtedness owed to
the City, issues or passes to any City Official or employee any check or other
similar sight order for the payment of money which is not honored by the
drawee for any reason.
Section 705.090. Location For Payment of Utility Bills. [Ord. No.
02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
The payment of all utility bills owed to the City shall be made at the address
of the principal office of the City, as set forth on the billing document, or at
E. Any occupant or user of the premises receiving utility services shall be
jointly and severally liable to pay for such services rendered on such
premises. The City shall have the power to sue any occupant, user or
combination thereof in a civil action and receive any sums due for such
services plus a reasonable attorney's fee to be determined by the court.
A. The City may adjust any customer utility bill when any such customer
usage exceeds that customer’s normal usage by more than one hundred
percent (100%) as a result of a water leak. The adjusted water and
sewer billing shall be computed by deducting the monthly metered
average of the last three (3) months from the meter reading that
includes the leakage and then charging such customer for fifty percent
(50%) of the remainder. This adjustment shall not apply to any service
address where the structure has not been issued an occupancy permit
by the appropriate regulatory authority. No more than one (1)
adjustment may be applied to any service connection or structure
within any calendar year and shall not encompass charges for more
than one (1) billing cycle. When, in the sole opinion of the City, the
leakage did not enter the sanitary sewer system, 100% of the leakage
will be deducted from the sewer billing
B. No water or sewer adjustments will be made until the City is satisfied
the repairs have been made.
Section
705.050
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.090
AO:839
such other place or location as may be authorized by the terms of any such
billing document.
Section 705.100. Effect of Mistake of Fact. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
The City will not be bound by bills rendered under mistake of fact as to the
quantity and nature of utility services rendered.
Section 705.110. Frequency of Meter Readings. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1
— 2, 4-22-2002]
The City shall have the right to read meters and render utility bills for such
periods as it may deem practicable.
Section 705.120. Basis For Computing Utility Bills. [Ord. No. 02-14
§§1 — 2, 4-22-2002; Ord. No. 08-76 §1, 11-10-2008; Ord. No. 11-11
§1, 5-23-2011; Ord. No. 18-05, 1-16-2018; Ord. No. 18-40,
10-2-2018]
A. All utility customers shall be billed on the basis of monthly usage as
determined by monthly water meter and/or sewage meter readings,
except as authorized in this Chapter. If a utility customer either
discontinues service before a full billing cycle or starts new service
before a full billing cycle, any flat-rate portion of any monthly service
charges shall be prorated by taking the monthly rate and dividing it by
thirty (30) days. [Ord. No. 18-50, 1-8-2019]
B. Residential utility users shall be billed a sanitary sewer charge based on
metered water usage during the months of November through March.
Unless a residential utility user selects to be billed based upon metered
water usage according to Subsection (C), during the months of April
through October, residential utility users shall be billed a sanitary
sewer charge based on the average monthly water usage (rounded off
to the nearest hundred gallons) of the previous period of November
through March.
1. New residential utility customers may supply and the City may
accept usage data from a customer's previous residence to
calculate a November through March average.
2. Customers without November through March historic data will
remain at the sanitary sewer rate selected by them according to
Subsection (B)(3) upon initiating utility service until such time as
the November through March usage calculation is determined the
following year.
3. Unless a new residential user selects at the time they start utility
service for their sanitary sewer usage to be billed based upon
metered water usage, all new residents owning, leasing, or
otherwise occupying a residence or dwelling unit within the City
Section
705.090
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
705.120
AO:840
and connected to the sanitary sewer system, where such new
resident has no historic data of water or sanitary sewer usage,
shall pay sewer charges based upon one thousand seven hundred
(1,700) gallons of water usage per person for each person residing
or living in any such residence or dwelling unit. After three full
months of water usage, the new residential utility user who did not
elect to be billed based upon metered water usage will remain on
the sewer average assigned to them when they established service
unless the water usage is less than the assigned average; then the
sewer average will be set by averaging the first three months of
water usage. Such sewerage charge calculation shall be in effect
until such time as the average monthly usage can be calculated in
accordance with this Subsection (B). [Ord. No. 18-50, 1-8-2019]
C. Residential utility users can select to be billed based upon metered
water usage for their sanitary sewer charge by selecting that billing
method if they are a new residential user at the time they start service
or if they are an existing residential utility user by selecting that billing
method on a form approved by the City and delivered to the City during
the month of January. Existing residential utility users can also select to
be moved from metered water usage billing for their sanitary sewer
charge to average water usage in accordance with Subsection (B)
during the month of January using a form approved by the City and
delivered to the City. However, no residential utility user may move
from metered water usage to average water usage or from average
water usage to metered water usage for their sanitary sewer charge
more than one (1) time per calendar year.
D. Contractors and owners of units under construction, prior to the sale or
leasing thereof, shall pay water charges at actual usage as stated in
Subsection (A) above. Sewer charges are to be billed at the base
amount as shown in Section 705.210, until such time the occupancy
permit is issued by the City for said residence. At that time said
contractors and owners base sewer amount will be converted to actual
usage. [Ord. No. 18-50, 1-8-2019]
E. In the event that a customer can provide evidence suitable to the City of
the consumption of water in a manufacturing or industrial process, the
basis of sanitary sewer service charges for a customer may be
established by agreement in writing between the City and the user, the
agreement shall be reviewed annually by the City and user and may be
so reviewed at such other times as the City, in its discretion, may
require or permit.
F. The owners of tenant-occupied property shall have the right to examine
the collection records of the City for the purpose of determining
whether such rates and charges have been paid by such tenants;
provided that such examination shall be made at the office at which
such records are kept and during the hours that such office is open for
business.
Section
705.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.120
AO:841
Section 705.130. Users Outside City Limits of Republic. [Ord. No.
02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002; Ord. No. 12-49 §1, 8-13-2012]
Users outside of the City limits of Republic shall be assessed an additional
charge of fifty percent (50%) unless those users have executed a valid and
enforceable voluntary consent to annex in a form approved by the City
suitable for recording in the County land records. Upon execution of a
voluntary consent to annex, a user outside the City limits shall be charged
at the rate established for those users within the City limits. Should a
voluntary consent to annex become unenforceable for any reason, then the
fifty percent (50%) additional charge shall be applicable.
Section 705.140. Accounting System For Funds. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1
— 2, 4-22-2002]
The sewer and water rate schedule adopted for any fiscal year shall be
designed to ensure adequate sewer operation and maintenance funds and to
maintain a sufficient sewer replacement fund to cover costs of anticipated
major equipment replacements.
Section 705.150. Base Charge For Water Service. [Ord. No. 02-14
§§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
Utility customers using less than the minimum monthly usage shall be
required to pay the full amount of the base charge. If utility service is
disconnected during a reading cycle, utility customer shall be required to
pay, at a minimum, the base charge.
Section 705.160. Water User Fees. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002; Ord. No. 03-01 §§1 — 2, 1-27-2003; Ord. No. 03-83 §1,
12-22-2003; Ord. No. 07-52 §1, 8-27-2007; Ord. No. 07-61 §1,
9-24-2007; Ord. No. 08-77 §1, 11-24-2008; Ord. No. 11-11 §2,
5-23-2011]
G. The City shall have the right and privilege to discontinue water service
to any customer or refuse water service to any customer, whether
previously served or not, for any reason which, in the sole judgment and
discretion of the City, may be valid or sufficient.
A. Purpose. It is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive
to the protection of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of
the City of Republic to collect fees from all users of the municipal water
system. The proceeds of such fees so derived will be used for purposes
to include, but not limited to, operating, maintaining, improving and
retiring the debt for such public water system.
B. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms are defined as
follows:
ANNUAL EXPENSES — Include, but are not limited to, all costs
associated with operating and managing the water system.
Section
705.120
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
705.160
AO:842
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS — Include, but are not limited to, all
expenditures toward the purchase or construction of equipment or
facilities which will increase, improve, expand or extend the Water
System. Capital improvements shall include main replacement and
other budgeted capital outlay.
EQUIPMENT REPLACEMENT — Expenditures for obtaining and
installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are
necessary during the useful life of the water system to maintain the
capacity and performance for which such works were designed and
constructed.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE — All expenditures during the
useful life of the system for materials, labor, utilities and other items
which are necessary for managing and maintaining the water system,
including interfund transfers and debt service.
USEFUL LIFE — The estimated period during which the water system
works will be operated.
USER — The owner or occupant of property or premises that is
connected directly or indirectly to the municipal water system.
USER FEE — That portion of the total water service fee which is
levied in a proportional manner for the cost of operation, maintenance,
equipment replacement and capital outlay of the water system.
WATER SYSTEM — Any devices and systems owned and operated by
the City of Republic for the production, storage, treatment, recycling
and distribution of water. These include transmission and distribution
lines, pumping, power and other equipment and their appurtenances;
extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions and alterations
thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable water supply such as
standby treatment units and any works, including site acquisition of
land, that may be a part of the maintenance, production, storage or
treatment process.
C. Collection And Disbursements.
1. The user fee system shall generate sufficient annual revenues to
pay the costs of all annual expenses. This may include costs
associated with debt retirement of bonded capital associated with
financing water system improvements which the City may by
ordinance designate be paid by the user fee system.
2. That portion of the user fees which are designated for the operation
and maintenance, equipment replacement and capital
improvement purposes as established herein, shall be deposited in
a separate non-lapsing fund designated as the Operation and
Maintenance, Equipment Replacement and Capital Improvement
Fund and will be kept in three (3) primary accounts as follows:
a. The Operation and Maintenance Account shall be an account
designated for the specific purpose of funding operation and
Section
705.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.160
AO:843
maintenance cost (including debt service but excluding
equipment replacement and capital outlay) of the water
system. Deposits in the Operation and Maintenance Account
shall be made monthly from the system revenues in the
minimum amount of twenty-five thousand seven hundred eight
dollars ($25,708.00).
b. The Equipment Replacement Account shall be an account
designated for the specific purpose of ensuring the
replacement needs of the existing water system over its useful
life. Deposits in the Equipment Replacement Account shall be
made monthly from the system revenues in the minimum
amount of one thousand two hundred one dollars ($1,201.00).
c. The Capital Improvement Account shall be an account
designed for the purpose of ensuring improvement needs over
the useful life of the water system. Deposits in the Capital
Improvement Account shall be made monthly from the system
revenues in the minimum amount of forty-one thousand six
hundred twenty-eight dollars ($41,628.00).
3. Fiscal year-end balances in the Operation and Maintenance
Account, Equipment Replacement Account and the Capital
Improvement Account shall be carried over to same accounts in
each subsequent fiscal year and shall be used for no other purposes
than those designated for these accounts. Monies which have been
transferred from other sources to meet temporary shortages in the
Operation and Maintenance, Equipment Replacement or the
Capital Improvement Account shall be returned to their respective
accounts upon appropriate adjustment of the user fees for
operation, maintenance and capital improvements. The user fee(s)
shall be adjusted such that the transferred monies will be returned
to their respective accounts within the fiscal year following the
fiscal year in which the monies were borrowed.
D. User Fee Structure.
1. Each user shall pay for the services provided by the City based on
their use of the water system as determined by water meters
acceptable to the City.
2. All monthly user fees will be based on monthly water usage.
3. For those users inside City limits, each user will be charged a
monthly minimum fee plus a unit fee per one thousand (1,000)
gallons, or fraction thereof as shown below. User fees for all
customers not within the boundaries of the City of Republic shall be
one and one-half (1½) times the inside fee as specified herein.
4. The water service rates to be charged shall be as follows:
Section
705.160
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
705.160
AO:844
Effective date
for services
provided on or
after: June 1, 2011
December 1,
2011
December 1,
2012
Inside
City
Rate
Outside
City
Rate
Inside
City
Rate
Outside
City
Rate
Inside
City
Rate
Outside
City
Rate
Base charge per
month for 1,500
gallons or less
$6.16 $9.24 $6.53 $9.80 $6.86 $10.29
Surcharge for
each 1,000
gallons in excess
of 1,500 gallons
per month or
fraction thereof
$3.12 $4.68 $3.31 $4.97 $3.39 $5.09
Effective date
for services
provided on or
after: December 1, 2013 December 1, 2014
Inside
City Rate
Outside
City Rate
Inside
City Rate
Outside
City Rate
Base charge per
month for 1,500
gallons or less
$7.20 $10.80 $7.56 $11.34
Surcharge for
each 1,000
gallons in excess
of 1,500 gallons
per month or
fraction thereof
$3.47 $5.21 $3.56 $5.34
E. Annual Review.
1. The City of Republic shall review the user fee system annually or as
frequently as needed and revise user fees as necessary to ensure
that the system generates adequate revenues to pay the costs of
operation and maintenance, including equipment replacement and
capital improvements, and that the system continues to provide for
the proportional distribution of annual expenses among users.
2. The City of Republic will notify each user at least annually, in
conjunction with a regular bill, of the user fees being charged for
use of the water system.
Section
705.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.170
AO:845
Section 705.170. Utility Service Deposit. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002; Ord. No. 03-16 §1, 2-24-2003; Ord. No. 03-35 §§1 — 2,
4-28-2003; Ord. No. 05-14 §2, 2-14-2005]
Prior to being furnished utility service, each applicant shall be required
to deposit with the City the following deposit fee, except as hereinafter
provided:
Meter Size Deposit Amount
5/8 - inch water meter connection $150.00
1 - inch water meter connection $250.00
1½ - inch water meter connection $350.00
2 - inch water meter connection $500.00
3 - inch water meter connection $700.00
4 - inch water meter connection $1,000.00
6 - inch water meter connection $1,500.00
8 - inch water meter connection $2,000.00
All or any portion of the deposit described herein may be applied by the
City at any time to any delinquent utility account as stated in Section
705.050. Upon the termination or discontinuance of any utility service
for which a deposit was made by the customer thereof, such deposit shall
be applied to customer's final bill.
After twelve (12) months of consecutive utility service with no more than
one (1) delinquent payment, the above-mentioned utility service deposit
may be applied to the customer's utility service account upon customer's
request.
The City may waive a utility service deposit for five-eighths (5/8) inch
water meter connections if an applicant submits, on a form provided
by the City, proof from the applicant's immediately preceding utility
services provider of the following:
1. The applicant had at least twelve (12) months of continuous
service from applicant's last utility services provider;
2. The applicant had no more than one (1) payment delinquency
during the final twelve (12) months of service by applicant's last
utility services provider; and [Ord. No. 17-21 § 1, 5-16-2017]
3. The applicant's utility service was not disconnected or
discontinued by applicant's last utility services provider for
reasons of delinquency or non-payment.
Section 705.180. Hydrant Meter Deposit. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
Prior to obtaining a hydrant-metering device, customers are required to pay
the following:
Section
705.170
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
705.180
AO:846
Metering devices under 2" $250.00 deposit
2" or larger metering device $750.00 deposit
Labor for installation $25.00 per meter
In addition to the costs contained herein, usage is billed at the inside City
rates as determined in Section 705.160. Any credit balance to be returned
to customer from the deposit will go through the same process as water
deposit reimbursements.
Metering devices are only to be used inside the corporate limits of the
City of Republic and shall not be in user's possession for more than two
(2) weeks at a time. After two (2) weeks, the meter must be returned
to the City in good condition to avoid additional charges. If the meter is
not returned at the appropriate time or in good condition, the balance of
the deposit, or a portion thereof, shall be forfeited. If necessary, the City
will take the appropriate action to recover metering devices that are not
returned.
Section 705.190. Miscellaneous Charges. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
Section 705.200. Base Charge For Sewer Service. [Ord. No. 02-14
§§1 — 2, 4-22-2002; Ord. No. 03-59 §§1 — 2, 8-25-2003; Ord. No.
08-76 §2, 11-10-2008]
Sewer customers shall be required to pay at a minimum the base charge
as shown in Section 705.210. Should their usage exceed the base charge
they will be required to pay based on metered usage for the billing cycle.
If utility service is disconnected during a reading cycle, utility customer
shall be required to pay, at a minimum, the base charge. Should their usage
during the final reading cycle exceed the base charge, they will be required
to pay the full amount of usage during this period.
A. Prior to being furnished utility service, an account set-up fee of ten
dollars ($10.00) shall be paid by each utility applicant to cover the
expense of processing the application for utility service.
B. Upon a customer's request for meter installation, the City of Republic
will make the initial trip to the meter site at no charge. Should
subsequent trips be needed as a result of failure to have the site ready
for installation, a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) meter installation trip
charge will be assessed to the customer's account for each subsequent
trip necessary for installation of the meter.
C. A customer who requests a temporary disconnection of service, for
other than repair of a recorded water leak or for longer than a fortyeight
(48) hour period, will be assessed a twenty-five dollar ($25.00)
turn-on charge upon the customer's written notification to the City for
reinstatement of services.
Section
705.180
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.210
AO:847
Section 705.210. Sanitary Sewer Rates. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002; Ord. No. 06-47 §1, 6-26-2006; Ord. No. 08-76 §3,
11-10-2008; Ord. No. 11-11 §3, 5-23-2011]
The sanitary sewer service rates to be charged shall be as follows:
Effective date
for services
provided on or
after: June 1, 2011
December 1,
2011
December 1,
2012
Inside
City
Rate
Outside
City
Rate
Inside
City
Rate
Outside
City
Rate
Inside
City
Rate
Outside
City
Rate
Base charge per
month for 1,500
gallons or less
$13.17 $19.76 $14.82 $22.23 $15.93 $23.90
Surcharge for
each 1,000
gallons in excess
of 1,500 gallons
per month or
fraction thereof
$8.39 $12.59 $9.02 $13.53 $9.47 $14.21
Effective date,
for services
provided on or
after: December 1, 2013 December 1, 2014
Inside City
Rate
Outside
City Rate
Inside City
Rate
Outside
City Rate
Base charge per
month for 1,500
gallons or less
$15.93 $23.90 $15.93 $23.90
Surcharge for
each 1,000
gallons in excess
of 1,500 gallons
per month or
fraction thereof
$9.47 $14.21 $9.47 $14.21
Section 705.220. Sanitary Sewer Rates — Additional Charges. [Ord.
No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002; Ord. No. 06-47 §2, 6-26-2006]
A. In order that the rates and charges may be justly and equitably adjusted
to the service rendered, the City shall have the right to base its charges
not only on volume but also the strength and characteristics of sewage
and wastes which it is required to treat and dispose of. The City shall
have the right to measure and determine the strength and content of all
sewage and wastes discharged, either directly or indirectly, into the
Section
705.210
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
705.220
AO:848
City's sanitary sewerage system in such a manner and by such method
as it may deem practicable in the light of the conditions and attending
circumstances of the case in order to determine the proper charge.
1. Extra charges for discharge of excess BOD.
a. Any customer inside the corporate limits of the City of Republic
who discharges sewerage having a BOD concentration in
excess of two hundred fifty (250) mg/1 shall pay an additional
charge of thirty-three cents ($.33) per pound of excess BOD
discharged.
b. Any customer outside the corporate limits of the City of
Republic who discharges sewerage having a BOD
concentration in excess of two hundred fifty (250) mg/1 shall
pay an additional charge of fifty cents ($.50) per pound of
excess BOD discharged.
2. Extra charges for discharge of excess TSS.
a. Any customer inside the corporate limits of the City of Republic
who discharges sewerage having a TSS concentration in
excess of three hundred (300) mg/1 shall pay an additional
charge of twenty-six cents ($.26) per pound of excess TSS
discharged.
b. Any customer outside the corporate limits of the City of
Republic who discharges sewerage having a TSS concentration
in excess of three hundred (300) mg/1 shall pay an additional
charge of thirty-nine cents ($.39) per pound of excess TSS
discharged.
3. Extra charges for discharge of excess phosphorus.
a. Any customer inside the corporate limits of the City of Republic
who discharges sewerage having a phosphorus concentration
in excess of ten (10) mg/l shall pay an additional charge of fiftythree
cents ($.53) per pound of excess phosphorus discharged.
b. Any customer outside the corporate limits of the City of
Republic who discharges sewerage having a phosphorus
concentration in excess of ten (10) mg/l shall pay an additional
charge of eighty cents ($.80) per pound of excess phosphorus
discharged.
4. Extra charges for discharge of toxic substances. Any customer who
discharges a toxic substance which is deleterious to the treatment
process or to sludge utilization shall be liable for all costs incurred
by the City in returning the treatment process or sludge to its
proper condition. Such extra charges shall be determined by the
Director subject to review and approval by the City Council.
Section
705.220
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.230
AO:849
Section 705.230. Determination of Sewage Usage. [Ord. No. 02-14
§§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
A. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, wastewater service
charges shall be based on one (1) of the following:
1. On the quantity of water used from any source or sources of supply
as measured by water meters acceptable to the Director.
2. On the quantity of wastewater entering the POTW, and measured
by a wastewater meter acceptable to the Director.
3. On the quantity of water used as determined by the Director.
4. On the quantity of wastewater entering the POTW as determined
by the Director as determined by usage based on occupation or
other usage parameters accepted by the industry.
5. On the percentage of the metered water used entering the POTW
as determined by the Director.
B. Installation Of Water And Wastewater Meters.
1. The Utility Department shall install and maintain in continuous
efficient operation a water meter at each lot, parcel of real estate,
or building served by the utility.
2. An owner, at his/her expense, may install and maintain a
wastewater meter acceptable to the Director. The wastewater
meter shall be specifically designed for use with wastewater.
3. The Director may require users of the POTW to provide other
methods of determination as may be required.
C. Maintenance of meters, either water or wastewater, shall be in
accordance with manufacturer's specifications. The readings of any
such meter that has not been maintained in a continuous and efficient
manner may be disregarded and the Director may determine the
wastewater volume delivered to the POTW during the time covered by
discredited meter readings.
D. Water meters shall be read by the Utility Department in accordance
with the meter reading practices of the Director.
Section
705.230
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
705.230
AO:850
ARTICLE II
Water and Sewer Impact Fees98
Section 705.240. Purpose. [Ord. No. 11-29 §§1 — 2, 11-14-2011;
Ord. No. 12-19 §§1 — 5, 1-23-2012]
Impact fees are one-time equitable charges for the privilege of utilizing the
finite capacity of the City's water and sewer system. These fees provide
a means of balancing cost requirements for new utility infrastructure
between existing customers and new customers and are intended to be
consistent with the principles of allocating a fair share of the cost of new
facilities to new users and are based on the rational nexus of a reasonable
proportionality between the amount of the fee and the direct benefit
provided to the new or expanded user. All fees collected under these
provisions shall be deposited into restricted fund accounts and shall be
expended only in the manner and method for the purposes of system
improvements, expansion, related debt service, or dire emergency.
Section 705.245. Procedures For Establishing Rates. [Ord. No.
11-29 §§1 — 2, 11-14-2011; Ord. No. 12-19 §§1 — 5, 1-23-2012]
A. Water impact fees for residential and non-residential land use will be
calculated based on the following meter sizes:
5/8 x ¾ inch (typical residential size)
1 inch (minimum non-residential size)
1.5 inch
2 inch
3 inch
4 inch
6 inch
B. Sewer impact fees for residential and non-residential land use will be
calculated based on the following meter sizes:
5/8 x ¾ inch (typical residential size)
1 inch (minimum non-residential size)
1.5 inch
98.Cross Reference — As to emergency notification system impact fees, §500.060. Editor's
Note — Ord. no. 11-29 §§1 — 4, adopted November 14, 2011 (passed in election 2-7-2012),
and ord. no. 12-19 §3, adopted January 23, 2012, repealed sections 705.240 "sewer impact
fees", 705.245 "water impact fees" and 705.250 "connection fees for sanitary sewers built
by private contract" and enacted new provisions set out herein. Former sections 705.240
— 705.250 derived from ord. no. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002; ord. no. 05-03 §§1 — 3,
1-25-2005.
Section
705.240
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.245
AO:851
Section 705.250. General Provisions. [Ord. No. 11-29 §§1 — 2,
11-14-2011; Ord. No. 12-19 §§1 — 5, 1-23-2012]
2 inch
3 inch
4 inch
6 inch
C. Council is authorized to establish and/or amend by ordinance the
impact fee schedule rates or the method of calculating the impact fees
from time to time based upon economic conditions related to the cost of
providing for expansion of the sewer and/or water system or in the
event of dire emergency.
D. Council may authorize a separate rate structure for meters related to
irrigation systems or similar uses.
E. Water impact fees for structures outside the Republic City limits, as
they now exist or as may be extended in the future, shall be assessed at
one and one-half (1½) times the rates established hereunder unless
otherwise determined by Council.
F. No impact fees shall be assessed on existing customers or residences
currently utilizing the municipal water or sewer system or to residential
property that is to be remodeled. All monies will be deposited in the
properly designated restricted fund accounts to be used only for system
improvements, expansion, related debt service, or dire emergency.
G. Impact fees will be assessed and all monies collected at the time a
building or plumbing permit is issued.
A. Schedule established. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code
to the contrary, there is hereby established a charge to every new or
expanded user of the City's water and sewer system, which is in
addition to other fees and charges under this Code. An expanded user
of the water or sewer system is a user which increases the size or
number of water meters serving its property or premises. Water and
sewer impact fees will be in accordance following fee schedule and
shall be based on the water meter size serving the property or premises
according to the following classifications: [Ord. No. 13-16 §1,
4-8-2013]
1. Water impact fee classification for residential and commercial/
industrial used to establish fees.
a. 5/8-inch x 3/4-inch: single-family residential size and individual
residential unit connections in "R-2" and "R-1Z", otherwise
minimum 1 inch.
Section
705.245
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
705.250
AO:852
b. 1-inch: multi-family residential (minimum "R-3" multi-family
size).
c. 1.5-inch: multi-family residential.
d. 2-inch: multi-family residential.
e. 3-inch: multi-family residential.
f. 5/8-inch x 3/4-inch: for small commercial and office use with
peak demand of less than 10 gallons per minute.
g. 1-inch: commercial/business/industrial.
h. 1.5-inch: commercial/business/industrial.
i. 2-inch: commercial/business/industrial.
j. 3-inch: commercial/business/industrial.
k. 4-inch: commercial/business/industrial.
l. 6-inch: commercial/business/industrial.
2. Sewer impact fee classification for residential and commercial/
industrial used to establish fees.
a. 5/8-inch x 3/4-inch: single-family, residential size and
individual residential unit connections in "R-2" and "R-1Z",
otherwise minimum 1 inch.
b. 1-inch: multi-family residential (minimum multi-family size).
c. 1.5-inch: multi-family residential.
d. 2-inch: multi-family residential.
e. 3-inch: multi-family residential.
f. 5/8-inch x 3/4-inch: for small commercial and office use with
peak demand of less than 10 gallons per minute.
g. 1-inch: commercial/business/industrial.
h. 1.5-inch: commercial/business/ industrial.
i. 2-inch: commercial/business/industrial.
j. 3-inch: commercial/business/industrial.
k. 4-inch: commercial/business/industrial.
l. 6-inch: commercial/business/industrial.
Section
705.250
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.250
AO:853
Impact Fee Schedule
Residential
Through December 31, 2013
Meter Size
(inches)
Water
Impact Fee
Sewer
Impact Fee Notes
5/8 x 3/4 $350 $450 Single-family
residential size
and individual
connections in
"R-2" and "R-1Z",
otherwise 1 inch
1 $1,400 $1,800 Minimum fee for
"R-3"
1.5 $2,100 $2,700 Multi-family
2 $2,800 $3,600 Multi-family
3 $4,200 $5,400 Multi-family
Impact Fee Schedule
Residential Effective January 1, 2014
Meter Size
(inches)
Water
Impact Fee
Sewer Impact
Fee Notes
5/8 x 3/4 $350 $750 Single-family
residential size
and individual
connections in
"R-2" and
"R-1Z",
otherwise 1 inch
1 $1,400 $4,500 Minimum fee for
"R-3"
1.5 $2,100 $6,750 Multi-family
2 $2,800 $9,000 Multi-family
3 $4,200 $13,500 Multi-family
Section
705.250
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
705.250
AO:854
Impact Fee Schedule
Commercial
Meter Size
(inches)
Water
Impact Fee
Sewer
Impact Fee Notes
5/8 x 3/4 $350 $750 For small
commercial and
office use with
peak demand of
less than 10
gallons per
minute.
1 $1,400 $4,500
1.5 $2,100 $6,750
2 $2,800 $9,000
3 $4,200 $13,500
4 $5,600 $18,000
6 $8,400 $27,000
B. Existing Users. Existing users of the water or sewer system will not be
assessed impact fees but any increase in the number or size of water
meters serving the property or premises will be assessed as an
expanded use.
C. Increase In The Size Or Number Of Water Meters. Any user who
increases the size or number of water meters servicing its property or
premises shall pay fees equal to the difference between the impact fees
for the meter(s) which existed prior to the increase, and the impact fees
for the newly installed meter(s).
D. Irrigation Meters. The impact fee schedule for new or expanded
irrigation users shall be one-half (½) times the rate for water only. This
is in addition to any fees for the master meter.
E. Fees For Service Outside Of The City Limits. The impact fee schedule
for new or expanded users outside of the corporate limits of the City of
Republic shall be one and one-half (1½) times the applicable rate shown
herein.
F. Time Of Payment. Except as provided herein all impact fees shall be
collected in conjunction with the issuance of a building permit,
plumbing permit or other permit. The owner of any property or
premises may enter into a fee agreement with the City Council
providing for an alternate time of payment pursuant to the remaining
terms of this Article.
Section
705.250
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.250
AO:855
G. Annual Adjustment. The impact fees set forth herein are directly related
to construction costs incurred or expenses anticipated in the future and
as such are influenced by the rate of interest on loans secured or the
rate of inflation for future construction. Each rate established in
Subsection (A) is subject to review and adjustment annually by City
Council with such review occurring before adoption of the annual
budget. City Council may adjust the fees as conditions warrant;
however, if no annual adjustment is made or if City Council does not
conduct a review, the then current impact fees shall remain in place.
H. Exception. Properties or premises with existing residential structures
in the former Brookline Village center at the time on consolidation on
June 6, 2005, as per a listing of property owners maintained by the City
Clerk, shall be exempt from water and sewer impact fees per the policy
established for properties in this area during the consolidation process.
A copy of that policy is on file with the City Clerk. This exemption is
contingent upon the ownership being the same as was of record on June
6, 2005, and that the residential structure was in existence on June 6,
2005. If ownership has changed or if a new structure is involved, then
the schedule of fees contained herein shall be applicable.
I. Denial Of Services. The City, its boards, commissions or agents shall
withhold or discontinue all City improvements or services of
whatsoever nature, including the furnishing of sewer, water, and
further, no permits shall be issued by the Community Development
Department or Public Works Department to any property or premises to
which applicable impact fees have not been paid. [Ord. No. 16-23 § 1,
11-28-2016]
J. Severability. The portions of this Article shall be severable. In the event
that any portion of this Article is found by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, the remaining portions of this Article are
valid, unless the court finds the valid portions of this Article are so
essential and inseparably connected with and dependent upon the void
portion that it cannot be presumed that the City Council would have
enacted the valid portions without the invalid ones or unless the court
finds that the valid portions standing alone are incomplete and are
incapable of being executed in accordance with the legislative intent.
Section
705.250
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
705.250
AO:856
Chapter 710
WATER REGULATIONS
Section
705.250
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
705.250
AO:857

ARTICLE I
General Provisions — Water
Section 710.010. Purpose. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
The purpose of Articles I through IV of this Chapter is to establish rules and
regulations that provide for the efficient operation of the City water system
and protect public health.
Section 710.020. Scope. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
Section 710.030. Administration. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
Except as otherwise provided herein, the Director shall administer,
implement and enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
Section 710.040. Right of Entry. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
Section 710.050. Right To Refuse Service. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
A. The provisions of Articles I through IV shall apply to the use and
operation of the water system as defined in this Chapter.
B. This Chapter shall apply within the City of Republic, Missouri, and to
any person(s) who may require services related to the City water
system or whose property is served by City water.
A. Employees of the Water Department, with proper identification, shall
have the right to enter upon the premises of any water customer at any
time during ordinary business hours for the purpose of examining,
sampling, testing, changing or moving any water equipment, meters,
apparatus or piping of the Water Department or measuring the
customer's water demand. The owner of said property shall maintain
the property in such a way as to allow the City immediate access to the
water system as may be necessary at any given time. This shall include,
but not be limited to, burying or allowing vegetation growth, blocking
access or creating conditions that hamper proper operation and/or
maintenance of the water system. Any delay or cost incurred by the City
as a result of failure to maintain access shall be the responsibility of the
owner of said property.
B. All water piping and equipment on the customer's premises shall be
available to the Water Department and to all City inspectors who may
have jurisdiction over such piping and equipment; provided however,
that the City shall not be deemed to have assumed the responsibility to
inspect, repair or maintain any piping or equipment that is customer
owned, as located and defined in this Chapter.
Section
710.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
710.050
AO:859
A. The City shall have the right and privilege to discontinue water service
to any customer or refuse water service to any customer, whether
previously served or not, for any reason which, in the sole judgment and
discretion of the City, may be valid or sufficient.
B. The Director shall have the right to discontinue water service to any
customer who fails to comply with the water portion of this Title within
a reasonable time upon notification of violation.
C. The City can refuse to give service to any premises not located inside
the City unless consent to annexation has been negotiated and
approved by the City Council.
D. The Water Department shall have the right to discontinue water service
without notification if the connection is deemed a possible threat to the
potability of the water system. (See Section 710.140 "Restrictions upon
Connections to City Water Mains" and Section 710.380 "Backflow
Prevention".)
Section
710.050
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
710.050
AO:860
ARTICLE II
Responsibilities of The City Pertaining To Water Services
Section 710.060. Potability. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
The City shall make every economically feasible effort to provide the
customer with potable water that complies with requirements set forth
under Missouri Safe Drinking Water Law (Sections 640.100 through
640.140, RSMo., and Missouri Safe Drinking Water Regulations (10 CSR
60-1.010 through 10 CSR 60-16.030).
Section 710.070. System Maintenance. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
The Water Department shall maintain the water system in such a manner
that would ensure the reliability and integrity of said system. In the course
of performing such maintenance, the Water Department shall comply with
any applicable City construction specifications.
Section 710.080. Public Notification. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
The City shall comply with MoDNR requirements for public notification of
violations of the public drinking water rules as set forth in Missouri Safe
Drinking Water Regulations (10 CSR 60-8.010).
Section 710.090. City Not Responsible For Customer-Owned Piping,
Etc. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
Section 710.100. Pertaining To Service Interruptions For Repairs,
Etc. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
A. The City shall have no duty, obligation or responsibility to inspect,
maintain or repair any customer-owned piping, apparatus, appliance,
fixture or equipment.
B. The responsibility of the City shall end at the outlet of the meter setter.
In cases where the meter must be installed on customer-owned piping
such as inside a structure, the City shall be responsible only for the
meter itself.
A. In an effort to maintain good customer relations, the City shall attempt
to notify customers of water outages when adequate foreknowledge
allows. The Director shall determine the feasibility of such notification.
The Director shall determine the most advantageous method of
notification for each situation. Methods may include, but not be limited
to, notification by mail, telephone, television, radio, newspaper, or
posting at City Hall.
Section
710.060
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
710.100
AO:861
Section 710.110. Conservation of Water. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
In order to maintain proper and sufficient pressure in the distribution
system for fire protection and other purposes, the City reserves the right,
at all times, to determine, limit and regulate in a reasonable and nondiscriminatory
manner, the maximum amount of water a customer may use.
Section 710.120. City Not Liable For Damage Resulting From Use of
Water, Etc. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
Section 710.130. Extending Water Mains. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
B. Although the City may, so far as possible, attempt to notify customers,
the City reserves the right to shut off the water at any time without
notice for making repairs, extensions or alterations.
C. If, for the purpose of making repairs, extensions or connections, or for
any other reason beyond the control of the City, it becomes necessary to
shut off water in mains, the City shall not be responsible for damage
occasioned by such shut off. The City shall not be responsible for
damages caused by turbid water which may be occasioned by cleaning
of pipes, reservoirs or standpipes, or the opening or closing of any gate
valve or hydrant, or any other cause which is not the result of
negligence on the part of the City.
D. The City shall make every reasonable effort to eliminate interruption of
service and, when such interruption does occur, shall endeavor to
establish service with the shortest possible delay.
A. The City shall not be liable for any injury, damage or loss resulting from
the use of water on the customer's premises or from the presence,
location, maintenance or use of any water piping, fixtures or equipment
on the customer's premises.
B. It is expressly stipulated by the City that no claim shall be made
against, and that no person shall be entitled to, any damages by reason
of the breaking of any pipe, or by the reason of any other interruption of
the water supply resulting from mechanical failure or causes beyond
City control.
A. Whenever an extension of the City water distribution system is
necessary in order to serve an applicant whose premises are located
within the area served by the City, the City shall extend its water mains
along any public highways which are laid out in which grades have been
established and which are dedicated to public use within its service
area provided:
1. Such applicant, requesting extension of the City water distribution
system shall execute and deliver, without cost to the City, such
Section
710.100
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
710.130
AO:862
Section 710.140. Restrictions Upon Connections To City Water
Mains. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
easement indentures as in the opinion of the City are, or may be,
required at the time such extension is made or may be required in
the future to extend the water distribution system to an applicant
located adjacent to the premises to be served by such extension.
2. In its entirety, the extension is constructed in strict accord with the
construction specifications, drawings and plans prepared by or on
behalf of the City; and approval of such extension is given by
MoDNR.
3. All costs associated with the construction and extension shall be
incurred by the applicant and subject to inspection by and approval
of the City that such construction is in strict accord with the
approved specifications and plans; and all expenses incurred by the
City, as a result of the extension, including but not limited to
preliminary engineering, preparation of specifications, drawings,
performance bonds, one (1) year maintenance bond, plans, and
inspection of construction, shall be paid by the applicant.
4. Upon completion of the water line extension, connection to the
water distribution system, and certification in accordance with the
City's specifications and those of the continuing authority, all
rights, title and interest relating to the water line and the
associated parts of the water line shall be dedicated to the City free
of lien and other encumbrances.
5. The water distribution system shall be guaranteed against any
deficiencies relating to, but not limited to, the installation and the
materials installed for a period of one (1) year following the time
which final certification is received from the project engineer.
A. The City shall not allow its mains or service lines to be connected on any
premises with any customer-owned piping which is connected with any
other source of water supply.
B. The City shall not allow its mains or service pipes to be any way
connected to any customer-owned piping that by the nature of
configuration or connection with vats, tanks, apparatus or appliance
create a backflow hazard.
C. The City shall refuse to give service to any premises having such
configurations or connections until any and all existing conditions are
terminated.
D. The City can refuse to give service to any premises not located inside
the City unless consent to annexation has been negotiated and
approved by the City Council.
Section
710.130
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
710.150
AO:863
Section 710.150. Private Water Wells — Restrictions. [Ord. No.
02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002; Ord. No. 05-68 §1, 8-22-2005]
A. It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any private water well,
cistern or other ground water production facility, except a private water
well, cistern or other facility as provided by this Section, intended or
used for the production of ground water. All private water production
facilities must adhere to the rules, regulations and standards as
adopted by the City of Republic.
B. All private water wells, cisterns or other ground water production
facilities in operation at the time of adoption of this Section may
continue in operation and use, subject to the provisions of this Section.
C. The construction of new water wells, cisterns or other ground water
production facilities for any purpose other than ground water
remediation or monitoring is prohibited within the area defined by the
following streets: Anderson Street, West Avenue, Miller Road and
Hampton Avenue. Applications for well construction deeper than three
hundred (300) feet within the corporate limits as they existed on
December 31, 1988, will be forwarded to the Missouri Department of
Natural Resources, Hazardous Waste Section for review prior to action
by the City.
D. In the event the municipal water system is not available, the City may
grant permission to construct a private water well. Construction
drawings, specifications and other pertinent information relating to
such proposed water well shall be prepared by the owner at his/her
expense and shall be submitted to the Director, or his designee, and the
State of Missouri. Construction shall be in accordance with such
approved plans and shall not commence until such approvals are
obtained in writing, appropriate permits are obtained and charges or
fees are paid.
E. Private water wells shall be operated and maintained in a satisfactory
and effective manner by the owner at his/her expense. Such facilities
shall be subject to inspection by the Director at reasonable times with
reasonable notice.
Section
710.150
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
710.150
AO:864
ARTICLE III
Water Services Provided By The City
Section 710.160. Locates. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
The Water Department shall provide locating services for City-owned water
mains and City service lines upon request.
Section 710.170. Hydrant Meters. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
Metering devices and hoses are available to customers for use on fire
hydrants when the situation warrants such use. The City shall require a
deposit on the hoses and metering device.
Section 710.180. Water Hauling. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
The City may make water available for hauling when situations warrant.
Appropriate rates shall be established for such service.
Section 710.190. Temporary Service Connection. [Ord. No. 02-14
§§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
When it may appear to the City that requested water service will be
temporary, the City may either furnish or decline to furnish such service. If
the City elects to furnish such service, the applicant for service shall pay
to the City, in advance, the estimated cost of constructing such service,
including the cost of all labor, material and supervision required, less the
value determined by the City for such materials and equipment, if any, as
may be removed.
Section 710.200. City Service Line. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
Section 710.210. Meter Installation. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
A. The City shall determine the location of City service lines. In the event
service is requested at a point not already served by a main of adequate
capacity, the City may extend its main as provided in this Chapter.
B. The size of the City service line shall be determined by the City on the
basis of information given in the application of the customer.
C. Any change in the location of an existing City service line at the request
of a customer shall be made at the expense of the customer.
D. Maintenance or alteration of a City service line shall be done by the
City. When such work is necessary for the convenience of a customer, it
shall be done at customer's expense.
Section
710.160
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
710.210
AO:865
Section 710.220. Maintenance of Meters. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
Section 710.230. Relocation of Meters. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
Whenever a customer requests the location of a water meter to be changed,
the City may make a reasonable charge to cover the cost of such relocation.
No work on customer-owned piping will be done by the City either before or
after moving such meter. The City shall not be responsible for any damage
to customer-owned piping, apparatus, appliance, fixture or equipment
occasioned by relocation of meter.
Section 710.240. Disconnecting At Customer Request. [Ord. No.
02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
A. All new water service shall be metered and the City shall have the right
to place a meter on an existing service line and charge for water service
by meter measurements.
B. All water meters shall meet the requirements outlined in City
construction specifications, and installation shall meet approval with
City inspectors.
C. All water meters, upon satisfactory installation, shall be maintained and
can only be removed by the City and shall remain City property.
D. The City shall have the right to determine, on the basis of the
customer's stated flow requirements, the size and type of meter to be
installed and the location of same. If flow requirements decrease
subsequent to installation, and a smaller meter is requested by
customer, the cost of installing such meter shall be borne by the
customer.
A. All water meters shall be maintained by the City at its expense insofar
as ordinary wear is concerned, but damage due to hot water, freezing,
or other external causes arising out of or caused by customer's
negligence or carelessness shall be paid for by the customer. The
Director shall use his/her discretion to determine what constitutes
ordinary wear or damage.
B. Meters shall remain the property of the City. The owner of the property
on which the meter is located shall be held responsible for its safe
keeping and liable for any damage thereto resulting from the
carelessness of the customer, his/her agent or tenant, and for any
failure to protect same against freezing or damage by hot water. The
City may refuse to supply water until such damage is paid.
C. If the accuracy of a meter is in question, the customer may request that
it be checked. A reasonable fee may be charged if the meter is found to
be accurate. Inaccurate meters will be replaced by the City.
Section
710.210
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
710.240
AO:866
A. The Water Department shall, on verbal notice by the customer, turn
water on or off for repairs or alterations without any way affecting the
existing application. If such service is rendered after normal business
hours, a reasonable charge shall be made to cover costs incurred by the
City for such service.
B. Service shall be temporarily discontinued upon the written order of the
customer without any way affecting the existing applications; providing
however, that a turn-on charge may be made to cover costs incurred by
the City.
C. Service shall be permanently discontinued at the customer's request
when proper notification is made to the City. Upon receipt of such
notification, the Water Department shall read the customer's meter and
charges for water service rendered up to and including the time of cut
off and/or final reading shall be computed and shall become due and
payable immediately.
Section
710.240
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
710.240
AO:867

ARTICLE IV
Customer Responsibilities Pertaining To Water Service
Section 710.250. Accessibility of Valves, Meters and Hydrants. [Ord.
No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
Section 710.260. Property Damage. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
Section 710.270. Duty of Customer To Notify City of Defects. [Ord.
No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
Each customer shall notify the City promptly of any defect in water piping,
equipment or apparatus of the City or of any existing conditions that might
affect water service to the customer or might be dangerous to persons
or property. Unless the situation warrants more expedient notification, the
notification shall be made in writing.
Section 710.280. Duty of Customer To Notify City of Change in Load
Conditions. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
The customer shall notify the City of any change in connected load or
in water equipment on the customer's premises which might affect water
service to such customer or to any other water customer of the City; and
the City shall have no duty, obligation or responsibility arising out of or
resulting from customer's failure to so notify the City.
Section 710.290. Customer Service Line Furnished By Customer —
Specifications. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002; Ord. No. 04-32
§1, 5-10-2004; Ord. No. 16-01 §1, 1-25-2016]
A. The owner of any real property, on which any part of the water system is
located, shall maintain the property in such a way as to allow the City
immediate access to valves, meters and hydrants as may be necessary
at any given time. This shall include, but not be limited to, burying valve
or meter boxes, allowing vegetation overgrowth, blocking access, or
creating conditions that hamper proper operation of valves, meters or
hydrants.
B. Any delay or cost incurred by the City as a result of failure to maintain
access shall be the responsibility of the owner of said property.
A. The owner of any real property shall be liable for damage to City-owned
infrastructure on said property unless the owner of said property can
show other cause for damage acceptable to the City (acts of God,
actions by other person, etc.).
B. Any person found to have caused damage to City-owned infrastructure,
regardless of location, shall be held responsible either to repair the
damage or for the cost incurred by the City to repair the damage at the
Director's discretion.
Section
710.250
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
710.290
AO:869
A. The customer service line shall be furnished, installed and maintained
by the customer at his/her expense and risk.
B. The water service line shall be constructed and conform to the
requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes or other applicable
rules and regulations of the City. The service line shall be constructed of
Schedule 40 or heavier polyvinyl chloride (PVC), SDR-9 rolled tubing
rated at 150 p.s.i., copper or any other material as approved by the
Director with an inside diameter of no less than three-quarters (3/4)
inch. Joints for PVC pipe can be either the gasketed type or glue on. If
the joints are to be glued, then an approved primer/cleaner and solventtype
cements shall be used. The primer/cleaner shall be purple in color
for identification purposes. The water service line shall not be within
two (2) feet of a side property line unless the water main is positioned
along the side property line. All pipe and fittings must be installed with
granular pipe embedment, consisting of crushed or chipped limestone
with a nominal size of not less than one-half (1/2) inch or greater than
one (1) inch. Bedding material shall be used to provide a uniform trench
bottom. A minimum bedding of two (2) inches above and below the
exterior of the pipe is required. Water service lines laid under drives,
parking lots or traffic areas shall be either encased in metal conduit or
shall be covered with a minimum of six (6) inches of cleaned crushed or
chipped limestone, as specified herein, on all sides of the pipe or the
pipe shall be cast iron or ductile iron.
C. For customer service lines constructed or replaced after the date of
adoption of this Section, a minimum 12-gauge single strand copper clad
steel conductive tracer wire with HDPE insulation shall be installed
directly above and adjacent to the customer's water service line, where
such piping is located within the public right-of-way. Wire splices shall
be made with either rigid fittings or weatherproof connectors
specifically designed for direct burial. Electric ground shall be
established by splicing on to existing tracer wire where available or
using a minimum one-inch copper grounding rod driven into the trench
bottom near the water meter. The tracer wire shall be installed directly
above the service line and taped every ten (10) feet using poly tape. The
tracer wire shall be extended to the surface adjacent to the structure
being served and housed within a protective enclosure constructed of
Schedule 40 PVC pipe and a Schedule 40 PVC threaded clean-out with
cap or an alternately constructed housing as may be approved by the
City. The protective enclosure shall be extended to grade, installed so it
is easily accessible but shall not be located within any driving or
parking surface unless rigid clean-out fittings are used.
D. The Public Works Director shall be notified twenty-four (24) hours
before the water service line and connection to the meter is ready for
inspection. The ditch shall not be backfilled until the inspection is made
with approval given. A water service line inspection fee of forty dollars
($40.00) shall be submitted to the City prior to inspection or approval
Section
710.290
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
710.290
AO:870
Section 710.300. Customer Service Line Connection. [Ord. No.
02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
Section 710.310. Customer Service Line Shut-Off Valve — Required.
[Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
All customer service lines shall have a shut-off valve immediately inside the
building or foundation wall at place of entry.
Section 710.320. Customer-Owned Piping. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
Section 710.330. Meters (See Section 710.210 "Meter
Installation"). [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
for service. The City may refuse to give water service for failure to
conform to the requirements contained herein.
A. The customer service line shall include the connection to the outlet of
the meter setter, and all liability and responsibility for such connection
shall be the customer's.
B. In the absence of a meter setter, the customer service line shall be
installed to the property line at a point designated by the City.
C. The City is under no obligation to connect the customer service line
while installing the meter setter if the customer service line is not
installed to the designated point at the time of meter setter installation.
A. Customer ownership of water piping shall begin at the outlet side of the
meter setter serving that customer. In the absence of an in-ground
meter, customer ownership of piping shall begin at the property line or
at the connection to the main if the main is on the customer's property.
B. Any repairs or maintenance necessary on the customer service pipe or
any pipe or fixture in or upon the customer's premises, including the
connection to the meter, shall be performed by the customer at his/her
expenses and risk.
C. Such pipe and fixtures shall be kept and maintained in good condition
and free from all leaks. Failure on the part of customer to do so may
result in water service being discontinued.
A. All meters shall be installed in accordance with City construction
specifications.
B. Plumbers installing new service and house plumbing on premises shall
determine from the City the proposed location of the meter and, if
inside the building, shall leave sufficient horizontal space next to the
entrance cutoff for the installation of meters.
Section
710.290
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
710.340
AO:871
Section 710.340. Bypassing Meter — Prohibited. [Ord. No. 02-14
§§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
Section 710.350. Tampering With Main Valves, Curb Stops, Etc.,
Prohibited. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
Section 710.360. Tampering With Fire Hydrants — Prohibited. [Ord.
No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
No person shall tamper with any City-owned fire hydrant or device, or
any privately-owned device available for connecting a fire hose to a water
main, without obtaining written authority to do so from the City and from
the owner of such device. Area Fire Departments must have a written and
signed mutual-aid agreement with the City of Republic before access to
hydrants or water supply is allowed. The word "tamper" shall include, but
not limited to: the removal of the cap or any other part of such device;
the insertion of any object or material into such device; the application of
any wrench, tool, implement or other object or material to such device;
and/or the use of such device in any fashion so as to permit water to flow
therefrom. This Section shall not apply to the owner of such device, the
agents and employees of such owner. Customers may obtain a meter from
the City for use on fire hydrants and the receipt for deposit shall suffice as
written authorization (see Sections 710.170 "Hydrant Meters" and 705.180
"Hydrant Meter Deposit"). Any violation of this Chapter will be subject to a
fine up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
Section 710.370. Material and Installation Specifications. [Ord. No.
02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002; Ord. No. 16-23 § 1, 11-28-2016]
Any water pipe, hydrant, meter, valve, related materials, and the installation
thereof shall conform to "Construction Specifications for Public
A. Any device, connection, apparatus, piping or configuration which allows
any amount of water to be delivered to any person without proper
metering is strictly prohibited.
B. Any attempt to affect the accuracy or proper registering of any meter in
any way is strictly prohibited.
C. Any violation of this Section found on any premises shall result in
immediate termination of water service without notice and possible
criminal investigation may ensue.
A. No person shall turn the water on or off at any street valve, corporation,
meter valve, curb stop or other street connection or disconnect or
remove any meter without the consent of the City.
B. Exception may be made when a customer must turn off their meter
valve to prevent property damage; but the customer shall be
responsible for any damage to City property in doing so.
Section
710.340
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
710.370
AO:872
Improvements, City of Republic" on file at the offices of the City of Republic
Public Works Department and incorporated herein by reference.
Section 710.380. Backflow Prevention. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002; Ord. No. 04-62 §1, 9-13-2004]
A. The customer shall be responsible for the installation and maintenance
of an acceptable backflow prevention device when deemed necessary
by the City to maintain a safe water supply and/or adequate fire
suppression. Any new construction or modifications to existing private
fire suppression systems shall utilize such backflow prevention devices
pursuant to the State of Missouri Code of State Regulations (10 CSR 60
Chapter 11).
B. The customer shall also be responsible for annual testing of such
devices by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester as outlined
in said State regulations.
C. The customer shall forward a copy of the annual test results to the City.
D. The Director shall have the right to immediately discontinue water
service or to deny service for failure to comply with this Section.
E. The customer shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the City
resulting from failure to provide and maintain proper backflow
prevention as required by this Section.
Section
710.370
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
710.380
AO:873

ARTICLE V
Emergency Water Conservation Plan
Section 710.390. Purpose. [Ord. No. 12-54 §1, 9-24-2012]
The purpose of this Section is to protect public health and welfare and
implement the City of Republic's authority to regulate the equitable use of
water during uncommon times when the normal municipal water supply has
been disrupted due to weather, natural or man-made disasters, mechanical
failure(s) or other unforeseen events.
Section 710.400. Definitions. [Ord. No. 12-54 §1, 9-24-2012]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AGRICULTURE — Crop-based farming in all its branches and the
production of livestock, dairy products, poultry or poultry products.
CITY — The City of Republic, Missouri.
COUNCIL — The City Council of Republic, Missouri.
CUSTOMERS AND USERS — Persons receiving water service from the City
of Republic, Missouri.
DIRECTOR — The Public Works Director of the City of Republic, Missouri,
or designee.
EMERGENCY — A sudden or unexpected natural or man-made event
restricting the ability of the City to supply water to customers.
GROUND WATER LEVEL — The depth to the Ozark Aquifer, in feet below
the land surface.
LARGE USERS — Those customers whose monthly demand has ever
exceeded one hundred twenty-five thousand (125,000) gallons to include
multi-unit apartment complexes operating with multiple meters and under
single ownership whose usage in the aggregate reaches this threshold.
LONG TERM — A period of seven (7) or more consecutive days.
NOTICE — Written service delivered by either certified mail sent to a
customer's billing address or posting on the primary entrance of the subject
residence or business.
OUTDOOR IRRIGATION — Any residential, municipal, industrial, or
commercial watering of lawns, trees, landscaping, shrubs and vegetation
of any kind. Outdoor irrigation shall not include irrigation for agricultural
purposes.
PERSON(S) — Any individual, corporation, trust, partnership, association,
agency or authority, or other entity and any officer, employee, group or
agent of such persons and includes governmental bodies.
PLAN — Chapter 710, Article V, Section 710.390, inclusive of this Code.
Section
710.390
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
710.400
AO:875
SHORT TERM — A period of fewer than thirty (30) consecutive days.
STORED WATER VOLUME — The quantity of water contained in all of the
City's functioning water storage reservoirs.
WATER CONSUMPTION — The projected daily unrestricted use of water
provided by the City to customers or users.
WELL PRODUCTION CAPACITY OR WELL CAPACITY — The estimated
combined output of all functioning City wells.
Section 710.410. Water Conservation Generally. [Ord. No. 12-54 §1,
9-24-2012]
The Director shall prepare and implement an education and outreach
program which promotes the efficient use of water. The program shall
provide technical information on detecting and repairing common sources
of water leaks, methods and fixtures which can reduce water consumption
and encourages the voluntary practice of an alternating day irrigation
scheme matching the pattern of those use restrictions which may be
required under this Article.
Section 710.420. Peak Day Conservation. [Ord. No. 12-54 §1,
9-24-2012]
A. Peak day conservation efforts are short term in nature and generally
necessitated by local conditions which reduce the City's ability to
produce, treat, store or distribute water. Peak day restrictions may be
voluntary or mandatory dependent upon the severity of the
circumstances.
1. Peak day level one conservation (voluntary). Peak day level one
shall become effective when the Director determines and declares
that:
a. The daily production, treatment and distribution capacity of
City's water processing and storage facilities may be exceeded
by the daily usage.
b. An emergency exists which limits, or threatens to limit, the
amount of water that the City is able to supply to customers.
2. Peak day level one shall be short term, intended to accomplish an
overall system-wide reduction in daily water consumption of
twenty-five percent (25%). Reduction shall be measured against
water consumption as herein defined.
3. The Director shall consider well production and treatment capacity,
stored water volume, integrity of the transmission and distribution
piping systems, and other pertinent factors in determining the daily
treatment capacity.
Section
710.400
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
710.420
AO:876
4. Whenever the Director has determined and declared that it is
necessary to implement peak day level one conservation,
customers and users shall be encouraged to voluntarily restrict
their usage of water supplied by the City as follows:
a. No washing of sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, basketball
courts, tennis courts, patios or other exterior paved areas and
no pumping of fountains.
b. No filling or refilling of any and all swimming, wading, or hot
tub pools.
c. No non-commercial washing of motor vehicles, trailers or
boats, except from a bucket.
d. No use of water for dust control.
e. No flushing of mains by City personnel, except to alleviate
individual water quality problems.
f. No use of water from fire hydrants, except for fighting fires, for
human consumption, or for necessary watering of animals.
g. No watering of any lawn, garden, landscaped area, tree, shrub
or other plant, except from a handheld hose or container, or
drip irrigation system.
h. No eating establishment shall serve water except upon specific
request and shall display notice to that effect.
i. Commercial, industrial or public authority (including City
facilities) users shall reduce daily water consumption by
twenty-five percent (25%).
5. When the Director determine that the circumstances requiring the
measures of peak day level one no longer exist, he shall direct that
peak day one be terminated.
6. Peak day level two (mandatory). When the Director determines and
declares that the measures of Subsection (4) (peak day level one) of
this Section are inadequate, utilizing the criteria in Subsection (3),
to provide necessary water to customers and users, he shall declare
that the measures of peak day level two become effective.
7. Peak day level two shall be short term, intended to accomplish an
overall system-wide reduction in daily water consumption of fifty
percent (50%). Reduction shall be measured against water
consumption as herein defined.
8. The Director shall consider well production and treatment capacity,
stored water volume, integrity of the transmission and distribution
piping systems, the nature and extent of the emergency (if any) and
Section
710.420
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
710.420
AO:877
other pertinent factors in arriving at a decision under Subsection
(6).
9. Whenever the Director has determined that it is necessary to
implement peak day level two, it shall be unlawful for customers
and users to engage in any of the following activities utilizing water
supplied by the City:
a. Washing of sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, basketball
courts, tennis courts, patios or other exterior paved areas and
pumping of fountains.
b. Filling or refilling of any and all swimming, wading, or hot tub
pools.
c. Using water for recreational purposes, such as water slides or
yard play.
d. Non-commercial washing of motor vehicles, trailers or boats.
e. Use of water for dust control.
f. Flushing of mains by City personnel, except to alleviate
individual water quality problems.
g. Using water from fire hydrants, except for fighting fires, for
human consumption, or for necessary watering of animals.
h. Watering of any lawn, garden, landscaped area, tree, shrub or
other plant, except for agricultural purposes.
i. No eating establishment shall serve water except upon specific
request and shall display notice to that effect.
j. Using water supplied by the City in any motor vehicle washing
business.
k. In addition to the mandatory restrictions contained in this
paragraph, commercial, industrial or public authority users
(including the City) who choose not to file individual
conservation plans (pursuant to Section 710.450) shall reduce
daily short-term consumption by fifty percent (50%).
l. Large user conservation plans. All large users shall adhere to
this plan or to their plan as filed with and approved by the City
under Section 710.450.
10. When the Director determines that daily demand no longer
threatens to exceed the daily treatment capacity, or that an actual
or imminent shortage of water requiring implementation of peak
day level two has otherwise been sufficiently moderated or
eliminated, he shall direct that peak day level two revert to peak
day level one, or be terminated.
Section
710.420
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
710.430
AO:878
Section 710.430. Source Conservation. [Ord. No. 12-54 §1,
9-24-2012]
A. Source conservation efforts are long term in nature and are generally
necessitated by regional conditions which reduce or threaten the City's
ability to produce, treat, store or distribute water. Source conservation
restrictions are mandatory for all customers and water users.
1. Stage one — source water shortage. Stage one shall be in force and
effect when:
a. Credible data demonstrates that ground water levels have
reached critical levels relative to the depth of City wells and
relevant conditions are likely to result in a further decline of
ground water levels due to either a reduction in inflow
(recharge) or an increase in outflow (discharge).
b. An emergency exists or occurs.
2. When the City Council determines and declares by resolution the
existence of the conditions described in Subsections (1)(a) or (1)(b)
as provided in this Section, stage one is intended to accomplish an
overall system-wide reduction in water consumption of fifteen
percent (15%), as follows:
a. Users and customers shall comply with the following
restrictions when using water supplied by the City and it shall
be unlawful for customers and users to violate the following:
(1) No washing of sidewalks, driveways, parking areas,
buildings, gutters, tennis courts, patios or other paved
areas; no operation of any ornamental fountain or pond
except where necessary to support aquatic life.
(2) No filling or refilling of any and all swimming, wading, or
hot tub pools except on designated water days between
8:00 P.M. and Midnight.
(3) No non-commercial washing of motor vehicles, trailers or
boats, except from a bucket on designated water days
between 6:00 and 8:00 A.M. or 8:00 and 10:00 P.M.
(4) No use of water for dust control.
(5) No flushing of mains by City personnel, except to alleviate
individual water quality problems.
(6) No use of water from a fire hydrant, except for fighting
fires, for human consumption, or for necessary watering of
animals.
(7) Irrigation of lawns and landscaped areas shall be limited
to Midnight to 6:00 A.M. Sundays for all customers with a
Section
710.430
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
710.430
AO:879
street address ending in an even number, and Midnight to
6:00 A.M. Saturdays for all water customers with a street
address ending in an odd number. The use of permanently
installed automatic irrigation systems shall be limited to
twenty (20) minutes per zone or area for pop-up fixed
spray sprinklers and forty-five (45) minutes per zone or
area for pop-up rotary type sprinklers.
However, irrigation of lawn and landscaped areas is
permitted any day of the week for forty-five (45) minutes
between the hours of Midnight and 6:00 A.M. if it is by
means of a handheld hose, a faucet filled bucket or
watering can of five (5) gallons or less, drip irrigation
system, or hose end sprinkler. Spraying of water on
sidewalks, streets, and other paved areas is prohibited.
(8) No eating establishment shall serve water except upon
specific request and shall display notice to that effect.
(9) The City may disallow account adjustments for leaks as
provided in Section 705.060 when a customer neglected to
repair a water leak in a timely basis, provided that a notice
to repair the leak was served.
(10) The City's "stage one emergency conservation water
service rate" shall be applicable with the next regular
billing cycle applicable to each customer.
3. When the City Council determines and declares by resolution that
the existence of those conditions cited in Subsections (1)(a) or
(1)(b) as provided in this Section, no longer exist, or that the
circumstances requiring implementation of stage one have
sufficiently moderated or been eliminated, stage one shall be
terminated with the next regular billing cycle.
4. Stage two — source water emergency. Stage two shall become
effective when:
a. Credible data demonstrates that ground water levels have
reached critical levels relative to the depth of City wells and
relevant conditions are likely to result in a further decline of
ground water levels due to either a reduction in inflow
(recharge) or an increase in outflow (discharge).
b. An emergency occurs or continues.
c. Stage one has not accomplished a fifteen percent (15%)
reduction in water consumption, as determined by the
pumping records of City wells.
5. When the City Council determines and declares by resolution the
existence of conditions described in Subsections (4)(a), (4)(b) or
Section
710.430
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
710.430
AO:880
(4)(c), stage two is intended to accomplish an overall system-wide
reduction in water consumption of twenty percent (20%), as
follows:
a. Restrictions of stage one shall remain in effect, except as
modified below and it shall be unlawful for customers and
users to violate the following:
(1) The use of permanently installed automatic sprinkler
systems and hose end sprinklers is prohibited at all times.
(2) Filling or refilling of any and all swimming, wading, or hot
tub pools is prohibited. Using water for recreational
purposes such as water slides or yard play is prohibited.
(3) Non-commercial washing of vehicles is prohibited.
(4) All users (including the City), not subject to Section
710.450, shall consume no more than eighty percent (80%)
of the usage during the corresponding billing period in the
year prior to implementation of the conservation plan.
(5) The City may disallow account adjustments for leaks as
provided in Section 705.060 when a customer neglected to
repair a water leak in a timely basis, provided that a notice
to repair the leak was served.
(6) The City's "stage two emergency conservation water
service rate" shall be applicable with the next regular
billing cycle applicable to each customer.
6. When the City Council determines and declares by resolution that
the existence of those conditions cited in Subsections (5)(a), (5)(b)
or (5)(c) as provided in this Section no longer exist, or that the
circumstances requiring implementation of stage two have
sufficiently moderated or been eliminated, stage two shall be
terminated with the next regular billing cycle.
7. Stage three — source water crisis. Stage three shall become
effective when:
a. Credible data demonstrates that ground water levels have
reached critical levels relative to the depth of City wells and
relevant conditions are likely to result in a further decline of
ground water levels due to either a reduction in inflow
(recharge) or an increase in outflow (discharge).
b. An emergency occurs or continues.
c. Stage two has not accomplished a twenty percent (20%)
reduction in water consumption, as determined by the well
pumping records.
Section
710.430
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
710.430
AO:881
8. When the City Council determines and declares by resolution the
existence of the conditions described in (7)(a), (7)(b), or (7)(c),
stage three is intended to accomplish an overall system-wide
reduction in water consumption of twenty-five percent (25%), as
follows:
a. Restrictions of stage one and stage two shall remain in effect,
except as modified below and it shall be unlawful for customers
and users to violate the following:
(1) All requirements of stages one and two shall remain in
effect except as modified below.
(2) Washing of motor vehicles, trailers or boats is prohibited.
(3) Watering of any lawn, garden, or landscaped area is
prohibited. Trees, shrubs, and plants may be watered from
a handheld container.
(4) No application for new, additional, expanded, or increasedin-
size water service connections, meters, service lines,
pipeline extensions, mains or water service facilities that
fall under a building permit applied for after
implementation of stage three shall be approved until
circumstances requiring implementation of stage three
have sufficiently moderated or been eliminated.
(5) Large user conservation plans. All large users (including
the City) shall adhere to the City conservation plan for
their operation, or may file an individual plan of
conservation for approval by the City under Section
710.450 to consume no more than eighty percent (80%) of
the usage during the corresponding billing period in the
year prior to implementation of the conservation plan.
(6) The City may disallow account adjustments for leaks as
provided in Section 705.060 when a customer neglected to
repair a water leak in a timely basis, provided that a notice
to repair was served.
(7) The City's "stage three emergency conservation water
service rate" shall be applicable with the next regular
billing cycle applicable to each customer.
(8) Large users (including the City), who do not choose to file
individual conservation plans pursuant to Section 710.450,
shall consume no more than seventy-five percent (75%) of
the usage during the corresponding billing period in the
year prior to implementation of the water conservation
plan.
Section
710.430
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
710.430
AO:882
Section 710.440. Notification of Customers. [Ord. No. 12-54 §1,
9-24-2012]
Section 710.450. Conservation Plans For Large Commercial and
Industrial Customers. [Ord. No. 12-54 §1, 9-24-2012]
Section 710.460. Compliance. [Ord. No. 12-54 §1, 9-24-2012]
9. When the City Council determines and declares by resolution that
the existence of those conditions cited in Subsections (8)(a), (8)(b)
or (8)(c) as provided in this Section no longer exist, or that the
circumstances requiring implementation of stage three have
sufficiently moderated or been eliminated, stage three shall be
terminated with the next regular billing cycle.
A. All persons shall be conclusively presumed to have notice of the
implementation of any stage of the plan as hereinbefore set forth and
shall be subject to its provision (including the City's "emergency
conservation water service rates") upon the filing of a notice of such
implementation of any Section hereof with the City Clerk, and when a
copy of such notice is posted at the customer entrance to City Hall at
213 N. Main, Republic, Missouri.
B. Reasonable efforts shall be made to utilize news media and other means
to publicize the implementation of various stages of the plan. Notice
shall be posted and filed at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the time
for implementation of source water shortage stages one, two and three,
and at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time for implementation
of peak day level one and peak day level two.
A. Any large user may submit for approval by the Director, following
enactment of this Article, an emergency water conservation plan
setting forth in reasonable detail the manner in which such customer
proposes to comply with Sections 710.420 and 710.430. Such plan shall
be examined by the Director who shall approve the same if it appears
reasonably calculated to achieve reduced water consumption as herein
provided. Further, any customer who becomes subject to the provisions
of this Section after the effective date of this Article may file such plan
with the City. Meters used solely for fire protection purposes are not
considered subject to this requirement.
B. Each individual conservation plan shall set forth the means and manner
by which the large user intends to effect compliance with each
Subsection of 710.420 and with both Subsections of 710.430.
A. During any stage of the plan in which the "emergency conservation
water service rate" is in effect, single-family residential customers will
be provided (printed on bills) with at least the penalty-free usage
amount to be allowed in the upcoming billing period. Penalty-free usage
amounts for all non-residential customers will be provided upon
request.
Section
710.430
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
710.460
AO:883
Section 710.470. Penalty — New Customers, Procedures For
Termination of Service. [Ord. No. 12-54 §1, 9-24-2012]
Section 710.480. Granting of Exceptions. [Ord. No. 12-54 §1,
9-24-2012]
B. Compliance With The Plan. All persons who receive water service from
the City shall be entitled to receive such water service only upon
compliance with provisions of this Article. Failure to comply with the
provisions of this Article shall result in termination of service. If
terminated, service will not be restored until all conservation measures
have been removed, subject to the relief provided in Section 710.480.
A. Any person who shall violate the provisions of Sections 710.420 and
710.430 or any large user who having complied with Section 710.450
fails to adhere to such plan shall be guilty of a violation and punished as
provided in Article III Section 100.220.
B. Any customer who applies for service during any time the restrictions
on water use contained herein are in effect will be advised of that fact
by the City and will be provided the penalty-free usage for such
premises.
C. Failure to comply with the provisions of this Article shall result in
termination of service after two (2) notices of non-compliance,
delivered no less than ten (10) calendar days apart, have been served.
All notices of non-compliance shall include information allowing
customer to request an exception.
D. The City reserves the right to immediately discontinue service without
notice for private water infrastructure that is in disrepair.
A. Request For Exception. Exceptions to the application of use restrictions
and relief from the "emergency conservation water service rate" may be
requested in writing, setting forth in reasonable detail the factual basis
for such request. Such request shall be signed by the customer making
it, delivered to the Director, and shall include a request for hearing if
one is desired.
B. Hearing — Decision. If a hearing is granted, notice of the time and place
thereof will be given the applicant within three (3) business days, and
the matter determined in its entirety within ten (10) business days
following hearing of the request. If no hearing is requested, or none is
granted, the Director shall proceed to consider the application giving
due regard to the following factors: Major business or process
expansion, increase in family size, nature of a business, inequity,
hardship and other factors making strict application of the restrictions
unjust. Granting of hearing is discretionary with the Director.
Section
710.460
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
710.480
AO:884
Section 710.490. Conservation Rate Structure. [Ord. No. 12-54 §1,
9-24-2012]
The emergency conservation water service rate structure consists of a
surcharge added to the volumetric water rate. Conservation rates do not
affect the base rate for water or sewer rates. The emergency conservation
rate structure is as follows:
Customer Class Stage One Stage Two Stage Three
Residential use
customers per
dwelling unit
115% of the
current
volumetric rate
for all usage
above 4,300
gallons
120% of the
current
volumetric rate
for all usage
above 4,000
gallons
125% of the
current
volumetric rate
for all usage
above 3,800
gallons
Commercial,
industrial,
institutional
115% of the
current
volumetric rate
120% of the
current
volumetric rate
125% of the
current
volumetric rate
C. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a decision made in the
implementation of this Article may appeal the same to the City
Administrator.
Section
710.480
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
710.490
AO:885
Chapter 715
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
Section
710.490
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
710.490
AO:886
ARTICLE I
General Provisions — Sanitary Sewer
Section 715.010. Purpose. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the maximum possible
beneficial public use of the POTW through regulations of sewer
construction, sewer use and wastewater discharges; to provide for
equitable distribution of the costs of the POTW; and to provide procedures
for complying with the requirements contained herein.
Section 715.020. Scope. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
Section 715.030. Administration. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
Except as otherwise provided herein, the Wastewater Superintendent shall
administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
Section 715.040. Accessibility of The POTW. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 —
2, 4-22-2002]
A. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the discharge of all
wastewater into the POTW. This Chapter provides for use of the POTW,
regulations of sewer construction, control of the quantity and quality of
wastewater discharged, wastewater pretreatment, alternate treatment
facilities, equitable distribution of costs, assurance that existing
capacity will not be exceeded, approval of sewer construction plans,
issuance of wastewater contribution permits, minimum sewer
connection standards and conditions, and penalties and other
procedures for violation of this Chapter.
B. This Chapter shall apply within the City of Republic, Missouri, and to
persons outside the City of Republic, Missouri, who are users of the
POTW.
C. All connections of lateral or building sewer lines into the sewage system
of the POTW service area, whether within or without any City, shall be
made subject to such terms and conditions as the ordinances of the City
of Republic may prescribe.
A. Employees of the Wastewater Department, with proper identification,
shall have the right to enter upon the premises of any sanitary sewage
customer at any time during ordinary business hours for the purpose of
examining, sampling, testing, changing or moving any sanitary sewage
equipment, meters, apparatus or piping connected to the POTW or
measuring the customer's sanitary sewage discharge. The owner of said
property shall maintain the property in such a way as to allow the City
immediate access to the POTW as may be necessary at any given time.
This shall include, but not be limited to, burying or allowing vegetation
growth, blocking access or creating conditions that hamper proper
Section
715.010
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.040
AO:887
Section 715.050. Right of Entry. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
Employees of the Wastewater Department bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter properties without delay at any
reasonable time for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement
and sampling of the wastewater discharge to ensure that the discharge
to the POTW is in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. The
inspector shall not have the authority to inspect any process that does not
have a direct bearing on any processes that may not have a direct effect on
the POTW.
Section 715.060. Vandalism. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface, tamper with or impede accessibility of any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is part of the POTW.
Section 715.070. Confidential Information. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
Any information submitted pursuant to this Chapter may be claimed as
confidential by the submitter. Any such claim must be asserted at the time
of submission by stamping the words "confidential business information" on
each page containing such information.
The information will be declared as confidential information as long as it
does not contradict Chapter 610, RSMo., concerning the Sunshine Law.
If no claim of confidentiality is made at the time of submission, the Director
may make the information available to the public without further notice.
Upon approval of the Director, such portions of a report claimed as
"confidential business information" and which might disclose trade secrets,
secret processes, or methods of production shall not be made available for
inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written request to
governmental agencies for uses related to this Chapter, the POTW NPDES
permit and/or the pretreatment program; but such portions of a report shall
be available for use by the City, the State, or any Federal agency in judicial
or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
operation and/or maintenance of the POTW. Any delay or cost incurred
by the City as a result of failure to maintain access shall be the
responsibility of the owner of said property.
B. All water piping and equipment on the customer's premises shall be
available to the Wastewater Department and to all City inspectors who
may have jurisdiction over such piping and equipment; provided
however, that the City shall not be deemed to have assumed the
responsibility to inspect, repair or maintain any piping or equipment
that is customer owned, as located and defined in this Chapter.
Section
715.040
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
715.070
AO:888
Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data as
defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information
and will be available to the public without restriction.
Section 715.080. Falsifying Information. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
No person shall knowingly make any false statements, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed
or required to be maintained pursuant to this Chapter nor falsify, tamper
with, or knowingly render inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this Chapter.
Section 715.090. Non-Compliance Reporting. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 —
2, 4-22-2002]
A. The Wastewater Superintendent shall annually publish, in the largest
daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is
located, a list of the users which, during the previous twelve (12)
months, were in significant non-compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements. The term "significant noncompliance"
shall mean:
1. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of wastewater
measurements taken during a six (6) month period exceed the daily
maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter
by any amount;
2. Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of wastewater
measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six (6)
month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum
limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4
for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease and 1.2 for all other pollutants
except pH);
3. Any other discharge violation that the Director believes has caused,
along or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass
through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or
the general public;
4. Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent
endangerment to the public or to the environment or has resulted
in the Director's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or
prevent such a discharge;
5. Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater
contribution permit or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
Section
715.070
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.090
AO:889
Section 715.100. Private Wastewater Treatment Facilities. [Ord. No.
02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002; Ord. No. 09-45 §1, 12-14-2009]
6. Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date, any
required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on
compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines,
periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;
7. Failure to accurately report non-compliance; or
8. Any other violation(s) which the Director determines will adversely
affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program.
A. It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault,
cesspool or other facility, except a private wastewater treatment facility
as provided by this Chapter, intended or used for disposal of
wastewater. Approved portable chemical toilets may be temporarily
erected and maintained on construction sites and areas used for
temporary businesses and entertainment with the approval of the City
Planner. All private wastewater treatment facilities must adhere to the
rules, regulations and standards as adopted by the City of Republic for
on-site wastewater treatment systems.
B. In lieu of introducing untreated or partially treated wastewater into the
POTW, the owner of the premises producing such waste may construct
and operate at his/her expense private wastewater treatment facilities
with the effluent discharged to the waters of the State, provided:
1. The design and operation of such facilities shall continuously
produce an effluent which is in compliance with standards that may
be imposed by the Director and the State of Missouri.
2. Construction drawings, specifications and other pertinent
information relating to such proposed treatment facilities shall be
prepared by the owner, at his/her expense, and shall be submitted
to the Public Works Director, the State of Missouri or other
regulatory authority as may be required. Construction shall be in
accordance with such approved plans and shall not commence until
such approvals are obtained in writing, appropriate permits are
obtained and charges or fees are paid.
3. Such facilities shall be operated and maintained in a satisfactory
and effective manner by the owner at his/her expense. Such
facilities shall be subject to inspection by the Director at
reasonable times with reasonable notice. If a private wastewater
treatment system is to be used, the owner must adhere to the rules,
regulations and standards for on-site wastewater systems as
adopted by the City of Republic.
Section
715.090
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
715.100
AO:890
Section 715.110. Authority To Approve Plans, Profiles and
Specifications For Construction of Dead-End Sewers and Dedication
of Dead-End Sewers. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
C. Holding tanks may be used and shall be limited to the rules, regulations
and standards for on-site wastewater systems as established by the City
of Republic.
D. All private wastewater treatment and holding facilities shall conform to
the Greene County, Missouri, Regulations and Standards for On-Site
Wastewater Systems (latest edition).
A. The Director of the City of Republic, Missouri, is hereby authorized to
approve plans, profiles and specifications for the construction of deadend
sewers and to accept the dedication of such sewers, provided the
sewers are constructed within one (1) year from the date the Director
approves the plans and in accordance with City specifications. The
person constructing the sewer shall pay to the City in advance of any
work all engineering service fees as required by the City for the cost of
staking, plan review, inspection and related services by the City during
such construction. The City's obligation to maintain the sewers as part
of any sanitary sewer system shall not occur until sewers are otherwise
available. The person dedicating such sewers shall file and record
public sewer easements sufficient to provide the City access to the
sewers. The sewers shall be free from any lien for the construction work
related thereto. The Director shall have authority to accept the
dedication of the sewer easements and the sewers when all conditions
of this Section have been satisfied.
B. All certifications including, but not limited to, those required by the
Missouri Department of Natural Resources and the City's Construction
Specifications for Public Improvements shall be submitted before final
approval of any sewer extension is given.
Section
715.100
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.110
AO:891

ARTICLE II
Use of The Publicly-Owned Treatment Works
Section 715.120. Preliminary Treatment Facilities. [Ord. No. 02-14
§§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
Section 715.130. Connection To The Publicly Owned Treatment
Works. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002; Ord. No. 04-33 §1,
5-10-2004; Ord. No. 16-01 §2, 1-25-2016]
A. The admission into the POTW of any wastewater containing any
quantity of pollutant shall be subject to review and approval of the
Director. Where necessary, in the opinion of the Director, the owner of
the property or premises producing such waste shall provide, at his/her
expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to reduce
pollution or certain pollutants to within the maximum limits provided
for in this Chapter or to control the quantities or rates of discharge of
such wastewaters.
B. Construction drawings, specifications and other pertinent information
relating to the proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be
prepared by the owner at his/her expense and shall be submitted for the
approval of the Director and no construction of such facilities shall be
commenced until such approvals are obtained in writing. Construction
shall be in accordance with such approved plans.
C. Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided, they shall be
maintained continuously in effective operation by the owner at his/her
expense.
A. The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose, situated in the
City or in any area where there is an availability of sewers in a
jurisdiction with which the City has an interjurisdictional sewage
treatment agreement and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in
which there is now located or may in the future be located a sanitary
sewer of the City, is hereby required, at his/her expense, to install
suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly
with the proper sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter within one hundred eighty (180) days after sewer service is
available, provided such sanitary sewer is within three hundred (300)
feet of all structures used for human occupancy, employment,
recreation or other purposes. In the event there is no sanitary sewer
within three hundred (300) feet of the structure, the owner may request
permission of the City to construct and maintain an adequate on-site
wastewater treatment system installation at the owner's expense, until
such time as a sanitary sewer is made available. At which time a public
sanitary sewer does become available, the owner shall connect the
building sewer to the public sanitary sewer. The owner shall remove the
septage from the sewage tank and dispose of it in an approved manner,
Section
715.120
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.130
AO:893
and the sewage tank shall be abandoned and filled with suitable
material or be removed.
B. No person shall make any connection to the POTW, either direct or
indirect, without written permission from the Director nor reconnect
wastewater services when such services have been disconnected for
non-payment of a bill for wastewater services unless such bill for
wastewater services, including charges for disconnection, has been
paid in full.
C. No person shall tap into any sanitary sewer line of the POTW except by
using an approved tapping method and an approved connection fitting
unless otherwise approved by the Director. The Director shall develop
reasonable rules and regulations on tapping and connecting
procedures. These rules and regulations shall take force and effect five
(5) days after the same shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk.
D. The building sewer shall be constructed and conform to the
requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes or other applicable
rules and regulations of the City. The building sewer shall be
constructed of Schedule 40 or heavier polyvinyl chloride (PVC), castiron
soil pipe or any other material as approved by the Director with an
inside diameter of no less than four (4) inches. Joints of the building
sewer shall be watertight and rootproof. Joints for PVC pipe can be
either the gasketed type or glue on. If the joints are to be glued, then an
approved primer/cleaner and solvent-type cements shall be used. The
primer/cleaner shall be purple in color for identification purposes.
Ninety-degree ells or bends shall not be allowed at any point of the
building sewer. At the point where the building drain connects to the
building sewer, there shall be a tee or wye and a cleanout extended
above the flow line of the building sewer and the line brought up above
the surface of the surrounding ground. The pipe shall have an approved
cap or screw-in plug to be used for access. The building sewer shall be
laid at a minimal slope of one quarter (1/4) inch of fall per foot of
horizontal distance and may not be located within two (2) feet of a side
property line unless the sanitary sewer main is positioned along the
side property line. The connection of the building drain to the building
sewer shall be made at a point not less than three (3) feet from the
foundation and not more than five (5) feet from the foundation. The
cleanout must be of the same size of pipe as the building sewer up to
the foundation. All pipe and fittings must be installed with granular pipe
embedding, consisting of crushed or chipped limestone with a nominal
size of not less than one-half (1/2) inch or greater than one (1) inch.
Bedding material shall be used to provide a uniform trench bottom. A
minimum bedding of two (2) inches above and below the exterior of the
pipe is required. When the building sewer runs in excess of one
hundred (100) linear feet, additional cleanouts shall be installed a
maximum of one hundred (100) linear feet apart. The building sewer
shall not be installed in the same trench as the water supply line. Water
service pipe and building sewer shall be separated by five (5) feet of
Section
715.130
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
715.130
AO:894
undisturbed or compacted earth. An eighteen-inch vertical separation
shall be required between the building sewer and water supply line.
Where this vertical separation cannot be complied with, then the
building sewer and water supply line shall be without joints or
connections until a five-foot separation is obtained. When existing
conditions do not allow specified separation, sealed encasement shall
be provided for either line until separation is achieved. Building sewers
laid under drives, parking lots or traffic areas shall be either encased
in metal conduit or shall be covered with a minimum of six (6) inches
of crushed or chipped limestone, as specified herein, on all sides of the
pipe, or the pipe shall be cast iron or ductile iron.
E. The maintenance and repairs of the building sewer shall be the
responsibility of the owner to the point of connection with the City's
sanitary sewer main. This shall include when the building sewer crosses
any street, road, highway, alley or right-of-way.
F. For building sewers constructed or replaced after January 1, 2016, a
minimum 12-gauge single strand copper clad steel high-strength
conductive tracer wire with HDPE insulation shall be installed directly
above and adjacent to the customer's building sewer line, where such
piping is located within the public right-of-way. Wire splices shall be
made with either rigid fittings or weatherproof connectors specifically
designed for direct burial. Electric ground shall be established by
splicing on to existing tracer wire where available or using a minimum
one-inch copper grounding rod driven into the trench bottom near the
sewer main. The tracer wire shall be installed directly above the
building sewer line and taped every ten (10) feet using poly tape. The
tracer wire shall be extended to the surface adjacent to the building
clean out and housed within a protective enclosure constructed of
Schedule 40 PVC pipe and a Schedule 40 PVC threaded clean out or an
alternately constructed housing as may be approved by the City. The
protective enclosure shall be extended to grade, installed so it is easily
accessible but shall not be located within any driving or parking surface
unless rigid clean-out fittings are used.
1. This provision shall apply to building sewers operating under
pressure or vacuum except that protective housings for accessing
the tracer wire shall be located adjacent to the associated pump
vault.
G. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building and each individual premises intended to be maintained and
owned separately, except where one (1) building may stand at the rear
of another building in an interior lot and no public sanitary sewer is
available or can be constructed to the rear building through any street,
alley or right-of-way, in which case the building sewer from the front
building may be extended to the rear building.
H. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
drain at an elevation that will permit gravity flow into the building
Section
715.130
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.130
AO:895
Section 715.140. Limitation On Point of Discharge. [Ord. No. 02-14
§§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
No person shall discharge any wastewater or pollutant directly into a
manhole or other opening of the POTW, other than through an approved
building sewer. A building sewer may only be connected at a manhole
or other opening of POTW, only if the sanitary sewer main line does not
extend into the property or a point that extends further than the property
line abutting on any street, alley, easement or right-of-way, unless he/she
shall have been given written permission to do so by the Superintendent.
Discharges from sources other than a building sewer may be allowed only
sewer. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit
gravity flow to the sanitary sewer, the sanitary sewage carried by the
building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to
the building drain or the nearest point that will permit gravity flow to
the sanitary sewer. In any and all cases where the building drain or
the drain of any plumbing fixture that drains by gravity is at a lower
elevation than the highest elevation of the closest upstream manhole,
which is part of the sanitary sewer main to which the building sewer is
connected, a backwater valve shall be installed on the building sewer.
A backwater valve shall also be installed on the upstream portion of
the building sewer if at any point of the building sewer there is a
connection of a pressurized discharge line from a pump used to carry
water from a building subdrain to the building sewer. All bearing parts
of backwater valves shall be of corrosion-resistant material. Backwater
valves shall comply with ASME A112.14.1, CSA CAN/CSA-B181.1 or
CSA CAN/CSA-B181.2. Backwater valves shall be so constructed as to
provide a mechanical seal against backflow. Backwater valves, when
fully opened, shall have a capacity not less than that of the pipes in
which they are installed. Backwater valves shall be installed so that
access is provided to the working parts for service and repair.
I. Old building sewers may be used in connection with a new building only
when the old building sewer is constructed per this Section. Building
sewers constructed of any non-approved materials shall be abandoned
and disconnected at the point of connection to the public sanitary
sewer.
J. The Public Works Director shall be notified twenty-four (24) hours
before the building sewer and connection to the public sanitary sewer is
ready for inspection. The ditch shall not be backfilled until the
inspection is made with approval given. Documentation of the location
of the lateral shall be made at the time of inspection and shall be
transferred to a permanent recordkeeping system established to
document the same. A building sewer line inspection fee of forty dollars
($40.00) shall be submitted to the City prior to inspection or approval
for service. The City may refuse to give sanitary sewer service for
failure to conform to the requirements contained herein.
Section
715.130
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
715.140
AO:896
if given written permission to do so from the Superintendent pursuant to
Section 715.160.
Section 715.150. Harmful Contributions. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
The Director may, after formal notice to the discharger, take whatever
steps are necessary to immediately temporarily suspend a user's sewer
use permit, or impose temporary restrictions on discharges, or halt and
prevent the discharge of pollutants to the POTW which reasonably appear
to present an immediate endangerment to the health or welfare of persons.
If the Director determines that an industrial user's discharge to the POTW
does not present an immediate endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons but presents or may present an endangerment to the environment
or threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, he/she shall
notify the discharger in writing setting forth sufficient facts to describe the
violation and allowing a reasonable period of time, which shall be stated
in the notice, to respond and correct the violation and if the response or
actions of the discharger do not result in abatement and correction within
such period of time, the Director may take whatever action is necessary to
halt or prevent the discharge.
Section 715.160. Trucked or Hauled Wastewater — Conditions For
Discharge To The POTW. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
A. Sewage tank waste, holding tank waste may be introduced into the
POTW only at locations designated by the Superintendent, at such
times as are established by the Superintendent, and only after written
permission has been given by the Superintendent. A written request
must be submitted to the Superintendent for his/her review. The
request must state where the waste was generated, the approximate
amount and characteristics of the waste, suspected constituents, and
whether there are any RCRA hazardous wastes. The discharge of
hauled sewage tank waste is subject to all other requirements of this
Chapter. Such waste shall not violate Article III of this Chapter or any
other requirements established by the City of Republic. The
Superintendent may require holding tank waste haulers to obtain
wastewater discharge permits.
B. The Superintendent shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain
wastewater discharge permits. The Superintendent may require
generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge
permits. The Superintendent also may prohibit the disposal of hauled
industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to
all other requirements of this Chapter.
C. Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by the Superintendent. No load may be discharged without
prior consent of the Superintendent. The Superintendent may collect
samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable
Section
715.140
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.160
AO:897
Section 715.170. Trucked or Hauled Wastes — Charges and Fees.
[Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
The Superintendent is hereby authorized to determine the cost to receive,
test and administer wastewater which is trucked or hauled to the POTW.
The Superintendent shall file such cost determinations with the Director
of Finance, with notice to the City Council, and the City thereafter shall
charge for such services in accordance with the amount so filed, unless
countermanded by a resolution of the City Council.
Section 715.180. Sale of Process Residues From Publicly-Owned
Treatment Works. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
The Superintendent shall dispose of all treated sludge (bio-solids) and
other by-products of the POTW. He/she may sell such sludge and other
by-products to such persons as may wish to purchase the same and shall
determine a schedule of charges and provide for the collection of such
charges. He/she shall account monthly to the Director of Finance for such
sales. The sale of bio-solids must meet all Federal and State regulations of
Class A bio-solids, as set by the 503 rules of the Act.
Section 715.190. Fats, Oils, Grease and Sand. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 —
2, 4-22-2002; Ord. No. 15-17 §1, 10-12-2015]
standards. The Superintendent may require the industrial waste hauler
to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge.
D. Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every
load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of
the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names
and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of
waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected
waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous
wastes.
A. Scope And Purpose. This Section is established to aid in preventing the
introduction and accumulation of fats, oils, greases, sand (FOGS) and
other harmful wastes into the municipal sewer system that tend to
cause or contribute to sanitary sewer blockages and obstructions. Food
service establishments, industrial and commercial operations, and
other generators of FOGS are subject to this Section. This Section
regulates such users by requiring grease interceptors, traps, recovery
appliances, and other strategies approved by the Public Works Director
be installed, implemented and maintained in accordance with the
provisions hereof.
B. Objectives. The objectives of this Section are:
1. To prevent the introduction of contaminants that may inhibit
operation of the sanitary sewer collection system and treatment
plant.
Section
715.160
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
715.190
AO:898
2. To protect the environmental quality of the streams, creeks and
other public waterways traversing the City.
3. To better enable the City of Republic to comply with State and
Federal laws to which the City is subject.
4. To protect the health, safety and welfare of the public and City
workers through regulation of pretreatment and on-site treatment
methods.
C. City-Operated Facilities Not Exempted. Facilities owned or operated by
the City of Republic where fats, oil, grease, sand or other wastes other
than domestic strength sewerage shall be subject to the provisions of
this Section and all adopted policies.
D. Separator/Interceptor/Trap Required. Grease, oil and/or sand
separators/interceptors/traps shall be provided at the user's expense
when necessary for the proper handling of wastewater discharges
containing fats, oils, grease, flammable wastes, sand, grit and other
harmful components, except for private living quarters or dwelling
units unless a home-based business is determined by the City to be a
significant generator of FOGS. All grease, oil and/or sand separators/
interceptors/traps shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Director and shall be located to be readily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. Grease, oil and sand separators and associated sampling
pits/ports shall be constructed in conformance with the adopted edition
of the International Plumbing Code, the Fats, Oils, Grease and Sand
(FOGS) Management Program, and with any standards adopted
pursuant to this Section. When installed, the FOGS-contributing user, at
his/her expense, shall maintain all grease, oil and sand interceptors in
continuously efficient manner and in compliance with the provisions in
this Section.
E. Permit Required. No user shall operate a grease, oil and/or sand
separator without possessing a valid City of Republic permit or
exemption thereto, as issued by the Public Works Director. Permits shall
be issued for a period of five (5) years and will be renewed at the end of
each term after a review of user compliance. Permits may be reissued
as needed to reflect changes in operating/maintenance conditions or
equipment. The user is required to keep the permit on the premises and
produce it upon the request of the City.
F. Director Authorized. The Public Works Director is authorized and
directed to develop and maintain a comprehensive and cohesive policy
consistent with the provisions of this Section. The policy, along with any
associated forms, diagrams and procedures, shall be designated as the
Fats, Oils, Grease and Sand (FOGS) Management Program. Once
adopted by the City Council, a copy of the FOGS Management Program
shall be kept on file by the City Clerk. The Public Works Director is
further authorized to make periodic updates or modifications to the
adopted program conditioned upon providing sixty (60) days' written
Section
715.190
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.190
AO:899
notice to all wastewater users regulated hereunder and filing the
update or modified program with the City Clerk. If no written objections
are received by the City Clerk within the sixty-day period, the proposed
update or modification may be considered approved under the authority
granted herein. City Council must approve, by resolution, any proposed
update or modification for which a wastewater user has submitted a
timely written objection to the City Clerk.
G. Suspension Or Revocation Of Permits Or Authority To Discharge. The
City shall retain authority to suspend or revoke operation of FOGS user
permits or the authority to discharge wastes into the public sewer for
violations of the FOGS Management Program.
H. Enforcement.
1. It is unlawful for a user, person or entity to fail to comply with, or
otherwise violate, the provisions of this Section or any section of
the FOGS Management Program. A notice of violation (NOV) shall
be issued for failure to comply with the following requirements of
this program:
a. Properly operate, maintain, and/or clean the FOGS
management equipment as detailed by the FOGS Management
Program or by the FOGS permit issued to the user.
b. Possess a valid FOGS permit issued by the City of Republic
when the facilities are regulated under this Section.
c. Report significant changes in operations or wastewater
characteristics that result in a sewage discharge exceeding the
limits stated within this Section or results in the formation of
grit or grease in the public sanitary sewer.
d. Maintain FOGS-related pumping, cleaning, or maintenance file
records for a minimum period of three (3) years.
e. Perform and report maintenance, complete repairs, replace or
install FOGS management equipment within time frequency
prescribed by the City.
f. Clean FOGS management equipment within the time
frequency prescribed by the City, unless exemptions are
authorized under this Section or through adopted policy.
g. Retain flow regulators on FOGS equipment as required for
proper functioning.
h. Discharge wastewater into the public sanitary sewer that does
not exceed the following limits:
(1) One hundred (100) milligram per liter total recoverable
fats/grease.
Section
715.190
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
715.190
AO:900
(2) One hundred (100) milligram per liter petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable
cutting oil or mineral oils.
(3) pH levels lower than six (6.0) standard units or higher than
nine (9.0) standard units.
(4) Two hundred fifty (250) milligram per liter biological
oxygen demand or chemical oxygen demand.
(5) Two hundred fifty (250) milligram per liter total suspended
solids.
2. The City may serve any user with a written notice of violation
(NOV) for failure to comply with this program. The party to whom
the NOV is directed shall be given an appropriate amount of time,
as determined by the City, to correct noted deficiencies. Should
measures to correct any deficiency not be completed in a timely
manner as directed by the City, and measures to promote
compliance have been exhausted, a summons to appear in the City
of Republic Municipal Court will then be issued to the owner,
contact person and/or user, or their authorized representative. The
City may seek whatever remedies are authorized by the State of
Missouri Statutes, City ordinances, at law or in equity, against any
person or user violating the provisions of this program. Upon
issuance of notification of the NOV, each day corrective action is
not taken shall be determined to be a separate violation. Fines and
penalties may be assessed each and every day to the owner or
contact person or user of the property until compliance with this
program is achieved.
3. The City shall have the right to inspect the building sewer and to
discontinue water or sewer service to any property where the
plumbing is not maintained to IPC code or in a sanitary, effective,
and/or efficient operating condition, or if the public sewer facilities
may be harmed thereby. The remedies provided in this program
shall not be exclusive, and the City may seek other remedies as
authorized by statute or City ordinance, at law or in equity, against
any person or user violating the provisions of this program.
4. Any non-domestic user who allows grease trap, separator or
interceptor wastes, sludges or other prohibited wastes to be
deposited into the public sewer collection system, whether through
discharge, improper installation, improper operation or
maintenance or a grease trap, separator or interceptor, failure to
install an adequately sized grease trap, separator or interceptor,
failure to provide proper containment or other intentional or
unintentional action shall be subject to enforcement actions as
provided by this or other applicable laws or regulations. Such
actions may be declared a public nuisance.
5. Any person who allows grease trap, separator, or interceptor
wastes or sludges or other prohibited wastes to be deposited into a
Section
715.190
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.190
AO:901
street, gutter, storm sewer, or onto public or private property,
whether through discharge, improper installation, improper
operation or maintenance of a grease trap, separator or
interceptor, failure to install an adequately sized grease trap,
separator or interceptor, failure to provide proper containment,
or other intentional or unintentional action shall be subject to
enforcement actions as provided by this or other applicable laws
or regulations. Such actions may be declared a public nuisance, a
threat to the POTW, and/or to the health and welfare of persons.
6. The City shall have the right to obtain discharge samples and
perform lab tests for the measuring of wastes and flows from the
building sewer. Sampling pits/ports shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the FOGS Management Program.
7. Water service to any structure, business or entity may be
discontinued in the event that a violation of the FOGS Management
Program constitutes a public health threat. All outstanding fees,
penalties, or other utility charges must be paid prior to
reinstatement of water service.
Section
715.190
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
715.190
AO:902
ARTICLE III
Conditions For Use of The Publicly-Owned Treatment Works
Section 715.200. Special Uses of Publicly-Owned Treatment Works.
[Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
No person shall discharge anything other than wastewater to the POTW.
Any connection, drain or arrangement that will permit any other water to
enter the POTW shall be deemed to be a violation of this Chapter.
Section 715.210. Restricted Discharges. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
A. These general restrictions apply to all users of the POTW whether or
not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards
or any other national, State or local pretreatment standards or
requirements:
1. No person shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which acting alone or in
conjunction with other substances present in the POTW interferes
with the operation or performance of the POTW or which causes or
contributes to interference or pass through. A person shall not
contribute substances to the POTW which may:
a. Create a fire or explosion hazard including, but not limited to,
gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquids, solids or gases with a closed cup flash point
of less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) (six
hundred degrees Centigrade (600°C)) (the RCRA ignitability
standard for liquid characteristic waste) using the test
methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. At no time shall two (2)
successive readings over a one (1) hour period on any
explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the
POTW (or at any point in the POTW) be more than five percent
(5%) nor shall any single reading be over ten percent (10%) of
the Lower Explosive Limit (LEL).
b. Cause corrosive damage or hazard to structures, equipment or
personnel of the POTW. In no case shall the discharges have a
pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0.
c. Cause obstruction to the flow in the POTW or other
interference with the operation of the wastewater facilities due
to accumulation of solid or viscous material such as, but not
limited to: grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half
(½) inch in any dimensions, animal tissues, paunch manure,
bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, blood, feathers, ashes,
cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass,
straw, shavings, rags, plastics, tar, asphalt, residues from
Section
715.200
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.210
AO:903
refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass
grinding, or polishing wastes.
d. Constitute a rate of discharge sufficient to cause interference
with the operation and performance of the POTW.
e. Contain heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity of
the POTW treatment plant. In no case shall the temperature at
the point of connection to the POTW exceed one hundred fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (sixty-five and one-half degrees
Centigrade (65.5°C)) or cause the temperature at the
treatment plant influent to exceed one hundred four degrees
Fahrenheit (104°F) (forty degrees Centigrade (40°C)).
f. Contain any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
g. Contain petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or
products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause
interference or pass through.
h. Contain any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids
which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life and
property or that result in toxic gasses, vapors and fumes in a
quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety
problems.
i. Contain radioactive waste or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits defined by applicable State
and Federal regulations.
j. Contain any odor- or color-producing substances exceeding
concentration limits which may be established by the Public
Works Director for the purpose of meeting the POTW's NPDES
permit.
k. Contain any substances which may cause the POTW's effluent
or any product of the POTW such as residues, sludge or scum
to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or interfere with the
reclamation process where the POTW is pursuing a reuse and
reclamation program.
l. Contain toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity to injure or
interfere with the wastewater treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or other life forms, create a toxic effect in
the receiving waters of the POTW, or exceed the limitation set
forth in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard.
m. Contain compatible pollutants of such concentration, quantity
or rate of discharge that the POTW treatment efficiency is
impaired or unusual attention or expense is required to handle
such materials in the POTW.
Section
715.210
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
715.210
AO:904
Section 715.220. Specific Pollutant Limitations. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1
— 2, 4-22-2002]
City of Republic's Wastewater Treatment Plant Local Discharge Limitations.
Local discharge limitations for specific pollutants listed in this table are
established to protect against pass through and interference. No person
shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following
instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits:
n. Contain fats, oils, or grease of animal or vegetable origin
greater than one hundred (100) milligrams per liter.
o. Contain any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at points and
times designated by the Director in accordance with Section
715.170.
p. Contain any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized
by the Director.
q. Contain pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants
(BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or
pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction
with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW.
r. Contain storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, discharge from foundation drains,
discharge from pumps used for drainage of ground water or
storm water, or any other source that allows the discharge of
storm water or ground water into the POTW.
s. Contain well water, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
deionized water, cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater,
unless specifically authorized by the Director.
t. Contain sludge, screenings, or other residues from the
pretreatment of industrial wastes.
u. Contain wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other
sources, the treatment plants effluent to fail a toxicity test.
v. Contain detergents, surface-active agents (surfactants) or
other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the
POTW.
w. Contain phosphorus or phosphorus compounds that exceed
eight and one-half percent (8.5%) phosphorus by weight. This
shall include all laundry detergents, dishing washing
compounds, household cleaner, metal cleaner, degreasing
compound, commercial cleaner, industrial cleaner, phosphate
compound, or other substance that is intended for cleaning
purposes.
Section
715.210
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.220
AO:905
PARAMETERS (mg/l)
Aluminum — dissolved (Al) *
Antimony (Sb) *
Arsenic (As) 0.51
Barium (Ba) *
Beryllium (Be) *
Boron (B) *
Cadmium (Cd) 0.13
Chromium — total (Cr) 2.91
Chromium — hexavalent (Cr 6+) *
Cobalt (Co) *
Copper (Cu) 2.44
Cyanide (Cn) 0.33
Fluoride (F) *
Iron (Fe) *
Lead (Pb)0 .53
Manganese (Mn) *
Mercury (Hg) 0.02
Nickel (Ni) 5.79
Phenols *
Silver (Ag) *
Thallium (Tl) *
Zinc (Zn) 6.54
Total Kieldahl Nitrogen (TKN) *
Ammonia (NH3-N) *
Oil and Grease (Animal and/or
vegetable)
100
Total Toxic Organics (TTO) *
Temperature — maximum (F°) 150
pH — maximum (pH units) 9.0
pH — minimum (pH units) 6.0
Biochemical Oxygen Demand 250
Chemical Oxygen Demand *
Total Suspended Solids (TSS) 300
Flow — (MGD or gpd) *
Flash point — not less than (F°) 140
Section
715.220
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
715.220
AO:906
PARAMETERS (mg/l)
* No discharge limit is currently warranted for these parameters. The
Director reserves the right, however, to establish a discharge limit as the
need occurs.
The above limits apply at the point where wastewater is discharged to the
POTW. All concentrations for metallic substance are for "total" metal
unless indicated otherwise.
In establishing discharge restrictions, discharge limits, or pretreatment
standards pursuant to this Chapter, the Director, in lieu of concentrations
limits, may establish mass limits of comparable stringency for an
individual user at the request of such user.
Where process effluent is mixed prior to treatment with wastewaters
other than those generated by the categorical regulated process, fixed
alternative discharge limits may be derived in accordance with 40 CFR
403.6 (e), combined waste stream formula.
Categorical pretreatment standards may be adjusted to reflect the
presence of pollutants in an industrial user's intake water in accordance
with 40 CFR 403.15, net/gross calculation.
Section 715.230. Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
[Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
A. No user subject to an applicable Federal categorical pretreatment
standard or any other national, State or local pretreatment standard or
requirement shall discharge or cause to be discharge to the POTW
wastewater containing substances in excess of the quantity prescribed
unless otherwise provided in this Section.
B. Upon application by a user, the Director may revise pretreatment
standards specified in the applicable pretreatment standards to reflect
removal of the substances by the wastewater treatment facility. EPA
approval is required before removal credits may be granted by the
Director. The revised discharge limit for specified substances shall be
derived in accordance with 40 CFR Sections 403.7 and 403.11.
C. Upon application by a user, the Director may adjust any limitations on
substances specified in the applicable pretreatment standards to
consider factors relating to such persons which are fundamentally
different from the factors considered by EPA during the development of
the pretreatment standards. Request for and determinations of a
fundamentally different factor adjustment shall be in accordance with
40 CFR Section 403.13.
Section
715.220
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.230
AO:907
Section 715.240. State Pretreatment Standards. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1
— 2, 4-22-2002]
State pretreatment standards located at 10 CSR 20-6.100 are hereby
incorporated.
Section 715.250. Special Agreements. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as preventing any special
agreement or arrangement between the City and any user of the POTW,
whose wastewater discharge is not subject to State or Federal regulations,
whereby wastewater of unusual strength or character is accepted into the
system and specially treated subject to any payments or user charges as
may be applicable.
Section 715.260. Excessive Discharge. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
No user shall increase the use of processed water or in any way attempt to
dilute a discharge as partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment
to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in applicable
pretreatment standards, or any other specific pollutant limitation developed
by the City and State.
Section 715.270. Accidental or Slug Discharges. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1
— 2, 4-22-2002]
D. The Director shall notify any user affected by the provisions of this
Section and shall establish an enforceable compliance schedule for
each.
A. The Director may require any industrial user to develop and implement
an accidental discharge/slug control plan. At least once every two (2)
years the Director shall evaluate whether each significant industrial
user needs such a plan. Any industrial user required to develop and
implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan shall submit a plan
which addresses, at a minimum, the following:
1. Description of discharges practices, including non-routine batch
discharges.
2. Description of stored chemicals.
3. Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental
or slug discharge. Such notification must also be given for any
discharge, which would violate any of the restricted discharges in
Sections 715.210, 715.220, 715.230 and/or 715.240 of this Chapter,
with procedures for follow-up written notification within five (5)
days.
Section
715.230
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
715.270
AO:908
Section 715.280. Notification of The Discharge of Hazardous Waste.
[Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
4. Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer
of material, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site
run-off, worker training, building of containment structures or
equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants
(including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for
emergency responses.
A. Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify
the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and
State hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the
POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a
hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include
the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the
EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous,
batch or other). If the user discharges more than two hundred twenty
(220) pounds (one hundred (100) kilograms) of such waste per calendar
month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following
information to the extent such information is known and readily
available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents
contained in the wastes, an estimation of the constituents in the waste
stream expected during the following twelve (12) months. All
notifications must take place no later than one hundred eighty (180)
days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this
paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste
discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be
submitted under Section 715.300(E) of this Chapter. The notification
requirement in this Section does not apply to pollutants already
reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under
self-monitoring requirements of Section 715.300 (A), (C) and (D).
B. Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of Subsection (A),
above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than
thirty-three (33) pounds (fifteen (15) kilograms) of hazardous wastes,
unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR
261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than thirty-three (33)
pounds (fifteen (15) kilograms) of non-acute hazardous wastes in a
calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as
specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one (1) time
notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges
more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require
additional notification.
C. In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the
Section
715.270
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.280
AO:909
Director, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director,
and State hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such
substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such
regulations.
D. In the case of any notification made under this Section, the user shall
certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity
of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.
E. This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this Chapter, a permit issued
thereunder, or any applicable Federal or State law.
Section
715.280
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
715.280
AO:910
ARTICLE IV
Industrial Users
Section 715.290. Information Requirements. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 —
2, 4-22-2002]
Section 715.300. Reporting Requirements. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
A. When requested by the Director, industrial users shall have on file with
the City, prior to commencing their discharge, wastewater information
deemed necessary for determination of compliance with this Chapter,
the POTW NPDES permit conditions, and State and Federal law. Such
information shall be provided by completion of a questionnaire
designed and supplied by the Director and by supplements thereto as
may be necessary. The Director may periodically require industrial
users to update the questionnaire. Failure to submit the questionnaire
designed shall be reasonable grounds for terminating service to the
industrial user and shall be considered a violation of this Chapter.
Information requested in the questionnaire and designated by the user
as confidential is subject to the conditions of confidentiality as set out in
Section 715.070 of this Chapter.
B. Industrial users shall keep and maintain records a minimum of five (5)
years of the information as referred to in Sections 715.290(A) and
715.300 of this Chapter. This period shall be automatically extended for
the duration of any litigation concerning compliance with this Chapter,
or where the industrial user has been specifically notified of a longer
retention period by the Director. Such records shall be available for
inspection during regular business hours by the Director, and he/she
shall be permitted to make and retain copies of such records.
C. Where a person owns, operates or occupies properties designated as an
industrial user at more than one (1) location, separate information
submittals shall be made for each location as may be required by the
Director.
A. Baseline Monitoring Reports.
1. Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date
of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative
decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4),
whichever is later, existing significant industrial users subject to
such categorical pretreatment standards, and currently
discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW, shall be
required to submit to the Director a report which contains the
information listed in Subsection (B) below. At least ninety (90) days
prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and
sources that become industrial users subsequent to the
promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall be
required to submit to the Director a report which contains the
Section
715.290
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.300
AO:911
information listed in Subsection (B) below. A new source shall also
be required to report the method of pretreatment it intends to use
to meet applicable pretreatment standards. A new source shall also
give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to
be discharged.
2. The industrial user shall submit the information required by this
Section including:
a. Identifying information. The name and address of the facility
including the name of the operator and owners.
b. Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control
permits held by or for the facility.
c. Description of operations. A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production, and standard industrial
classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such industrial
user. This description should include a schematic process
diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from
the regulated processes.
d. Flow measurement. Information showing the measured
average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to
the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams,
as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream
formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
e. Measurement of pollutants.
(1) Identify the categorical pretreatment standards applicable
to each regulated process.
(2) Submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the
nature and concentration (and/or mass where required by
the standard or by the Director) of regulated pollutants in
the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous,
daily maximum and long-term average concentrations (or
mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall
be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed
in accordance with procedures set out in Section 715.320
of this Chapter.
(3) Sampling must be performed in accordance with
procedures set out in Section 715.320.
f. Certification. A statement reviewed by the industrial user's
authorized representative and certified by a qualified
professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are
being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional
operation and maintenance (O and M) and/or additional
Section
715.300
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
715.300
AO:912
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards
and requirements.
g. Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O and
M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the
shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide
such additional pretreatment and/or O and M. The completion
date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance
date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A
compliance schedule pursuant to this Section must meet the
requirements set out in Section 715.300(B) of this Chapter.
h. All baseline-monitoring reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with Section 715.350.
B. Compliance Schedule Progress Reports. The following conditions shall
apply to compliance schedules:
1. The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to
the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required
for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such
events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for
major components, commencing and completing construction,
beginning and conducting routine operation);
2. No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months;
3. The industrial user shall submit a progress report to the Director
no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule
and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether
or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for
any delay, (and, if appropriate) the steps being taken by the
industrial user to return to the established schedule; and
4. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such
progress reports to the Director.
C. Reports On Compliance With Categorical Pretreatment Standard
Deadline. Within ninety (90) days following the date for final
compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in
the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction
of wastewater into the POTW, any industrial user subject to such
pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the Director a
report containing the information described in Sections
715.300(A)(2)(d, e, and f) of this Chapter. For industrial users subject to
equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with
the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a
reasonable measure of the industrial user's long-term production rate.
For all other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit
Section
715.300
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.300
AO:913
of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include
the industrial user's actual production during the appropriate sampling
period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with Section 715.350 of this Chapter.
D. Periodical Compliance Reports.
1. Any significant industrial user subject to a pretreatment standard
shall, at a frequency determined by the Director but in no case less
than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report
indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by such pretreatment standards and
the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for
the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be
signed and certified in accordance with Section 715.350 of this
Chapter.
2. If an industrial user, subject to the reporting requirement in and of
this Section, monitors any pollutant more frequently than required
by the POTW using the procedures prescribed in Section 715.320
of this Chapter, the results of this monitoring shall be included in
the report.
E. Reports Of Changed Conditions. Each industrial user is required to
notify the Director of any planned significant changes to the industrial
user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or
volume of its wastewater at least ninety (90) days before the change.
1. The Director may require the industrial user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed
condition, including the submission of a wastewater contribution
permit application under Section 715.340 of this Chapter.
2. The Director may issue a wastewater contribution permit under
Section 715.360 of this Chapter or modify an existing wastewater
contribution permit under Section 715.370 of this Chapter.
3. No industrial user shall implement the planned changed
condition(s) until and unless the Director has responded to the
industrial user's notice.
4. For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but
are not limited to, flow increases of ten percent (10%) or greater
and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants.
F. Reports Of Potential Problems.
1. In the case of any discharges including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature,
a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load which may cause
potential problems for the POTW (including a violation of the
restricted discharges in Section 715.210 of this Chapter), it is the
Section
715.300
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
715.300
AO:914
responsibility of the industrial user to immediately telephone and
notify the POTW of the incident. This notification shall include the
location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if
known, and corrective actions taken by the industrial user.
2. Within five (5) days following such discharge, the industrial user
shall, unless waived by the Director, submit a detailed written
report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to
be taken by the industrial user to prevent similar future
occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the industrial user
of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be
incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or
any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification
relieve the industrial user of any fines, civil penalties, or other
liability which may be imposed by this Chapter.
3. Failure to notify the POTW of potential problem discharges shall be
deemed a separate violation of this Chapter.
4. A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user's
bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom
to call in the event of a discharge described in Subparagraph (1)
above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause
or suffer such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency
notification procedure.
G. Reports From Unpermitted Users. All users not required to obtain a
wastewater contribution permit shall provide appropriate reports to the
Director as the Director may require.
H. Notice Of Violation/Repeat Sampling And Reporting. If sampling
performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the industrial user
must notify the Director within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming
aware of the violation. The industrial user shall also repeat the
sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to
the Director within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the
violation. The industrial user is not required to resample if the POTW
performs monitoring at the industrial user's at least once a month, or if
the POTW performs sampling between the industrial user's initial
sampling and when the industrial user receives the results of this
sampling.
I. Notification Of The Discharge Of Hazardous Waste.
1. Any industrial user who commences the discharge of hazardous
waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management
Division Director, and State hazardous waste authorities in writing
of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise
disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261.
Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as
set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and
the type of discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the industrial
Section
715.300
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.300
AO:915
user discharges more than ten (10) kilograms of such waste per
calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain
the following information to the extent such information is known
and readily available to the industrial user: an identification of
the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation
of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste
stream discharge during that calendar month, and an estimation
of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be
discharged during the following twelve (12) months. All
notifications must take place no later than one hundred eighty
(180) days after the discharge commences. Any notification under
this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous
waste discharged. However, notifications of changed discharges
must be submitted under Section 715.300(E) above. The
notification requirement in this Section does not apply to pollutants
already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of
Sections 715.300 (A), (C), (D).
2. Discharges are exempt from the requirements of Subparagraph (1)
of this Subsection during a calendar month in which they discharge
no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the
wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR
261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen (15)
kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of
any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR
261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification.
Subsequent months during which the industrial user discharges
more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require
additional notification.
3. In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing
any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user
must notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste
Division Director, and State hazardous waste authorities of the
discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the effective
date of such regulations.
4. In the case of any notification made under this Section, the
industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce
the volume and toxicity of hazardous waste generated to the
degree it has determined to be economically practical.
5. This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance
not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this Chapter, a permit
issued thereunder, or any applicable Federal or State law.
J. Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the
date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid,
into a mail facility serviced by the U.S. Postal Service, the date of
receipt of the report shall govern.
Section
715.300
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
715.300
AO:916
Section 715.310. Provision For Monitoring. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
Section 715.320. Determination of Wastewater Characteristics.
[Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
K. Record Keeping. Industrial users subject to the reporting requirements
of this Chapter shall retain, and make available for inspection and
copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring
activities required by this Chapter and any additional records of
information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by
the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the
date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the
person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who
performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and
the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a
period of at least five (5) years. This period shall be automatically
extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or City of
Republic, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer
retention period by the Director.
A. When required by the Director, users of the POTW shall provide
suitable access and such necessary meters and other appurtenances in
the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement
of the wastewater discharge. Such access and/or appurtenances shall
be in a readily and safely accessible location and shall be provided in
accordance with plans approved by the Director. The access and all
appurtenances shall be provided and maintained at the owner's
expense.
B. The Director shall consider such factors as the volume and strength of
the discharge, quantities of toxic materials in the discharge, rate of
discharge, POTW removal capabilities, and cost effectiveness in
determining whether or not access and equipment for monitoring
wastewater discharge shall be required.
C. Where the Director determines access and equipment for monitoring or
measuring wastewater discharges to the POTW are not practicable,
reliable or cost effective, the Director may specify alternative methods
of determining the characteristics of the wastewater discharge which
will provide an equitable measurement of such characteristics.
D. All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at
all times. The failure of an industrial user to keep its monitoring facility
in good working order shall not be grounds for the industrial user to
claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
A. Measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of wastewater
to which reference is made in this Chapter shall be determined in
Section
715.300
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.320
AO:917
accordance with procedures contained in 40 CFR, Part 136 and
amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable
categorical pretreatment standard or with any other test procedures
approved by the Administrator of EPA. Sampling methods, locations,
times, durations, and frequencies are to be determined on an individual
basis subject to approval by the Director.
B. Except as indicated in Subsection (C) below, the industrial user must
collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite
collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is
infeasible, the Director may authorize the use of time proportional
sampling or through a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the
user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the
effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to
show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.
C. Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, toxicity,
sulfides, and volatile organic chemicals must be obtained using grab
collection techniques.
D. Measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of wastewater
required of a user, the user may, with the approval of the Director, make
arrangements with a qualified laboratory, including that of the user, to
perform such analyses.
E. Monitoring of wastewater characteristics necessary for determination
of compliance with this Chapter shall be conducted at least semiannually
unless the Director requires more frequent monitoring.
Section
715.320
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
715.320
AO:918
ARTICLE V
Wastewater Contribution Permits
Section 715.330. General Permits. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
Section 715.340. Permit Application. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
A. Significant industrial users proposing to connect or contribute to the
POTW shall obtain a wastewater contribution permit before connecting
or contributing to the POTW.
B. All existing significant industrial users who are connected to the POTW
system prior to the effective date of this Chapter shall obtain a
wastewater contribution permit within one hundred eighty (180) days
after the effective date of this Chapter.
C. Prior to the commencement of any increase or change in an industrial
user's contribution of pollutants to the POTW, the industrial user shall
notify the POTW. If the increase or change causes the industrial user to
become a significant industrial user, they shall apply for and obtain a
permit to cover such increase or change. Any increase or change in an
industrial user's contribution of pollutants to the POTW without prior
approval is prohibited.
D. An industrial user will be exempted from obtaining a wastewater
contribution permit if the Director determines the industrial user is
contributing only domestic waste. At any time an industrial user is
determined by the Director to be a significant industrial user, such
industrial user shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit within
sixty (60) days of notification and shall obtain said permit within one
hundred twenty (120) days after application.
A. Significant industrial users shall complete and file with the Director a
wastewater contribution permit application in the form prescribed by
the Director and shall certify its true accuracy and completeness in the
manner and form specified in 40 CFR 403. In support of and with the
application, the significant industrial user shall submit in units and
terms appropriate for evaluation, the following:
1. Name, address and location (if different from the address) of the
significant industrial user.
2. SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, Office of Management and Budget, latest edition.
3. Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not
limited to, those mentioned in Sections 715.210 and 715.220 of this
Chapter as determined by an approved laboratory. Sampling and
analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures
Section
715.330
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.340
AO:919
Section 715.350. Signatories and Certification. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1
— 2, 4-22-2002]
established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and
contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended.
4. Time and duration of contribution.
5. Average daily and maximum wastewater flow rates, including daily,
monthly and seasonal variations if any.
6. Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details
to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances thereto
by size, location and elevation.
7. Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises including all materials which are or could be discharged
to the POTW.
8. The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge
which are limited by City, State or Federal pretreatment standards,
and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment
standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether
additional operation and maintenance (O and M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the significant industrial user to meet
pretreatment standards.
9. Each product produced by type, amount, process(es) and rate of
production including daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any.
10. Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day).
11. Number of employees, hours of plant operation and proposed or
actual hours of operation of pretreatment system.
12. Such additional information as is deemed necessary or appropriate
by the Director in order to evaluate the permit application. The
Director may allow additional time if necessary in which to submit
the additional information.
13. Any environmental control permits held by or for the facility.
14. Average and maximum daily flows to the POTW for each regulated
process stream and other streams as necessary to use the
combined waste stream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e).
15. Monitoring requirements as specified in 40 CFR 403.12(b)(5).
16. Certification, by a qualified professional, indicating whether or not
pretreatment standards is being met on a consistent basis and, if
not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or
additional pretreatment is required.
Section
715.340
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
715.350
AO:920
Section 715.360. Permit Decisions. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
The Director will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user and may
require additional information. Within one hundred and twenty (120) days
of receipt of a complete wastewater contribution permit application, the
director will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater contribution
permit. If no determination is made within this time period, the application
will be deemed denied. The Director may deny any application for a
wastewater contribution permit.
Section 715.370. Permit Modification. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
A. All permit applications and industrial user reports must contain the
following certification statement and be signed by an authorized
representative of the industrial user.
1. "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in
accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified
personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted.
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the
system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that
there are significant penalties for submitting false information,
including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing
violations.
2. All samples and measurements taken are to the best of my
knowledge representative of the permitted wastewater discharge.
3. All sampling, measurements and analyses were conducted in
accordance with guidelines prescribed in 40 CFR 136 and the
wastewater contribution permit obtained from the City of Republic,
Missouri."
A. The Director may modify the wastewater contribution permit for good
cause including, but not limited to, the following:
1. To incorporate any new or revised Federal or local pretreatment
standards or requirements.
2. To address significant alterations or additions to the industrial
user's operation, processes or wastewater volume or character
since the time of wastewater contribution permit issuance.
3. A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge.
Section
715.350
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.370
AO:921
Section 715.380. Permit Contents. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
4. Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat
to the POTW, POTW personnel or the receiving waters.
5. Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater contribution
permit.
6. Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater contribution permit application or in any required
reporting.
7. Revisions of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13.
8. To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater
contribution permit.
9. To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a
new owner/operator.
The filing of a request by the permittee for a wastewater
contribution permit modification does not stay any wastewater
contribution permit condition.
A. Wastewater contribution permits shall include such conditions as are
reasonably deemed necessary by the Director to prevent pass through
or interference, protect the quality of the body of water receiving the
treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate
sludge management and disposal, protect ambient air quality, and
protect against damage to the POTW.
1. Wastewater contribution permits must contain the following
conditions:
a. A statement that indicates wastewater contribution permit
duration, which in no event shall exceed three (3) years.
b. A statement that the wastewater contribution permit is nontransferable
without prior notification to and approval from the
Director and provisions for furnishing the new owner or
operator with a copy of the existing wastewater contribution
permit.
c. Effluent limits applicable to the user based on applicable
pretreatment standards in Federal, State and local law.
d. Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record
keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an
identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency and sample type based on Federal, State
and local law.
Section
715.370
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
715.380
AO:922
Section 715.390. Permit Duration. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
Wastewater contribution permits shall be issued for a specified time period
not to exceed three (3) years from the effective date of the permit. A
e. A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any
applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not
extend the time for compliance beyond that required by
applicable Federal, State or local law.
2. Wastewater contribution permits may contain, but need not be
limited to, the following:
a. Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time
of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and
equalization.
b. Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment
devices designed to reduce, eliminate or prevent the
introduction of pollutants into the treatment works.
c. Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plans or other special conditions including
management practices necessary to adequately prevent
accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges.
d. Development and implementation of waste minimization plans
to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW.
e. The unit charge or schedule of industrial user charges and fees
for the wastewater discharged to the POTW.
f. Requirements for installation, maintenance and of inspection
and sampling facilities and equipment.
g. A statement that compliance with the wastewater contribution
permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for
compliance with all applicable Federal and State pretreatment
standards, including those which become effective during the
term of the wastewater contribution permit.
h. Requirements for notification to the Director prior to the
commencement of any new introduction of wastewater
constituents or any substantial change in the volume or
character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into
the POTW.
i. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Director to
ensure compliance with this Chapter and State and Federal
laws, rules and regulations.
Section
715.380
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.390
AO:923
wastewater contribution permit may be issued for a period less than three
(3) years, at the discretion of the Director. Each wastewater contribution
permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.
Section 715.400. Permit Transfer. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
Section 715.410. Permit Revocation. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
A. Wastewater contribution permits may be reassigned or transferred to a
new owner and/or operator only if the permittee gives at least ninety
(90) days' advance notice to the Director and the Director approves the
wastewater contribution permit transfer. The notice to the Director
must include a written certification by the new owner and/or operator
which:
1. States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent
to change the facility's operations and processes.
2. Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur.
3. Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
wastewater contribution permit. Failure to provide such advance
notice of a transfer renders the wastewater contribution permit
voidable from the date of facility transfer.
A. The Director may revoke a wastewater contribution permit for good
cause including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
1. Failure to notify the POTW of significant changes to the wastewater
prior to the changed discharge.
2. Failure to provide prior notification to POTW of changed conditions
pursuant to Section 715.300(E).
3. Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater contribution permit application.
4. Falsifying self-monitoring reports.
5. Tampering with monitoring equipment.
6. Refusing to allow the Director timely access to the facility premises
and records.
7. Failure to meet effluent limitations.
8. Failure to pay fines.
9. Failure to pay sewer charges, connection charges, or other
applicable fees and charges as determined by the Director.
10. Failure to meet compliance schedules.
Section
715.390
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
715.410
AO:924
Section 715.420. Permit Reissuance. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
A significant industrial user with an expiring wastewater contribution
permit shall apply for wastewater contribution permit reissuance by
submitting a complete wastewater contribution permit application in
accordance with Section 715.340 of this Chapter, a minimum of ninety (90)
days prior to the expiration of the industrial user's existing wastewater
contribution permit.
Section 715.430. Continuation of Expired Permits. [Ord. No. 02-14
§§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
Section 715.440. Permit Appeals. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
11. Failure to complete a wastewater questionnaire or the wastewater
contribution permit application.
12. Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted
facility.
13. Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this Chapter.
14. Failure to provide notification to the POTW of potential problems
pursuant to Section 715.300(F).
15. Wastewater contribution permits shall be voidable upon non-use,
cessation of operations, or transfer of business ownership. All
wastewater contribution permits issued to a particular user are
void upon the issuance of a new wastewater contribution permit to
that user.
A. An expired wastewater contribution permit will continue to be effective
and enforceable until the wastewater contribution permit is reissued if:
1. The industrial user has submitted a complete wastewater
contribution permit application at least ninety (90) days prior to the
expiration of the user's existing wastewater contribution permit.
2. The failure to reissue the wastewater contribution permit, prior to
expiration of the previous wastewater contribution permit, is not
due to any act or failure to act on the part of the industrial user.
A. Any person, including the industrial user, may petition the Director to
reconsider the terms of a wastewater contribution permit within thirty
(30) days of its issuance.
1. Failure to submit a petition for review within thirty (30) days shall
be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal.
Section
715.410
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.440
AO:925
2. In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
contribution permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this
objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in
the wastewater contribution permit.
3. The effectiveness of the wastewater contribution permit shall not
be stayed pending the appeal.
4. If the Director fails to act within thirty (30) days, a request for
reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to
reconsider a wastewater contribution permit, not to issue a
wastewater contribution permit, or not to modify a wastewater
contribution permit shall be considered final administrative action
for purposes of judicial review.
Section
715.440
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
715.440
AO:926
ARTICLE VI
Enforcement
Section 715.450. Warrants. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
If an official who has a duty to perform under this Code has been refused
access to a building, structure or property or any part thereof, and if such
official has probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
Chapter or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program of the City designed to verify compliance
with this Chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect
the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then upon
application by the City Attorney to the Municipal Court Judge and a showing
of the above, the Municipal Court Judge of the City of Republic shall issue
a search and/or seizure warrant describing therein the specific location
subject to the warrant. The warrant shall specify what, if anything, may be
searched and/or seized on the property described. Such warrant shall be
served at reasonable hours and only by an official of the department in the
company of an uniformed Police Officer of the City of Republic.
Section 715.460. Administrative Enforcement Remedies. [Ord. No.
02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
A. Notification Of Violation. Whenever the Wastewater Superintendent
finds that any user has violated or is violating this Chapter, a
wastewater contribution permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Wastewater Superintendent
or his/her agent may serve upon said user a written notice of violation.
Within the time specified in the notice, an explanation of the violation
and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to
include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the
Wastewater Superintendent. Submission of this plan in no way relieves
the user of liability for any violation occurring before or after receipt of
the notice of violation. Nothing in this Section shall limit the authority
of the POTW to take any action, including emergency actions or any
other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
B. Consent Orders. The Wastewater Superintendent is hereby empowered
to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or
other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user
responsible for non-compliance. Such orders will include specific action
to be taken by the user to correct the non-compliance within a time
period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same
force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to
Sections 715.460(D) and 715.460(E) below.
C. Show Cause Hearing. The Wastewater Superintendent may order any
user which causes or contributes to violation(s) of this Chapter,
wastewater contribution permits, or orders issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement to appear before the
Section
715.450
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.460
AO:927
Section 715.470. Administrative Revocation of Permits, Utilities
and Disconnection From POTW. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
Wastewater Superintendent and show cause why a proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on
the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed
enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that
the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not
be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail (return receipt requested). Such notice may
be served on any authorized representative of the user. Whether or
not the user appears as ordered, immediate enforcement action may
be pursued following the hearing. A show cause hearing shall not be a
prerequisite for taking any other action against the user.
D. Compliance Orders. When the Wastewater Superintendent finds that
user has violated or continues to violate this Chapter, wastewater
contribution permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Wastewater Superintendent
may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing
that the user come into compliance within a time as specified by the
Wastewater Superintendent. If the user does not come into compliance
within the time specified by the Wastewater Superintendent, sewer
service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities,
devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly
operated. Compliance orders may also contain other requirements to
address the non-compliance, including additional self-monitoring and
management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants
discharged to the POTW. A compliance order may not extend the
deadline for compliance established for a Federal pretreatment
standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order release the user
of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance
of a compliance order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other
action against the user.
E. Cease And Desist Orders. When the Wastewater Superintendent finds
that a user is violating this Chapter, the user's wastewater contribution
permit, any order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to
recur, the Wastewater Superintendent may issue an order to the user
directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user
to:
1. Immediately comply with all requirements;
2. Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a prerequisite
to taking any other action against the user.
Section
715.460
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
715.470
AO:928
Section 715.480. Emergencies. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
Section 715.490. Prosecution of Violation. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
If a person violates this Chapter, a wastewater contribution permit or
any order issued hereunder, the Wastewater Superintendent may cause a
Municipal Court summons to be issued and he/she may also request the
A. In addition to the provisions in Section 715.410 of this Chapter, any
user who violates any of the following conditions may be subject to
disconnection from the POTW:
1. Violation of wastewater contribution permit conditions;
2. Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
3. Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;
4. Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring or sampling;
5. Violation of the conditions for use of the POTW in Article III of this
Chapter; or
6. Failure to comply with an order by the Wastewater Superintendent
to correct a violation within the time specified by such order.
B. The Wastewater Superintendent may disconnect the violator from the
POTW, revoke any permits issued by the City under which the activity is
conducted, including any permit issued hereunder, and seek
termination of Republic City utilities, or other public or private utility
services, to the building or structure wherein the activity is conducted.
A. When the Wastewater Superintendent finds that an emergency exists,
he/she shall require the violator to immediately cause the violations to
be abated or corrected. In the event the violator cannot be contacted
within a reasonable time or fails or refuses to abate or correct the
violation, the Wastewater Superintendent may abate or correct the
same.
B. When the Wastewater Superintendent has abated or corrected any
violation as above, he/she shall certify the costs thereof to the Director
of Finance, and the owner of the property on which such violation was
abated or corrected shall be civilly liable to the City for the costs of such
abatement or correction. Violation may also result in denial or
revocation of a permit to contribute to the POTW under Section
715.410. Costs shall include all costs attributable to such abatement or
correction, including the wages and salaries of City employees for their
time directly attributable to the abatement or correction.
Section
715.470
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.490
AO:929
City Attorney to institute the appropriate legal proceedings to obtain an
injunction to restrain, correct or abate such violation of the provisions of
this Code.
Section 715.500. Penalties. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
Section 715.510. Affirmative Defenses To Discharge Violations.
[Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2, 4-22-2002]
A. Criminal Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of
Chapter 715 of the Republic City Code or failing to comply with any
order, permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Chapter
shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in Jail for a period not exceeding one
hundred eighty (180) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Each violation per day after the posting of the notice shall be deemed a
separate offense. Notice, as set forth in Section 715.460, shall not be
required in order to prosecute a person for a violation of any provisions
of this Chapter, except such notice shall be required to prosecute a
person for failure to comply with an order.
B. Civil Penalties. Failure to comply with an order which has been duly
posted, which interferes with the POTW or significantly contributes to
any violation or requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit or any
violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter or the failure to comply
with any order, permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this
Chapter, shall be subject to civil penalties not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00) per day per violation.
A. Upset.
1. For the purposes of this Section, "upset" means an exceptional
incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance
with pretreatment standards because of factors beyond
the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does not
include non-compliance to the extent caused by operational error,
improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment
facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper
operation.
2. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for non-compliance with pretreatment standards if the
requirements of Subparagraph (3), below, are met.
3. An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense
of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed,
contemporaneous operating logs or other relevant evidence, that:
a. An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the
cause(s) of the upset;
Section
715.490
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
715.510
AO:930
b. The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable
operation and maintenance procedures;
c. The industrial user has submitted the following information to
the POTW within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of
the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written
submission must be provided within five (5) days);
(1) A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;
(2) The period of non-compliance, including exact dates and
times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance
is expected to continue;
(3) Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent recurrence of the non-compliance.
4. In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
5. Industrial users will have the opportunity for a judicial
determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action
brought for non-compliance with pretreatment standards.
6. The industrial user shall control production or all discharges to the
extent necessary to maintain compliance with pretreatment
standards upon reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility
until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is
provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among
other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility
is reduced, lost or fails.
B. Restricted Discharges. An industrial user shall have an affirmative
defense to an enforcement action brought against it for non-compliance
with the restricted discharges in Section 715.210 of this Chapter if it
can prove that it did not know or have reason to know that its
discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources,
would cause pass through or interference and that either:
1. A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the industrial
user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during,
the pass through or interference; or
2. No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially
in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the
POTW was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit and, in
the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge
use or disposal requirements.
C. Bypass.
Section
715.510
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.510
AO:931
1. For the purposes of this Section:
a. "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste streams
from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility.
b. "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage
to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes
them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss
of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to
occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does
not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
2. An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not
cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but
only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient
operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of
Subparagraphs (3) and (4) of this Subsection.
3. If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it
shall submit prior notice to the Wastewater Superintendent, at
least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass if possible.
An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the
Wastewater Superintendent within twenty-four (24) hours from the
time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall
also be provided within five (5) days of the time the industrial
user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall
contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration
of the bypass, including exact dates and times and, if the bypass
has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to
continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The Wastewater
Superintendent may waive the written report on a case-by-case
basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four (24)
hours.
4. Bypass is prohibited, and the Wastewater Superintendent may take
enforcement action against an industrial user for a bypass, unless:
a. Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury,
or severe property damage;
b. There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated
wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment
downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up
equipment should have been installed in the exercise of
reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which
occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventive maintenance; and
Section
715.510
REPUBLIC CITY CODE Section
715.510
AO:932
Section 715.520. Abatement of Violation. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not prevent the
City Attorney from instituting appropriate action to prevent or to restrain,
enjoin, correct or abate a violation or nuisance, or to prevent an illegal act
or conduct, in or about any premises, in violation of this Chapter.
Section 715.530. Responsibility. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1 — 2,
4-22-2002]
Any person who shall occupy the user's premises as a tenant under any
rental or lease agreement shall be jointly and severally responsible for
compliance with the provisions of this Chapter in the same manner as the
owner.
Section 715.540. Enforcement Response Plan. [Ord. No. 02-14 §§1
— 2, 4-22-2002]
The Wastewater Superintendent shall develop and implement an
Enforcement Response Plan in accordance to 40 CFR 403.8(f)(5).
Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with
the City's Enforcement Response Plan. However, the City reserves the right
to take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant.
Further, the City is empowered to take more than one (1) enforcement
action against any non-compliant user. These actions may be taken
concurrently.
c. The industrial user submitted notices as required under
Subparagraph (3) of this Subsection.
D. The Wastewater Superintendent may approve an anticipated bypass
after considering its adverse effects, if the Wastewater Superintendent
determines that it will meet the three (3) conditions listed in
Subparagraph (4)(a) of this Section.
Section
715.510
ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section
715.540
AO:933