Chapter 100
GENERAL PROVISIONS
100:1

ARTICLE I
General Code Provisions
Section 100.010. Title of Code. [R.O. 2009 §10.01]
This codification of ordinances by and for the City of St. Charles shall be
designated as the Code of Ordinances of the City of St. Charles and may be
so cited.
Section 100.020. Definitions and Rules of Construction.1 [R.O. 2009
§10.02; CC 1981 §1-2; Ord. No. 87-96, 5-12-1987; Ord. No. 87-97,
5-12-1987; Ord. No. 91-51, 3-8-1991; Ord. No. 03-122, 5-27-2003]
For the purposes of this Code, the following definitions and rules of
construction shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
BOND — When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing in such form
and with such sureties as may be satisfactory to the Mayor is sufficient
unless otherwise required by State law or this Code.
CERTIFIED MAIL OR CERTIFIED MAIL WITH RETURN RECEIPT
REQUESTED — Includes certified mail carried by the United States Postal
Service or any parcel or letter carried by an overnight, express or ground
delivery service that allows a sender or recipient to electronically track its
location and provides a record of the signature of the recipient.
CITY — The words "the City" or "this City" shall mean the City of St.
Charles, Missouri.
CITY COUNCIL — The words "City Council" or "the Council" shall mean the
City Council of the City of St. Charles, Missouri.
COMPUTATION OF TIME — The time within which an act is to be done shall
be computed by excluding the first (1st) and including the last day. If the
last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, it shall be excluded.
CORPORATE LIMITS OR CITY LIMITS — Whenever the words "corporate
limits", "corporation limits" or "City limits" are used, they shall mean the
legal boundary of the City of St. Charles, Missouri.
COUNTY — The words "the County" or "this County" shall mean the County
of St. Charles, Missouri.
COURT — The Municipal Court of the City.
DEFINITIONS — Unless otherwise expressly provided, definitions given
within a Title, Chapter, Article, Section or Subsection apply only to words or
phrases used in such Title, Chapter, Article, Section or Subsection.
DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY — Whenever a provision appears requiring
an officer or the head of a department of the City to do some act or
make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the
1. State Law Reference—Construction of statutes generally, §§1.020—1.210, RSMo.
Section
100.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
100.020
100:3
department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform
the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the
provision or Section designate otherwise.
DESIGNEE — Following an official of the City, means the authorized agent,
employee or representative of such official.
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH/HUMANE DEPARTMENT — The Office of
Community Services.
GENDER — When any subject matter, party or person is described or
referred to by words importing the singular number or the masculine
gender, several matters and persons, and females as well as males, and
bodies corporate as well as individuals, are included.
INTERPRETATION — In the interpretation and application of any provision
of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for
the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general
welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon
the subject matter than another more general provision imposed by the
Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be
deemed to be controlling.
JOINT AUTHORITY — Words importing joint authority to three (3) or more
persons shall be construed as authority to a majority of the persons, unless
otherwise declared in the law giving the authority.
KEEPER OR PROPRIETOR — Natural persons, firms, associations,
corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or
through a servant, agent or employee.
LIBERAL CONSTRUCTION — All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the City Council may be fully carried out.
MONTH — A calendar month.
NAME OF OFFICER — Whenever the name of an officer is given, it shall be
construed as though the words "of the City of St. Charles" were added.
NON-TECHNICAL AND TECHNICAL WORDS — Words and phrases shall
be taken in their plain or ordinary and usual sense, but technical words
and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be
understood according to their technical import.
NUMBER — A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons or things as well as to one (1) person or thing.
OATH — An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn"
shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and "affirmed".
OWNER — Applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole
or a part of such building or land.
Section
100.020
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
100.020
100:4
PERSON — May extend and be applied to bodies politic and corporate, and
to partnerships and other unincorporated associations.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Includes money, goods, chattels, things in action
and evidences of debt.
PRECEDING AND FOLLOWING — When used by way of reference to any
Section of this Code, shall mean the Section next preceding or next
following that in which the reference is made, unless some other Section is
expressly designated in the reference.
PROPERTY — Includes real and personal property.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place where the public is permitted or invited to
go or congregate, a place of common resort, a place where the public
has a right to go and be. "Public places" include, but are not limited to,
streets, roadways, alleys, sidewalks, parks, cemeteries, beaches, school
yards, parking lots, boats, barges, business and commercial establishments
(whether for profit or not-for-profit and whether open to the public at
large or where entrance is limited by a cover charge or membership
requirement), bottle clubs, hotels, motels, restaurants, nightclubs, country
clubs, cabarets and meeting facilities utilized by any religious, social,
fraternal or similar organizations.
PUBLIC WAY — Any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway, sidewalk or
other public thoroughfare.
REAL PROPERTY — Including the terms "premises", "real estate" or
"lands", shall be deemed to be co-extensive with lands, tenements and
hereditaments.
RESIDENCE — The place adopted by a person as his/her place of habitation
and to which, whenever he/she is absent, he/she has the intention of
returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place
where such person sleeps shall be deemed his/her residence.
REVISED STATUTES OR RSMo. — The Revised Statutes of Missouri, as
amended.
SEAL — The Seal of the City of St. Charles.
SHALL AND MAY — The word "shall" as used in this Code is mandatory;
"May" is permissive or discretionary.
SIDEWALK — The portion of the street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
SIGNATURE OR SUBSCRIPTION — Where the written signature or
subscription of any natural person is required, the proper handwriting of
such person or his/her mark, when such person cannot write, shall be
intended.
STATE — The State of Missouri.
STREET — Any public way, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway,
alley or other public thoroughfare and each of such words shall include
every other of them.
Section
100.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
100.020
100:5
TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY — Goods, chattels and all personal
property except intangible personal property.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT — Applied to a building or land, shall include any
person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether
alone or with others.
TENSE — Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well
as the past and present.
WEEK — Seven (7) days.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING AND WRITING WORD FOR WORD — Includes
printing, lithographing, or other mode of representing words and letters,
but in all cases where the signature of any person is required, the proper
handwriting of the person, or his/her mark, is intended.
YEAR — A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed and the word "year"
shall be equivalent to the words "year of our Lord".
Section 100.030. Jurisdiction of Code. [R.O. 2009 §10.03; CC 1981
§1-3]
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, this Code shall apply to acts
performed within the corporate limits of the City. The provisions of this
Code shall also apply to acts performed outside the corporate limits and up
to the limits prescribed by law where the law confers power on the City to
regulate such particular acts outside the corporate limits.
Section 100.040. Catchlines of Sections. [R.O. 2009 §10.04; CC
1981 §1-4]
The catchlines of the several Sections of this Code printed in boldface type
are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the Section and
shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such Sections, nor as any part
of the Section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed
when any of such Sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
Section 100.050. Provisions Considered As Continuations of
Existing Ordinances. [R.O. 2009 §10.05; CC 1981 §1-5]
The provisions appearing in this Code, insofar as they are the same as those
of the Revised Ordinances of 1965 and Revised Ordinances of 1980 and
ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be
considered as continuation thereof and not as new enactments.
Section 100.060. Severability. [R.O. 2009 §10.06; CC 1981 §1-6]
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the
Sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are
severable and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or Section of this
Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of
Section
100.020
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
100.060
100:6
any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect
any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and Sections
of this Code since the same would have been enacted by the City Council
without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase,
clause, sentence, paragraph or Section.
Section 100.070. Amendments To Code. [R.O. 2009 §10.07; CC 1981
§1-7]
Section 100.080. Supplementation of Code. [R.O. 2009 §10.08; CC
1981 §1-8]
A. All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code, which amend, repeal or
in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the
numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein or, in
the case of repealed Chapters, Sections and Subsections or any part
thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be
excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected
thereby and the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or
omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such
subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent
ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the
City Council.
B. Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by
amending such provisions by specific reference to the Section of this
Code in substantially the following language: "That Section __________
of the Code of Ordinances of the City of St. Charles, Missouri, is hereby
amended to read as follows: (Set out new provisions in full)"
C. When the City Council desires to enact an ordinance of a general and
permanent nature on a subject not heretofore existing in the Code,
which the City Council desires to incorporate into the Code, a Section in
substantially the following language shall be made a part of the
ordinance:
"Section __________. It is the intention of the City Council and it is
hereby ordained that the provisions of this Chapter shall become and
be made a part of the Code of Ordinances of the City of St. Charles,
Missouri, and the Sections of this Chapter may be renumbered to
accomplish such intention."
D. All Titles, Chapters, Articles or Sections of this Code desired to be
repealed should be specifically repealed by Section number or Chapter
number, as the case may be.
A. By contract or by City personnel, supplements to this Code shall be
prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the City
Council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive
permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the Council
during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made
Section
100.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
100.080
100:7
Section 100.090. Maintenance of Copies of Code. [R.O. 2009 §10.09;
CC 1981 §1-9]
thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered
that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary,
replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete and the
new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted,
the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest
ordinance included in the supplement.
B. In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which
have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission
thereof from reprinted pages.
C. When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the
person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement)
may make formal, non-substantive changes in ordinances and parts of
ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do
so to embody them into the unified Code. For example, the codifier may:
1. Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
2. Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for Sections
and other Subsections of the Code printed in the supplement and
make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
3. Assign appropriate numbers to Sections and other Subsections to
be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new
material, change existing Section or other Subsection numbers;
4. Change the words "this ordinance" or words to the same meaning
to "this Chapter", "this Article", "this Subsection", etc., as the case
may be or to "Sections __________ to __________" (inserting Section
numbers to indicate the Sections of the Code which embody the
substantive Sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code);
and
5. Make other non-substantive changes necessary to preserve the
original meaning of ordinance Sections inserted into the Code; but
in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or
effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already
embodied in the Code.
A. The City Clerk shall keep three (3) copies of this Code. These copies
shall be printed or otherwise mounted to withstand heavy usage and
preserved by the City Clerk in a book or binder in looseleaf form or in
such other form as the City Council may consider most expedient, so
that all amendments thereto and all general ordinances hereafter
passed may be inserted in their appropriate places in such volumes and
all Sections of this Code or ordinances repealed from time to time may
be extracted therefrom for the purpose of maintaining said three (3)
copies in such condition that they will show all general ordinances
Section
100.080
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
100.090
100:8
Section 100.100. Organization of Code. [R.O. 2009 §10.10]
The ordinances in this Code are organized into Titles, Chapters, Articles,
Sections and Subsections as identified in the following definitions:
CHAPTER — Organizes the information that is contained within a Title.
SUBSECTION — Separates a Section into paragraphs, designated by letters
and numbers as follows:
A. First division.
1. Second division.
a. Third division.
(1) Fourth division.
SECTION — The basic unit of a Code designated by the symbol "§".
ARTICLE — Itemizes the information found in a Chapter by breaking it into
smaller parts according to subject matter.
TITLE — The largest unit of organization in this Code. Titles divide
ordinances by broad subject matter into the following categories:
Section 100.110. Official Time. [R.O. 2009 §10.11; CC 1981 §1-11]
passed up to date at any time in such manner that ready reference may
be had thereto.
B. In determining whether or not any ordinance hereafter passed, or any
part thereof, shall be inserted in such volume and in determining the
form, Chapter, Article or Section which shall be taken out, if any doubt
arises, the City Clerk shall be guided by the advice of any regular or
special City Counselor.
1. Government Code;
2. Public Health, Safety and Welfare;
3. Traffic Code;
4. Land Use;
5. Building and Construction;
6. Business and Occupation;
7. Utilities.
A. Designated. United States standard or daylight savings time for the
zone in which the City is located shall be the official time of the City.
B. Referred To In Ordinances, Notices, Documents And The Like. When
reference is made to any time without qualification in any ordinance,
resolution or order heretofore passed or which may be passed hereafter
Section
100.090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
100.110
100:9
Section 100.120. Publication of Code — Evidence.2 [R.O. 2009
§10.12; CC 1981 §1-12]
When the Code shall be printed and bound, it shall be deemed a sufficient
publication of all ordinances contained therein and they shall be received
in evidence without further proof in all cases, suits or proceedings had,
instituted or prosecuted under the provisions thereof and in pleading any
ordinance or part of ordinance in prosecutions and proceedings had by
virtue of any of the provisions thereof, it shall be sufficient to designate the
number of the Section or Chapter under which the action is instituted or
proceedings had.
Section 100.130. Prisoners May Be Worked. [R.O. 2009 §10.13; CC
1981 §1-14]
In case any person is found guilty and sentenced by the Municipal Judge
for violation of this Code or any other ordinance of the City, whether the
punishment be by fine or imprisonment, or by both, such person may be put
to work and required to perform labor on the public streets or highways or
other public works or buildings of the City and the City shall have power
and be authorized and required to have or cause all such prisoners to work
out the full number of days for which they have been sentenced and in
case the defendant has sufficient property out of which to make the money
fine and costs against the defendant and the same shall remain unpaid, the
defendant shall be required to do and perform such labor on the streets,
highways or other public buildings or public works of the City, as his/her
by the City Council or in any official notice, advertisement or document
of the City or in any contract to which the City is a party, it shall
be understood to refer to the official time of the City as described in
Subsection (A) of this Section.
C. Application. In all ordinances, resolutions or orders of the City Council
and in all official notices, advertisements or documents of the City and
in all contracts to which the City is a party relating to the time of
performance of any act by any officer or department of the City or
relating to the time within which any rights shall accrue or determine
or within which any act shall or shall not be performed by any person, it
shall be understood and intended that the time shall be the official time
of the City as prescribed in Subsection (A) of this Section.
D. Public Timepieces. All clocks or other timepieces in or upon public
buildings or other premises maintained at the expense of the City shall
be set and run according to the official time as provided in Subsection
(A) of this Section. It is hereby made the duty of the officer or other
person having control and charge of any such building and premises to
see that the clocks or other timepieces are set and run in accordance
with official time.
2. State Law Reference—Admission of printed copies of ordinances as evidence, §490.240,
RSMo.
Section
100.110
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
100.130
100:10
health and strength will permit, not exceeding eight (8) hours per day and
for such work and labor the person so employed shall be allowed, exclusive
of his/her board, the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) per day, which amount
shall be credited on such fine and costs. Such labor shall be done at the
direction and under the supervision of the Mayor. The officer or person in
charge of such prisoner while so employed may impose such restraints as
may be reasonably necessary to prevent the escape of the prisoner while so
employed.
Section 100.140. Prosecution Where Different Provisions Exist For
Same Offense. [R.O. 2009 §10.14; CC 1981 §1-15]
In all cases where the same offense may be made punishable or shall be
created by different clauses or Sections of the ordinances of the City, the
prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than
one (1) recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense.
Section 100.150. Penalty.3 [R.O. 2009 §10.99; CC 1981 §1-13]
A. Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the City any act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or the
doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be
unlawful or a misdemeanor, except where a specific statutory penalty is
provided for, the violation of any such provision shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment
not exceeding three (3) months or both such fine and imprisonment, as
may be just for any offense, recoverable with cost of suit; provided
however, that where the City and the State both prescribe the same
offense, the penalty for violating the City provision shall be the same as
is set by Statute. [Ord. No. 16-270 §1, 12-20-2016]
Exceptions:
1. In any case wherein the penalty for an offense is fixed by a Statute
of the State of Missouri, the statutory penalty, and no other, shall be
imposed for such offense.
2. The penalty for a "minor traffic violation" as those words are
defined by Section 479.350, RSMo., shall be subject to the
following provisions:
a. The maximum fine and court costs that may be imposed for a
minor traffic violation shall be two hundred twenty-five dollars
($225.00), and
b. Court costs shall be assessed against such person unless the
Municipal Court finds such person is indigent.
3. The penalty for an ordinance violation for which penalties are
authorized by Sections 67.398 (nuisances), 71.285 (high grass and
3. State Law Reference—Limitation on penalty, §77.590, RSMo.
Section
100.130
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
100.150
100:11
weeds and litter and debris nuisances), or 89.120 and 89.490
(zoning violations), RSMo., shall be subject to the following
provisions:
a. The maximum fine and court costs that can be imposed for a
violation shall be:
(1) For the first violation within any 12-month period of time:
two hundred dollars ($200.00).
(2) For the second violation within any 12-month period of
time: two hundred seventy-five dollars ($275.00).
(3) For the third violation within any 12-month period of time:
three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00).
(4) For the fourth and any subsequent violation within any
12-month period of time: four hundred fifty dollars
($450.00).
b. Court costs shall be assessed against such person unless the
Municipal Court finds such person is indigent.
4. A person shall not be placed in confinement for failure to pay a fine
unless such non-payment violates terms of probation or unless the
due process procedures mandated by Missouri Supreme Court Rule
37.65 or its successor rule are strictly followed by the Municipal
Court.
B. Each act of violation and every day upon which a violation occurs or
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
C. The failure of any officer or employee of the City to perform any official
duty imposed by this Code shall not subject such officer or employee to
the penalty imposed by this Section unless a penalty is specifically
provided.
Section
100.150
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
100.150
100:12
ARTICLE II
City Standards
Section 100.160. City Logo and Seal.4 [R.O. 2009 §11.01; CC 1981
§1-10; Ord. No. 10-29 §1, 2-19-2010]
Section 100.170. Official City Tree. [R.O. 2009 §11.02; Ord. No.
03-156, 7-8-2003]
The Redbud, scientifically designated as Cercis Canadensis, is declared
to be the arboreal emblem of the City of St. Charles and the City shall
recognize it as the official City tree and encourage its cultivation on account
of the beauty of its flower and foliage.
Section 100.180. Official City Flower. [R.O. 2009 §11.03; Ord. No.
03-218, 9-3-2003]
The Purple Coneflower, scientifically designated as Echinacea Purpurea
(Asteraceae), is declared to be the floral emblem of the City of St. Charles
and the City shall recognize it as the official flower of the City and
encourage its cultivation on account of the beauty of its flower and foliage.
A. Description. The logo and seal of the City shall consist of a circular
shape in the foreground and surrounded in the background by an eight
(8) point compass rose. The diameter of the four (4) cardinal points of
the compass rose shall be no smaller than one and one-half (1½) inches
by one and one-half (1½) inches. The circular shape in the foreground
shall be divided into four (4) quadrants. The northeast quadrant shall
contain a fleur de lis, once used as the armorial emblem of French
sovereigns. The southeast quadrant shall contain a depiction of two (2)
building structures representative of historic Main Street. The
southwest quadrant shall contain two (2) leaves. The northwest
quadrant shall contain a depiction of a river that is representative of the
Missouri River. The four (4) quadrants of the circular shape shall be
surrounded by a scroll that is inscribed with the words "CITY OF SAINT
CHARLES - EST. 1809". A banner shall drape across the bottom of the
circle, touching the southeast and southwest ordinal points and shall be
inscribed with the word "MISSOURI".
B. Custodian—Use. The City Clerk shall keep the Seal of the City in his/her
office and shall affix the same to all instruments of writing of
whatsoever nature, when required by ordinance, resolution or order of
the City Council or on direction of the Mayor. The City Clerk is also
authorized to affix the Seal of the City to copies of all records and
documents, whenever thereto required by any person and for such
services such person shall pay to the City fifty cents ($.50) for each
certificate.
4. State Law Reference—City seal authorized, §77.010, RSMo.
Section
100.160
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
100.180
100:13
Chapter 105
ELECTIONS
Cross Reference—As to nomination and elections, charter art. IX.
Section 105.010. Ward Boundaries.5 [R.O. 2009 §38.01; CC 1981
§8-1; Ord. No. 3303, 7-7-1965; Ord. No. 73-6, 2-6-1973; Ord. No.
81-93, 11-17-1981; Ord. No. 82-89, 12-22-1982; Ord. No. 85-8,
1-30-1985; Ord. No. 91-259, 12-17-1991; Ord. No. 92-4, 1-8-1992;
Ord. No. 94-235, 9-7-1994; Ord. No. 03-81, 4-7-2003; Ord. No.
09-163, 9-3-2009; Ord. No. 13-214 §1, 11-5-2013]
A. The City is hereby divided into ten (10) wards, designated as shown on
the ward map attached to Ordinance No. 13-214, passed November 5,
2013, and which are generally described as follows:
1. First ward. All that part of the City lying within the following
described area: Beginning at the corporate limits line and the
County line between Saint Charles County and Saint Louis County;
thence southwestwardly along the above-described corporate
limits line to the extended center line of First Capitol Drive; thence
westward along the center line of First Capitol Drive to the center
line of Kingshighway; thence northeastwardly along the center line
of Kingshighway to the center line of Randolph Street; thence east
along the center line of Randolph Street to the center line of North
Fifth Street; thence northwestwardly along the center line of North
Fifth Street to the point at which it merges with the southeastern
Norfolk and Southern Railroad right-of-way and follows the rightof-
way northwestwardly to the southern right-of-way line of
Missouri Highway 370; thence northwestwardly along the southern
right-of-way line of Missouri Highway 370 to the extension of the
center line line of Boschertown Road; thence northeastwardly
along the center line of Boschertown Road to the center line of Fox
Hill Road; thence southeastwardly along the center line of Fox Hill
Road to the extension of the northern boundary line of the Stable
Ridge Estates subdivision and the corporate limits line; thence
northeastwardly along the northern boundary line of the Stable
Ridge Estates subdivision to the northwestern boundary line of the
Stable Ridge Manor subdivision; thence northeastwardly along the
boundary line of the Stable Ridge Manor subdivision to the
northwestern boundary line of parcel known as 3445 North
Highway 94; thence northeastwardly along the boundary line of
parcel known as 3445 North Highway 94 to the corporate limits
line and back to the point of beginning, less and except all
properties within unincorporated St. Charles County, Missouri.
5. Cross Reference—As to city council wards, charter §3.4. State Law Reference—Authority of
cities of the third class to establish wards, §77.030, RSMo. Editor's Note—The charter
amendment approved April 7, 1992, changed the five wards of the city to ten wards, with
one member of the council representing each ward beginning April 1995.
Section
100.180
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
105.010
100:14
2. Second ward. All that part of the City lying within the following
described area: Beginning at the corporate limits line and the
County line between Saint Charles County and Saint Louis County;
thence southerly along the corporate limits line to the center line of
Interstate Highway 70 right-of-way; thence westerly along the
center line of Interstate Highway 70 right-of-way to the extension
of the center line of Hawks Nest Drive, thence northerly along the
center line of Hawks Nest Drive to the extension of the center line
of West Clay Street, thence easterly along the center line of West
Clay Street to the center line of First Capitol Drive; thence
generally northeasterly and easterly along the center line of First
Capitol Drive and its extension to the City limits, also known as the
County line between Saint Charles County and Saint Louis County
and back to the point of beginning.
3. Third ward. All that part of the City lying within the following
described area: Beginning at the corporate limits line and the
County line between Saint Charles County and Saint Louis County
at the center line of Interstate 70; thence westward along the
center line of Interstate Highway 70 to the extension of the
northeastern boundary line of the Sherman Meadows subdivision
and the City limits line; thence generally southwesterly,
northwesterly meandering along the City limits line and the
southern boundary lines of the Sherman Meadows and the
Sherman Square Condominium developments to the eastern
boundary line of the Country Club Place apartment development,
thence generally southerly, southwesterly and northerly along the
eastern and southern boundary lines of the Country Club Place
apartment development and its extension to the center line of
Friedens Road; thence northwesterly along the center line of
Friedens Road to the center line of Missouri State Highway 94;
thence southwesterly along the center line of Missouri Highway 94
to the center line of Pralle Lane; thence southeasterly along the
center line of Pralle Lane to the extension of the southeastern
boundary line of Collier Corporate Center subdivision; thence
southwestwardly along the southeastern boundary line of Collier
Corporate Center subdivision to the northeastern boundary line of
Blanchette Business Center subdivision; thence generally
southeastwardly, southwestwardly and northwestwardly along the
southern boundary line of Blanchette Business Center subdivision
to the corporate limits line; thence southerly and northerly
meandering along the corporate limits line back to the point of
beginning, less and except all properties within unincorporated St.
Charles County, Missouri.
4. Fourth ward. All that part of the City lying within the following
described area: Beginning at the intersection of Missouri State
Highway 94 and Interstate Highway 70; thence northwestwardly
along the center line of Interstate Highway 70 to the extension of
the center line of Hawks Nest Drive; thence southwestwardly along
Section
105.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
105.010
100:15
the extension of the center line of Hawks Nest Drive to the
northern property line of Saint Charles Commons Block 2, Evans
survey part of lot 18 and 19 known as Walgreens; thence
southwesterly along the property line of Saint Charles Commons
Block 2, Evans survey part of lot 18 and 19 known as Walgreens
extending to the center line of Zumbehl Road; thence extending
from the center line of Zumbehl Road westward to the northeastern
property line of Saint Charles Commons Block 2, Evans survey
part of lot 18 and 19 known as the Saint Charles Police Station;
thence westward along the northern property line of Saint Charles
Commons Block 2, Evans survey part of lot 18 and 19 known
as the Saint Charles Police Station to the northeastern corner
of the Bogey Crossing subdivision; thence southwestwardly along
the northern boundary line of Bogey Crossing subdivision to the
northeastern corner of Buckingham Green subdivision; thence
generally southwestwardly along the boundary line of Buckingham
Green subdivision to the northwestern boundary line of Meadow
Park #1 subdivision; thence southwestwardly along the
northwestern boundary line of Meadow Park #1 subdivision to
the eastern boundary line of Graystone #1 subdivision; thence
northwestwardly and southwesterly along the eastern and northern
boundary lines of Graystone #1 subdivision to the northeastern
boundary line of the Muegge Mobile Manor subdivision; thence
generally southerly and southwesterly along the eastern and
southern boundary lines of Muegge Mobile Manor subdivision to
the eastern boundary line of Spring Oaks subdivision; thence
meandering generally southeasterly and southwesterly along the
eastern and southern boundary lines of the Spring Oaks subdivision
to the extension of the center line of Muegge Road; thence
southeasterly along the center line of Muegge Road to the center
line of Hemsath Road; thence southerly along the center line of
Hemsath Road extending across the State Highway 94 right-ofway
to the center line of Hemsath Road (portion of Hemsath Road
south of State Highway 94) and the corporate limits line; thence
generally southwesterly, southerly and northeasterly along the
corporate limits lines to the southwestern boundary line of the
Blanchette Business Center subdivision; thence northeastwardly
and northwestwardly along the boundary line of the Blanchette
Business Center subdivision to the southwestern corner of the
Collier Corporate Center subdivision; thence northeastwardly
along the Collier Corporate Center southeastern boundary line
and its extension to the center line of Pralle Lane; thence
northwestwardly along the center line of Pralle Lane to the center
line of Missouri Highway 94 right-of-way; thence meandering
northeastwardly along the center line of Missouri Highway 94
to the extension of the center line of Friedens Road; thence
southeasterly along the center line of Friedens Road to the
extension of the southeastern boundary of the Country Club
Apartments subdivision; thence northeasterly, northwesterly and
Section
105.010
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
105.010
100:16
northerly along the eastern boundary lines of the Country Club
Apartments subdivision to the southeastern boundary line of the
Sherman Square Condo development and the corporate limits line;
thence along the corporate limits line and its extension to the
center line of Interstate Highway 70 right-of-way; thence westerly
along the center line of Interstate Highway 70 right-of-way to
the point of beginning, less and except all properties within
unincorporated St. Charles County, Missouri.
5. Fifth ward. All that part of the City lying within the following
described area: Beginning at the northeastern corner of
Buckingham Green subdivision; thence generally southwestwardly
along the boundary line of Buckingham Green subdivision to the
northwestern boundary line of Meadow Park #1 subdivision;
thence southwestwardly along the northwestern boundary line of
Meadow Park #1 subdivision to the eastern boundary line of
Graystone #1 subdivision; thence northwestwardly and
southwesterly along the eastern and northern boundary lines of
Graystone #1 subdivision to the northeastern boundary line of the
Muegge Mobile Manor subdivision; thence southerly and
southwesterly along the eastern and southern boundary lines of
Muegge Mobile Manor subdivision to the eastern boundary line of
Spring Oaks subdivision; thence meandering generally
southeasterly and southwesterly along the eastern and southern
boundary lines of the Spring Oaks subdivision to the extension of
the center line of Muegge Road; thence southeastwardly along the
center line of Muegge Road to the center line of Hemsath Road;
thence southerly along the center line of Hemsath Road extending
to the center line of State Highway 94 right-of-way; thence
southwesterly along the center line of State Highway 94 right-ofway
to the extension of the western property line of #1 Garvey
Parkway; thence northwesterly along the western property line of
#1 Garvey Parkway to the western corporate limits line; thence
meandering northwestwardly, southerly and northeastwardly along
the corporate limits line to the northwest corner of a parcel
presently known as 2221 Muegge Road; thence northeastwardly
along the northwest property line of the parcel presently known as
2221 Muegge Road to the center line of Muegge Road; thence
northwestwardly along the center line of Muegge Road to the
extension of the northwestern boundary line of the Scarsdale
Manor #2 subdivision; thence generally northeasterly,
southeasterly and easterly along the Scarsdale Manor #2
subdivision boundary to the northern boundary line of the Country
Club Corners subdivision; thence easterly along the northern
boundary line of the Country Club Corners subdivision and its
extension to the center line of Country Club Road; thence
southeasterly along the center line of Country Club Road to the
extension of the northwestern property line of parcel known as 116
Berlekamp; thence northeastwardly and southwestwardly around
the property line of the parcel presently known as 116 Berlekamp
Section
105.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
105.010
100:17
extending to the center line of Country Club Road; thence
southeastwardly along the center line of Country Club Road to
the extension of the northern boundary line of Shadow Wood
subdivision; thence northeastwardly along the northern boundary
line of Shadow Wood subdivision to the northern boundary line of
Bogey Hills Estates subdivision; thence generally northeastwardly,
southeastwardly and southwesterly along the northern, eastern
and southern boundary line of Bogey Hills Estates subdivision to
and back to the point of beginning, less and except all properties
within unincorporated St. Charles County, Missouri.
6. Sixth ward. All that part of the City lying within the following
described area: Beginning at the intersection of the center lines of
Zumbehl Road and Campus Drive along the corporate limits line;
thence southerly, westerly and northerly along the meanderings of
the corporate limits line to the southern right-of-way line of
Ehlmann Road; thence northeastwardly along the southern rightof-
way line of Ehlmann Road to the extension of the western
boundary line of Bluffstone Estates subdivision; thence north and
southeastwardly along the boundary line of Bluffstone Estates
subdivision to the southeastern corner of parcel presently known as
4125 Elm Point Road; thence meandering along the property line of
the above-described parcel to the northern boundary line of the
Oak Trails subdivision; thence southwestwardly along the abovedescribed
boundary line to the extension of the property line of
parcel presently known as Survey 291, Lot 3 - Ehlmann tract;
thence north and northwestwardly along the property line of the
last-described parcel to the corporate limits line; thence generally
southwestwardly along the corporate limits line to the center line
of Muegge Road; thence northeasterly from the center line of
Muegge Road extending to the northern boundary line of the
Scarsdale Manor #2 subdivision; thence northeasterly along the
Scarsdale Manor #2 subdivision to the western boundary line of
the Wellington Manor subdivision; thence northeasterly along the
above-described boundary line to the center line of Country Club
Road; thence southeasterly along the center line of Country Club
Road to the extension of the northern boundary line of the Ivy
Meadows Plat #3 subdivision; thence westerly, southerly and
easterly around the boundary line of the above-described
subdivision to the southwestern right-of-way line of Country Club
Road; thence southeastwardly along the southwestern right-of-way
line of Country Club Road to the extension of the property line
presently known as St. Elizabeth Ann Seton Church; thence
northeastwardly along the above-described property line to the
corporate limits line; thence northwestwardly and southeastwardly
along the corporate limits line to the southwestern boundary line of
the Villages of Bogey Hills Apartments; thence northeastwardly
along the above-described boundary line to the northwestern
corner of property presently known as the Saint Charles Police
Station; thence extending from the above-described corner to the
Section
105.010
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
105.010
100:18
southeastern corner of property presently known as Saint Charles
Commons Block 2, Evans survey part of lot 18 and 19 Walgreens
tract; thence northeasterly along the above-described property line
to the center line of Hawks Nest Drive; thence northeastwardly
along the center line of Hawks Nest Drive and its extension to
Interstate Highway 70 center line; thence northwestwardly along
the center line of Interstate Highway 70 to the center line of
Cole Creek; thence northwestwardly along the center line of Cole
Creek to the northeast corner of the parcel currently know as 2900
West Clay Street (Lowes Tract); thence southwestwardly along the
northern property line (and its extension) of the parcel currently
know as 2900 West Clay Street (Lowes Tract) to the center line
of Zumbehl Road; thence northerly and northwestwardly along the
center line of Zumbehl Road to the point of beginning, less and
except all the properties within unincorporated St. Charles County,
Missouri.
7. Seventh ward. All that part of the City lying within the following
described area: Beginning at the intersection of the center lines of
Elm Street and North Kingshighway; thence northeastwardly along
the center line of North Kingshighway to the center line of
Randolph Street; thence southeasterly along the center line of
Randolph Street to the center line of North Fifth Street; thence
northwestwardly along the center line of North Fifth Street to the
point at which it merges with the southeastern boundary of the
Norfolk and Southern Railroad right-of-way and follows the rightof-
way northwestwardly to the southern right-of-way line of
Missouri Highway 370 to its intersection with the north right-ofway
line of North Randolph Street; thence northwestwardly along
above-described right-of-way to the northeastern corner of the
Village Duchesne subdivision; thence southwestwardly along the
northeastern and western boundary line of the Indian Hills
subdivision to the northeastern corner of a property currently
described as 3126 Elm Street; thence generally easterly along the
northern property line of 3126 Elm Street to the eastern property
line of parcel currently known as 3138 Elm Street; thence generally
northerly and westerly along the eastern and northern property
line of 3138 Elm Street to the northeast corner of parcel currently
described as 3144 Elm Street; thence westerly along the northern
property line of 3144 Elm Street to the northeast corner of parcel
currently known as 3210 Elm Street; thence generally westerly and
northerly along the northern property line of 3210 Elm Street to
the extension of the center line of Elm Street; thence southeasterly
along the center line of Elm Street to the point of beginning.
8. Eighth ward. All that part of the City lying within the following
described area: Beginning at the southern line of Missouri Highway
370 right-of-way and the extension of the north right-of-way line of
North Randolph Street; thence northwesterly along abovedescribed
right-of-way to the northeastern corner of the Village
Section
105.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
105.010
100:19
Duchesne subdivision; thence southwestwardly along the
northeastern and western boundary line of the Indian Hills
subdivision to the northeastern corner of a property currently
described as 3126 Elm Street; thence generally easterly along the
northern property line of 3126 Elm Street to the eastern property
line of parcel currently known as 3138 Elm Street; thence generally
northerly and westerly along the eastern and northern property
line of 3138 Elm Street to the northeast corner of parcel currently
described as 3144 Elm Street; thence westerly along the northern
property line of 3144 Elm Street to the northeast corner of parcel
currently known as 3210 Elm Street; thence generally westerly
and northerly along the northern property line of 3210 Elm Street
to the extension of the center line of Elm Street; thence
northwestwardly along the center line of Elm Street to its
intersection with the southern right-of-way line of Old Elm Point
Road; thence southwestwardly along the above-described right-ofway
line to the northeastern corner of the Presidio subdivision;
thence generally southerly, westerly and northerly along the
eastern, southern and western boundary lines of the Presidio
subdivision to the southern boundary line of Governors Place
Addition subdivision; thence westerly along the southern boundary
line of the Governors Place Addition subdivision to the western
boundary line of Governors Place #2; thence southerly, westerly
and northerly along the eastern, southern and western boundary
lines of Governors Place #2 subdivision to the southern boundary
line of Governors Place #1 subdivision; thence westerly along the
Governors Place #1 subdivision southern boundary line and its
extension to the center line of Warwick Drive; thence southerly
along the center line of Warwick Drive to the center line of Zumbehl
Road; thence northerly along the center line of Zumbehl Road
and its extension to the southern boundary of the Norfolk and
Southern Railroad right-of-way to the extension of the property
line of parcel presently known as Survey 291, Lot 3 Ehlmann
tract; thence meandering north and southwestwardly along the
property line of the last-described parcel to the corporate limits
line; thence northerly and easterly along the corporate limits line
to the center line of Boschertown Road; thence southwestwardly
along the center line of Boschertown Road extending to the south
right-of-way line of Missouri Highway 370; thence eastwardly along
the above-described right-of-way to the point of beginning, less
and except all properties within unincorporated St. Charles County,
Missouri.
9. Ninth ward. All that part of the City lying within the following
described area: Beginning at the center line of Interstate Highway
70 and the extension of Hawks Nest Drive; thence northwesterly
along the center line of Interstate Highway 70 to the center line of
Cole Creek; thence meandering generally northeastwardly along
the center line of Cole Creek to the northeast corner of the parcel
currently known as 2900 West Clay Street (Lowes Tract); thence
Section
105.010
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
105.010
100:20
southwestwardly along the northern property line (and its
extension) of the parcel currently known as 2900 West Clay Street
(Lowes Tract) to the center line of Zumbehl Road; thence northerly
and northwestwardly along the center line of Zumbehl Road to the
extension of the southwestern property line of Saint Charles West
High School; thence easterly along the above-described property
line and its extension to Droste Road; thence generally
southeasterly along the center line of Droste Road to the center
line of South Duchesne Drive; thence northeastwardly along the
center line of South Duchesne Drive to the center line of Elm
Street; thence southeastwardly along the center line of Elm Street
to the center line of Kingshighway; thence southwestwardly along
the center line of Kingshighway to the center line of First Capitol
Drive; thence northwest and southwestwardly along the center line
of First Capitol Drive to the center line of West Clay Street; thence
westerly along the center line of West Clay Street to the center line
of Hawks Nest Drive; thence southwesterly along the center line of
Hawks Nest Drive and its extension to the center line of Interstate
Highway 70 right-of-way and back to the point of beginning.
10. Tenth ward. All that part of the City lying within the following area:
Beginning at the intersection of the center lines of S. Duchesne
Drive and Elm Street; thence northerly along the center line of Elm
Street to its intersection with the southern right-of-way line of Old
Elm Point Road; thence southwestwardly along the abovedescribed
right-of-way line to the northeastern corner of the
Presidio subdivision; thence generally southerly and westerly and
northerly along the eastern, southern and western boundary lines
of the Presidio subdivision to the southern boundary line of
Governors Place Addition subdivision; thence westerly along the
southern boundary line of the Governors Place Addition subdivision
to the western boundary line of Governors Place #2; thence
southerly, westerly and northerly along the eastern, southern and
western boundary lines of Governors Place #2 subdivision to the
southern boundary line of Governors Place #1 subdivision; thence
westerly along the Governors Place #1 subdivision southern
boundary line and its extension to the center line of Warwick Drive;
thence southerly along the center line of Warwick Drive to the
center line of Zumbehl Road; thence northerly along the center line
of Zumbehl Road to the extension of the northern boundary line of
Hanover Manor subdivision; thence southwesterly; southerly and
easterly along the northern, western and southern boundary line of
Hanover Manor subdivision to the western extension of the
southern property line of Saint Charles West High School; thence
easterly along the above-described property line to the center line
of Droste Road; thence southerly along the center line of Droste
Road to the center line of South Duchesne Drive: thence
northeastwardly along the center line of South Duchesne Drive to
the point of beginning, less and except all properties within
unincorporated St. Charles County, Missouri.
Section
105.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
105.010
100:21
Section 105.020. When Elections Held. [R.O. 2009 §38.02; CC 1981
§8-2; Ord. No. 97-361, 10-22-1997]
On the first (1st) Tuesday after the first (1st) Monday in April of every year
an election shall be held by the qualified voters of the City for the various
elective officers of the City.
Section 105.030. Nomination of Candidates. [R.O. 2009 §38.05; CC
1981 §8-5; Ord. No. 80-88, 8-13-1980]
Electors may nominate candidates for public office to be filled by election
within the City. The nominations for elective office shall be made by filing
a certificate of nomination executed with the formalities prescribed for the
execution of an instrument affecting real estate. The City Clerk shall make
available to any person desiring to be nominated who shall request the same
personally or in writing on his/her behalf at the office of the City Clerk.
Section 105.040. Forms For Nomination and Acceptance.6 [R.O.
2009 §38.07; CC 1981 §8-8.1; Ord. No. 82-77, 11-17-1982]
Section 105.050. One Nominee For Each Office.7 [R.O. 2009 §38.08;
CC 1981 §8-9]
B. Upon each annexation of land into the City, the land being annexed shall
be assigned to the appropriate ward or wards, and the ward boundaries
shall be deemed amended to include the area annexed without the
necessity of changing the general descriptions contained in this section.
A. The forms designated to be utilized in the City for nominating petitions
and for acceptance of nominations to elective City offices shall be
substantially the same composition as the attached forms which are on
file in the City offices and shall consist of the following:
1. Certificate of nomination form;
2. Signature form;
3. Signature form and declaration of candidacy form;
4. Affidavit form (to be executed by the circulator of the petition who
is not a notary public and notarized by a notary public); and
5. Notary statement (to be executed by the circulator of the petition
provided the circulator is a notary public).
B. Any forms submitted other than the forms designated herein shall be
null and void and shall not be accepted for nomination of any person to
an elective office in the City.
6. Editor's Note—The forms described in this section are available in the office of the city
clerk.
7. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
105.010
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
105.050
100:22
Chapter 110
CITY COUNCIL
Cross References—As to city clerk, charter §3.9; as to city council wards,
charter §3.4; as to compensation and expenses, charter §3.5; as to corrupt
allowance of claims, §115.100; as to eligibility, charter §3.2; as to
independent audit, charter §3.14; as to investigations, charter §3.13; as to
judge of qualifications, charter §3.12; as to legislative proceedings, charter
§3.10; as to prohibitions, charter §3.7; as to revision of ordinances, charter
§3.11; as to taxes levied for the operation of public parks, charter §3.15;
as to vacancies—forfeiture of office—filling of vacancies, charter §3.8; as to
where powers vested, charter §3.1.
A. No person shall join in nominating more than one (1) nominee for each
office to be filled; and no person shall accept a nomination to, or be
published as a candidate for, more than one (1) office.
B. No certificate of nomination shall contain the name of more than one (1)
candidate for each office to be filled.
Section
105.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
105.050
100:23

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 110.010. Composition.8 [R.O. 2009 §30.01]
There shall be a City Council of one (1) member from each of the ten (10)
wards, nominated and elected by the qualified registered voters of their
respective wards, as provided in Article IX of the City Charter.
Section 110.020. Qualifications and Terms.9 [R.O. 2009 §30.02; CC
1981 §2-23; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 89-40, 2-23-1989]
No person shall be Council member unless he/she is at least twenty-one
(21) years of age prior to taking office, a citizen of the United States, an
inhabitant of the City for two (2) years next preceding his/her election, a
qualified registered voter and shall be a resident of the ward from which
he/she is elected six (6) months next preceding his/her election. If a Council
member removes his/her residency from the ward from which he/she is
elected, his/her office shall be immediately vacated. No person shall be
elected or appointed to any office who shall at the time be in arrears for any
unpaid City taxes or forfeiture or defalcation in office.
Section 110.030. President, Vice President and Temporary Vice
President.10 [R.O. 2009 §30.03; CC 1981 §2-25; Ord. No. 86-2,
1-7-1986; Ord. No. 01-219, 9-21-2001; Ord. No. 01-268, 11-30-2001]
A. President.
1. The members of the Council at the first (1st) meeting following
their election shall elect one (1) of their members as President of
the Council who shall serve for a term of one (1) year and who shall
be Presiding Officer over the meetings of the Council and shall vote
as a member.
2. The election shall be by preprinted ballots listing all Council
members. A ballot shall be signed by the Council member casting
that ballot, shall be collected and counted by the City Clerk and
shall be kept by the City Clerk as open documents available for
public inspection. The President shall be elected by a majority of
those members present and voting.
B. Vice President. After the Council members have selected a President,
they shall select a Vice President using the same procedures required
for selection of the President. The Vice President shall perform the
functions of the President in the absence of the President, except when
the President has appointed a temporary replacement as provided by
ordinance. When the Vice President is fulfilling the functions of
8. Cross Reference—As to composition, election and terms, charter §3.3.
9. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
10.Cross Reference—As to president of the city council, charter §3.6.
Section
110.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
110.030
100:25
Section 110.040. Meetings. [R.O. 2009 §30.05; CC 1981 §2-22; Ord.
No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 86-91, 4-18-1986; Ord. No. 92-269,
11-12-1992]
Section 110.050. Keep Journal — Enforce Rules. [R.O. 2009 §30.08;
CC 1981 §2-26; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986]
The Council shall cause to be kept a journal of its proceedings, and the
"yeas" and "nays" of the members shall be entered on any question at the
President, the Vice President shall have all of the powers and duties of
the President, including the power to appoint a temporary replacement.
The Vice President shall hold the office for one (1) year.
C. Temporary Vice President.
1. In the event of the absence or incapacity of both the President and
Vice President, the Council may select one (1) of its members to
serve as temporary Vice President.
2. In the event of an emergency and of the absence or incapacity of
both the President and Vice President, the next Council member in
the line of succession, who is neither absent nor incapacitated,
shall serve as Vice President until the Vice President returns, or is
no longer incapacitated, or until a Council member higher in the
line of succession returns, or is no longer incapacitated, or until the
Council selects a temporary Vice President, whichever occurs first.
3. Following any election in which a Council member is elected and
following the appointment to fill a vacancy in any position of
Council member, the City Clerk shall determine by lottery the line
of succession for temporary Vice President and shall announce the
results to the Council at its next regular Council meeting following
the lottery.
A. The regular or stated meetings of the City Council shall be held on the
first (1st) and third (3rd) Tuesdays of each month at 7:00 P.M. or as soon
thereafter as practicable in the Council Chamber in the City Hall
Building, 200 North Second Street.
B. The City Council, at a previous meeting and upon two-thirds (2/3) vote
of the members present, may dispense with a meeting or set a different
date. Notice of such action shall be posted in the City Hall Building and
a copy given to newspapers published within the City.
C. The Mayor upon his/her own motion may, or at the request of three (3)
members of the Council, shall call a special meeting of the Council for a
time not earlier than twenty-four (24) hours after notice is given to all
members of the Council then in the City. Special meetings of the
Council may also be held at any time by the consent of all the members
of the Council, and such consent may be given either prior to or during
the special meeting.
Section
110.030
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
110.050
100:26
desire of any two (2) members. The Council may prescribe and enforce such
rules as may be necessary to secure the attendance of its members and the
expeditious transaction of its business.
Section 110.060. Power To Compel Attendance of Witnesses and
Production of Papers. [R.O. 2009 §30.09; CC 1981 §2-27; Ord. No.
86-2, 1-7-1986]
By a two-thirds (2/3) vote of its members, except when otherwise provided
by ordinance, the Council may compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of papers relating to any subject under consideration in which
the interest of the City is involved and to that end may authorize subpoenas
to be issued by the City Clerk and require the Chief of Police or any Police
Officer to serve the same. The President of the Council is hereby authorized
to administer oaths or affirmations to such witnesses.
Section 110.070. Votes Required To Adopt An Ordinance,
Resolution or Motion. [R.O. 2009 §30.10; Ord. No. 07-282,
11-9-2007]
A. Except as otherwise provided in the Charter, the affirmative vote of a
majority of the entire Council shall be necessary to adopt an ordinance,
resolution or motion.
B. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit a requirement of the affirmative
vote of more than a majority of the entire Council to adopt an
ordinance, resolution or motion.
C. For purposes of this Section, the words "entire Council" shall mean ten
(10) Council members regardless of vacancies and absent members.
Section
110.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
110.070
100:27

ARTICLE II
Ordinances and Resolutions
Section 110.080. Style of Enactment.11 [R.O. 2009 §30.20; CC 1981
§2-59; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986]
The style of the ordinances of the City shall be: "Be it ordained by the
Council of the City of St. Charles, Missouri, as follows:"
Section 110.090. Procedure For Passage. [R.O. 2009 §30.21; CC
1981 §2-60; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 92-191, 8-19-1992]
Section 110.100. Approval or Veto By Mayor — Reconsideration
Upon Veto. [R.O. 2009 §30.22; CC 1981 §2-61; Ord. No. 86-2,
1-7-1986; Ord. No. 92-192, 8-19-1992]
Every ordinance or resolution adopted by the Council shall be presented
to the Mayor for approval and if the Mayor shall sign the same, it shall
A. Except in the case of emergency ordinances, every proposed ordinance
shall be read by title in open Council meeting two (2) times before final
passage, and at least one (1) week shall elapse between introduction
and final passage. A copy of each proposed ordinance shall be provided
for each Council member at the time of its introduction, and at least
three (3) copies shall be provided for public inspection in the office of
the City Clerk until it is finally adopted or fails of adoption. Persons
interested in a proposed ordinance shall be given an opportunity to be
heard before the Council in accordance with such rules and regulations
as the Council may adopt. If the Council adopts an amendment to a
proposed ordinance which constitutes a change in substance, the
proposed ordinance as amended shall be placed on file for public
inspection in the office of the City Clerk for one (1) additional week
before final passage.
B. All emergency ordinances shall be read in full in open Council
meetings. An ordinance may be passed as an emergency measure on
the day of its introduction if it contains a declaration describing in clear
and specific terms the facts and reasons constituting the emergency
and receives the vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the Council.
An ordinance granting, reviewing or extending a franchise shall not be
passed as an emergency ordinance.
C. Every adopted ordinance shall become effective immediately upon
passage, adoption and approval by the Mayor or at any later date
specified therein except those ordinances excluded from referendum
provisions which shall become effective on final passage and approval.
Emergency ordinances shall become effective upon adoption or at any
later date specified therein.
11.Cross References—As to ordinances repealed, §110.110; as to ordinances unaffected,
§110.110; as to repeal or modification of ordinance, §110.110.
Section
110.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
110.100
100:29
be deemed approved and adopted. The Mayor may return an ordinance
or resolution with objections to the Council by delivering it to the City
Clerk's office at least two (2) days prior to the beginning of the next regular
meeting of the Council which meeting shall occur at least thirteen (13)
days following the Mayor's receipt and such ordinance or resolution shall
stand vetoed and shall not take effect without the approval of the mayor
unless adopted over the veto in the following manner: At the first (1st)
regular meeting next following receipt by the City Clerk of a disapproved
ordinance or resolution, the City Clerk shall cause the objection of the
Mayor to be entered upon the journal of the Council and the President of
the Council shall put to the Council the question: "Shall the ordinance or
resolution take effect the objections of the Mayor notwithstanding?" The
question may not be tabled for more than fourteen (14) days and shall not
be withdrawn. Should two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the entire Council
cast their votes in favor of overriding the Mayor's veto, the ordinance or
resolution shall take effect, otherwise it shall not take effect. Should the
Mayor neither sign nor return with objections any ordinance or resolution at
least two (2) days prior to the beginning of the next regular meeting of the
Council which meeting shall occur at least thirteen (13) days following the
Mayor's receipt, it shall be deemed approved and adopted. The Mayor shall
have the power to approve all or any part of any appropriation bill or the
general appropriation of the City budget or veto any item or all of the same.
The Council may override such veto in the same manner as an ordinance
or resolution provided three-fourths (¾) of the members cast their votes
in favor of overriding the Mayor's veto before the veto override shall be
effective.
Section 110.110. Repeal or Modification of Ordinance. [R.O. 2009
§30.24; CC 1981 §§2-63—2-67; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986]
A. Revival Or Re-Enactment. No ordinance shall be revived or re-enacted
by mere reference to the title thereof, but the same shall be set forth at
length as if it were an original ordinance.
B. Former Ordinances Not Revived. When an ordinance repealing a former
ordinance, clause or provision is itself repealed, such repeal shall not be
construed to revive such former ordinance, clause or provision, unless
it is otherwise expressly provided.
C. Effect Of Repeal Upon Acts, Rights And The Like. The repeal of any
ordinance or part of any ordinance shall not affect any act done or right
accrued or established in any proceeding, action, suit or prosecution
had or commence prior to the time when such repeal shall take effect,
but every such act, right or proceeding shall remain and continue as
valid and effectual as if such repeal had not taken place.
D. Effect Of Repeal Upon Previous Offenses Committed. No offense
committed and no fine, forfeiture or penalty incurred previous to the
time when the repeal of any ordinance shall take effect shall be
affected, released or in any way discharged by such repeal, but the trial,
conviction and punishment of all such offenses and the recovery of all
Section
110.100
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
110.110
100:30
such fines, forfeitures and penalties shall be had in all respects as if
such repeal had not taken place.
E. Effect Of Repeal Upon Actions Pending. No action, prosecution, suit or
proceeding pending at the time when the repeal of any ordinance or
part of any ordinance shall take effect shall be affected by such repeal,
but the same shall be continued and prosecuted to a final
determination, judgment or execution as if such repeal had not taken
place.
Section
110.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
110.110
100:31
Chapter 115
CITY OFFICIALS
Cross References—As to council members, ch. 110; as to director of
administration, charter art. V; as to city attorney, charter §§7.6—7.7; as to
director of finance, charter §7.4; as to municipal court—judge, charter §6.2;
as to marshal, charter §6.3.
Section
110.110
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
110.110
100:32
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 115.010. Definition — Qualifications. [R.O. 2009 §31.01; CC
1981 §§2-84, 2-86; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986]
Section 115.020. Administration of Oaths. [R.O. 2009 §31.02; CC
1981 §2-85; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986]
Section 115.030. Official Oath and Bond. [R.O. 2009 §31.03; CC
1981 §2-87; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 06-353, 12-20-2006]
Every officer of the City and his/her assistants and every Council member,
before entering upon the duties of his/her office, shall take and subscribe
to an oath or affirmation before some court of record in the County, the
City Clerk or any person authorized by law to administer oaths that he/
she possesses all the qualifications prescribed for his/her office by law; that
he/she will support the Constitution of the United States and of the State,
the provisions of all laws of the State affecting Cities of this class and the
ordinances of the City and faithfully demean himself/herself in office, which
official oath or affirmation shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk. Every
officer of the City, when required by law or ordinance, shall, within fifteen
(15) days after his/her election or appointment and before entering upon
the discharge of the duties of his/her office, give bond to the City, approved
A. As used in this Chapter, the following term shall have this prescribed
meaning:
OFFICER — Any person elected or appointed to a position in the City
Government pursuant to the City Charter.
B. Qualifications. All officers elected or appointed to office under the City
Charter shall be qualified voters under the laws and the Constitution of
the State. No person shall be elected or appointed to any office who
shall at the time be in arrears for any unpaid taxes or forfeiture or
defalcation in office.
A. The Mayor, Municipal Judge and City Clerk are authorized and
empowered to administer oaths and affirmations in the following cases:
1. The Mayor. To witnesses or other persons touching any subject
under consideration by the Council in which the interest of the City
is involved.
2. The Municipal Judge. To witnesses, jurors or other persons relating
to any trial or other proceedings within the jurisdiction of his/her
court.
3. The City Clerk. To any person certifying to any demand or claim
against the City, touching the correctness of the same or to any
witness or juror in any condemnation proceeding or any elective or
appointive officer to his/her official oath.
Section
115.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
115.030
100:33
by the Mayor, in such sum and with such sureties as shall be designated
by ordinance, conditioned for the faithful performance of his/her duties and
that he/she will pay over all monies belonging to the City, as provided by
law, that may come into his/her hands. If any person elected or appointed
to any office shall fail to take and subscribe such oath or affirmation or to
give bond as herein required, his/her office shall be deemed vacant. For any
breach or condition of any such bond, suit may be instituted thereon by the
City, or by any person in the name of the City, for the use of such person.
Section 115.040. Bond Schedule. [R.O. 2009 §31.04; CC 1981 §2-88;
Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
Each officer and employee of the City shall furnish a bond not less than the
amount as follows:
Director of Finance $200,000.00
Municipal Court Clerk $100,000.00
Mayor $10,000.00
Director of Administration $10,000.00
Finance Specialist $10,000.00
Payroll Technician $10,000.00
Evidence Officer, Police Department $10,000.00
Accounting Technician $10,000.00
Humane Supervisor $5,000.00
Building Maintenance Superintendent $5,000.00
Fire Chief $5,000.00
Cashier and License Inspector, Finance
Department
$5,000.00
Cashier, Water Department (4) $5,000.00
Part-time Municipal Clerk $5,000.00
City Clerk $2,000.00
Police Chief $2,000.00
Waterworks Superintendent $2,000.00
Assistant City Engineer $2,000.00
Sexton $2,000.00
Secretary II, Police Department $5,000.00
Secretary II, Fire Department $2,000.00
Secretary II, Planning Department $2,000.00
Secretary I, Engineering Department $2,000.00
Secretary I, Personnel $2,000.00
Section
115.030
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
115.040
100:34
Secretary I, Community Development
Office
$2,000.00
Secretary I, Finance Department $2,000.00
Section 115.050. Resignations. [R.O. 2009 §31.05; CC 1981 §2-89;
Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
Any officer or employee desiring to resign shall do so in writing. All
resignations shall be addressed and delivered to the Mayor.
Section 115.060. Elected Officials Transition. [R.O. 2009 §31.06; CC
1981 §2-82; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986]
Section 115.070. Legal Representation of City Officers and
Employees. [R.O. 2009 §31.07; CC 1981 §2-83; Ord. No. 86-2,
1-7-1986]
Section 115.080. Acceptance of Gifts. [R.O. 2009 §31.08; CC 1981
§2-1; Ord. No. 92-246, 10-13-1992]
A. This Section shall be known as the City's "Elected Officials Transition
Ordinance".
B. Incoming office holders for the positions of Mayor and Municipal Judge
may at their own discretion hire the outgoing previous office holders for
a period not to exceed twenty-one (21) days as an assistant to aid in the
transition process. During the period of time for which the outgoing
officeholder is hired as a consultant, he/she shall be paid at the same
rate as he/she was receiving while in office, including all extra benefits.
A. The City shall offer legal assistance to its officers and employees who
are defendants in any cause of action resulting from or alleged to result
from an error or omission while performing the duties and
responsibilities of such officers or employees.
B. The City may provide, by insurance, protection to such officers or
employees for legal costs and recovery as the City Council shall
determine.
C. Any officer or employee may request independent legal advice or
representation; any cost to the City shall be subject to the approval
described in Section 120.170.
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms
as used in this Section are defined as follows:
GIFT — Anything of value given to a person whether tangible or
intangible which would reasonably be considered of worth, use or
service to the person to whom it is conferred.
1. A gift includes, but is not limited to:
Section
115.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
115.080
100:35
a. Money;
b. Products or merchandise;
c. Works of art or collectibles;
d. Stocks, bonds, notes or options;
e. An interest in real property;
f. Contracts or a promise of a future interest in a contract;
g. An interest or a promise of a future interest in a business;
h. Meals, beverages or lodging;
i. Transportation;
j. Services, including loaned employees;
k. Loans, loan guarantees, co-signing;
l. Forgiveness of a debt;
m. Discounts or rebates not extended to the public generally;
n. Preferential treatment;
o. Tickets or admissions;
p. Free or discounted use of office facilities;
q. Loan of office equipment;
r. Promise or offer of present or future employment;
Use of autos, boats, apartments or other recreational or
lodging facilities; and
s.
t. Gratuity, favor, fee or compensation.
A gift does not include:
Gifts from any spouse, unemancipated child, grandparent,
grandchild, parent-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, nephew,
niece, aunt, uncle, great uncle, great aunt, first cousin, second
cousin or the spouse of any of these persons.
a.
Campaign contributions which are reported under Chapter
130, RSMo.
b.
Compensation from an employer, a sole proprietorship or a
partnership.
c.
Coffee, donuts and similar refreshments as a normal courtesy
incidental to the conduct of a business meeting.
d.
2.
Section
115.080
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
115.080
100:36
Section 115.090. Travel and Conference For Elected Officials. [R.O.
2009 §31.09; CC 1981 §2-463; Ord. No. 86-310, 12-8-1986; Ord. No.
SUBSTANTIAL INTEREST IN LEGISLATIVE OR ADMINISTRATIVE
ACTION — Persons, organizations or corporations which:
e. Costs of attending events or functions in official City capacity.
1. Are regulated by the City;
2. Provide goods and services to the City for compensation or profit;
3. Seek employment with the City or any agency thereof; or
Will be directly and substantially affected, either financially or
personally, by any contemplated legislation or agency of the City.
4.
B. No Council member, Mayor or spouse or dependent child of a Council
member or Mayor shall knowingly accept any gift from any person,
organization or corporation having a substantial interest in any
legislative or administrative action of the City, except as permitted in
this Section:
1. If the retail value of such gifts received in any calendar year from
such person, organization or corporation does not exceed fifty
dollars ($50.00), then the gifts may be accepted and no reporting is
required.
2. If the retail value of such gifts received in any calendar year from
such person, organization or corporation exceeds fifty dollars
($50.00) but is less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00), then the gifts
may be accepted, but must be reported as provided in this Section.
3. If the retail value of such gifts received in any calendar year from
such person, organization or corporation exceeds seventy-five
dollars ($75.00), then the gifts shall not be accepted.
C. Any Council member or Mayor required to report a gift under the
provisions of this Section shall file a report of the gift with the City
Clerk. Reports required by this Section shall be considered public
records.
D. The provisions of this Section are intended to avoid even the
appearance of conflict of interest and nothing contained in this Section
shall be construed to permit any actual conflict of interest or any
violation of any financial disclosure requirement.
E. Any award given in recognition of service by a professional, social or
service organization and any food, lodging, honorariums, registration
or similar courtesies given by such organizations in exchange for
presentations or other services to the organizations may be accepted
regardless of value, but shall be reported as provided in this Section.
Section
115.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
115.090
100:37
87-6, 1-20-1987; Ord. No. 89-193, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 94-314,
12-7-1994; Ord. No. 95-140, 5-17-1995; Ord. No. 08-87, 4-16-2008]
A. Purpose. Elected officials may attend conferences, seminars or training
sessions for the purpose of furthering their knowledge and education
on municipal government and programs and relating information
acquired to the City Council and administration.
B. Procedure.
1. Funding for travel on City business by elected officials must be
approved in advance by the City Council, based solely on budgetary
limitations for that fiscal year.
2. If an elected official has received an advance payment and fails to
submit the required expense list and remit any funds due the City
within the ten (10) days after such expenses are actually incurred,
the elected official shall receive no further expense or travel funds
until all requirements under this Section are fulfilled.
C. Travel And Conference Guidelines For Elected Officials.
1. Travel on City business should be on an economical basis.
2. Transportation and accommodations expenses will be funded by
the City at reasonable rates. First class transportation and
accommodations shall be allowed only if specific conditions make
other arrangements impossible.
3. Registration for the conference, seminar or training session will be
funded by the City.
4. Personal vehicle usage is reimbursable at a rate authorized by
Council to individuals providing their own transportation. This
allowance is intended to cover the cost of gas, maintenance and
insurance. The maximum amount of transportation allowance paid
to an individual for transportation by personal vehicle shall not
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the standard coach airfare, except
when the travel is entirely within the States of Missouri and Illinois,
in which case one hundred percent (100%) of the mileage will be
paid.
5. Garage parking and toll charges incurred as a result of City
business are reimbursable. Cab fares are reimbursable.
6. Meal expense is reimbursable, as follows:
a. Actual cost of meal is reimbursable with receipt; or
b. Per diem, without receipt, in the amounts established for
employees.
Section
115.090
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
115.100
100:38
Section 115.100. Corrupt Allowance of Claims. [R.O. 2009 §31.10;
CC 1981 §2-91(part); Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986]
Any member of the Council or officer of the City who shall, in his/her
official capacity or under color of his/her office, knowingly or willfully or
corruptly vote or assent to or report in favor of or allow or certify for
allowance any claim or demand against the City, which claim or demand
shall be on account of a contract or agreement not authorized by law and
the ordinances of the City, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth in Section
100.150 of this Code.
Section 115.110. Expense Reimbursement For Elected and
Appointed Officials and Employees. [R.O. 2009 §31.11; Ord. No.
94-314, 12-7-1994; Ord. No. 05-68, 3-7-2005]
A. In order to receive reimbursement for expenses, all elected and
appointed officials and all employees shall submit a voucher of their
expenses which certifies that the information on the voucher is true and
correct and that the expenses have been actually and necessarily
incurred in the performance of the official business of the City.
B. Expense Vouchers.
1. Appointed officials and employees shall submit an expense voucher
to the Finance Director who shall review the expense vouchers to
ensure reimbursement of only those expenses properly incurred.
2. Elected officials shall receive reimbursement for actual expenses
incurred while in office by submission of an expense
reimbursement request form to the Finance Director. The request
form shall set forth the period covered by the request, description
of each expense, dollar amount of reimbursement being requested
for each item of expense and such other information and
documentation required to comply with Federal tax law
requirements for exclusion of reimbursement payments from
income and reporting for tax purposes. Expense reimbursement
payments made without documentation in compliance with Federal
tax law requirements shall be reported to the Internal Revenue
Service in the manner required by law and all appropriate
withholdings of taxes shall be made as required by law. Mileage
shall be reimbursed at the rate currently in effect for City
employees.
C. Expense vouchers shall be submitted within ten (10) days after the
expenses are actually incurred; except that expense vouchers for
elected officials, when advance payments are not involved, shall be
submitted within ninety (90) days after the expenses are actually
incurred.
Section
115.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
115.110
100:39
Section 115.120. Written City Communications. [R.O. 2009 §31.12;
Ord. No. 09-07, 1-14-2009]
Written City communications that are distributed via mail on a City-wide
basis or to the public at large may contain a reference to both the Mayor
and Council, but shall not contain a reference to only the Mayor or to only
the Council; except this Section shall not apply to any official act pursuant
to Chapter 235 "Emergency Management" of the Code of Ordinances.
D. A cash advance for expenses may be authorized by the Finance Director
in instances when the projected expense to be incurred would pose a
financial burden on the elected official, appointed official or employee.
E. If an advance is authorized, then the voucher for the expenses actually
and necessarily incurred and the balance of the advance remaining
after the expenditures shall be submitted to the Finance Director within
ten (10) days after the expenses are actually incurred.
Section
115.110
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
115.120
100:40
ARTICLE II
Suspension and Removal
Section 115.130. Removal in General. [R.O. 2009 §31.20; CC 1981
§2-92; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986]
The Mayor may, with the consent of a majority of all the members elected to
the City Council, remove from office, for cause shown, any elective officer
of the City, such officer being first given opportunity, together with his/her
witnesses, to be heard before the Council sitting as a court of impeachment.
Any elective officer may, in like manner, for cause shown, be removed from
office by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all the members elected to the City
Council, independently of the Mayor's approval or recommendation.
Section 115.140. Suspension of Elective Officers. [R.O. 2009 §31.21;
CC 1981 §2-93; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986]
The Mayor is empowered to suspend from office any elective officer of
this City, with the consent of a majority of all members elected to the
City Council, pending trial of the charges preferred against such officer
for his/her removal as provided for in this Subsection and, in case of any
suspension authorized by this Subsection, may immediately appoint some
qualified person to fill such office and perform the duties thereof pending
the trial of such charges and until the reinstatement or removal of the
officer so suspended. Such appointee, before entering upon the discharge
of his/her duties, shall furnish bond to the City for the faithful performance
of his/her official duties.
Section 115.150. Method For Suspension. [R.O. 2009 §31.22; CC
1981 §2-94; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986]
A. The suspension of an elective officer shall be effected by a written order
to that effect, signed by the Mayor and filed by him/her in the office of
the City Clerk. Such order shall be accompanied by a written
specification of the charges on which such order is founded, formulated
in such manner and with such reasonable precision and detail as shall
fully apprise the accused of the particular charges he/she is to defend
against and signed by the Mayor, a certified copy of which order and
specifications of charges shall be forthwith made by the Clerk, under
the Seal of the City, and delivered to the Chief of Police who shall
forthwith deliver the same to the officer suspended or leave the same at
the usual place of abode of such suspended officer or with a member of
his/her family over the age of fifteen (15) years. The officer serving the
same shall make his/her return on the specification of charges filed by
the Mayor aforesaid, when, where and how he/she served the same and
sign his/her name thereto.
B. Upon the filing by the Mayor of such order of suspension and such
specification of charges and service of the same on the accused as
Section
115.130
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
115.150
100:41
Section 115.160. Trial of Suspended Officer. [R.O. 2009 §31.23; CC
1981 §2-95; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986]
Whenever any elective officer has been suspended, the Mayor shall lay the
specification of charges filed by him/her with the City Clerk before the
City Council at the first (1st) regular meeting thereafter or at a special
meeting of the Council called for that purpose and the Council shall, without
unnecessary delay, proceed to investigate the charges upon a day fixed by
them. Such day shall be fixed by resolution of the Council entered upon the
journal, whereupon the City Clerk shall forthwith make out a certified copy
of the resolution as well as another certified copy of such specifications of
charges, all under the Seal of the City, and deliver the same to the Chief
of Police who shall forthwith deliver the same to the officer suspended or
leave the same at the usual place of abode of such suspended officer with a
member of his/her family over the age of fifteen (15) years and the officer
serving the same shall make his/her written return of such service opposite
such resolution, on the margin of the journal of the Council, how, when and
where he/she served the same and subscribe his/her name thereto.
Section 115.170. Trials Procedures. [R.O. 2009 §31.24; CC 1981
§§2-96—2-106; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986]
herein directed, such accused officer shall stand suspended from office
until reinstated as provided by Section 115.200.
A. Procedure Generally. At the time set for the hearing, the Council shall
meet and proceed, according to such rules as they may adopt and as
provided by this Subsection, to hear the evidence against and in favor of
the accused and may adjourn from time to time, if necessary, until all
the evidence is heard. The City Council shall determine all questions of
law arising during the trial upon the admission of evidence, the
competency of evidence and otherwise.
B. Failure Of Accused To Appear. If the accused shall have been notified as
provided in Section 115.160, but shall not appear or, appearing, shall
fail or refuse to make defense to the charges preferred against him/her,
the Council may proceed ex parte.
C. Oath To Be Administered. At the time and place appointed for the trial
and before proceeding therewith, the Mayor, or in case the Mayor is the
accused, the President Pro Tem of the Council, shall administer to the
members of the Council there present and the Municipal Judge shall, at
the same time, administer to the Mayor, or in case the Mayor is the
accused to the President Pro Tem of the Council, an oath or affirmation,
impartially to try and determine the charges and do justice according to
law and the evidence.
D. Depositions. Depositions of witnesses beyond the jurisdiction of the
Council, or prevented by sickness or other sufficient cause from
attendance, may be read at the trial and investigation, if taken in
conformity with the laws of this State. The notice of the taking thereof,
Section
115.150
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
115.170
100:42
when taken on behalf of the accused, shall be served upon the City
Attorney or Mayor.
E. Issuance And Service Of Subpoenas. Subpoenas for witnesses to testify
at any trial provided for by this Subsection may be issued by the Mayor
or by the President Pro Tem of the Council in case the Mayor is the
accused and shall be served and returned by the Chief of Police or any
Police Officer of this City in the same manner as if issued by the
Municipal Judge and such officer and witnesses shall be entitled to the
same fee as would be allowed for like services in the Municipal Court.
F. Attendance Of Witnesses And Production Of Papers. The Council shall
have power by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of its members to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of papers relating to any
subject under consideration in which the interests of the City are
involved or for the purpose of such investigation and shall have a right
to issue an attachment and call on the proper officer of the City or any
Sheriff or Constable in the County to execute such process. The Mayor,
or in case the Mayor is the accused, the President Pro Tem of the
Council, shall have power to administer oaths to witnesses in all
proceedings before the Council under this Subsection.
G. Accused Entitled To Counsel. Upon any trial for removal from elective
office, the accused shall be entitled to be heard, whether in person or by
counsel, in his/her defense.
H. City Attorney To Prosecute. It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to
manage and prosecute all trials on behalf of the City for the removal of
any elective City Officer, unless he/she is the accused, in which event
the Council shall appoint a competent attorney, a qualified voter of such
City, to act in his/her stead during the trial proceedings.
I. Proceedings To Be Entered On Council Journal. The City Clerk shall
cause to be recorded the proceedings of the Council in all cases for the
removal of any elective City Officer.
J. Determination Of Guilty. As soon as all the evidence has been taken and
the case submitted, the Council shall vote by "yeas" and "nays" upon the
charges separately. The question upon each charge shall be "Is the
accused guilty?" If the Council, by a majority vote of all the members
elected to the City Council and who heard all the evidence, find the
accused guilty of either of the charges, the Mayor may, if a majority of
all the members elected to the City Council by resolution concur in the
same, remove the accused from office and declare his/her office vacant.
K. Accused Not To Take Part In Proceedings. Should any charges under
this Subsection be preferred against any member of the City Council or
the Mayor or any other elective City Officer, such accused officer shall
not participate as such officer in the trial proceedings or issue or serve
any process in relation thereto and if the Mayor be the accused, the
President Pro Tem of the Council shall preside and discharge the duties
of the Mayor under this Chapter.
Section
115.170
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
115.180
100:43
Section 115.180. Action Against Elective Officers. [R.O. 2009
§31.25; CC 1981 §2-107; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986]
The City Council, by a resolution adopted by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all
the members elected to the Council, may prefer any one (1) or more of the
charges authorizing removal against any elective officer of this City. Such
resolution shall specify the charges with the same particularity and detail
as in case of specification of charges filed by the Mayor and shall specify
the time when such charges will be investigated by the Council and shall
be spread at large upon the journal of the Council. The City Clerk shall,
without delay, make out a certified copy of such resolution, under the Seal
of the City, and deliver the same to the Chief of Police who shall forthwith
deliver the same to the accused or leave the same at his/her usual place of
abode with a member of his/her family over the age of fifteen (15) years. The
officer serving such resolution shall certify in writing, opposite the same
on the margin of the journal of the Council, how, when and where he/she
served the resolution and subscribe his/her name thereto. From the time of
such service on him/her of such resolution, such accused officer shall stand
suspended from office until reinstated as provided in Section 115.200. The
conduct and proceedings pertaining to an investigation under this Section
shall be carried on in the same manner as is provided by this Section for
investigation of charges preferred by the Mayor. As soon as all the evidence
has been taken on charges preferred by the Council and the case submitted,
the Council shall vote by "yeas" and "nays" upon the charges separately. The
question upon each charge shall be: "Is the accused guilty?" If the Council,
by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all the members elected to the City Council and
who hear all of the evidence, find the accused guilty, such Council may then,
by resolution of a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all the members elected to the
Council, remove the accused from office and declare his/her office vacant.
Section 115.190. Suspended or Removed Officers Prohibited From
Performing Official Duties. [R.O. 2009 §31.26; CC 1981 §2-109; Ord.
No. 86-2, 1-7-1986]
Section 115.200. Reinstatement. [R.O. 2009 §31.27; CC 1981
§2-110; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986]
If the accused shall be found not guilty or shall not be removed from office
as provided by this Section, he/she shall be reinstated by the Mayor or the
Council, or by both, as the case may be.
A. It shall be unlawful for any officer of the City, during a suspension from
office, to perform or attempt to perform any official duty.
B. Every elective or appointive officer of this City, after being removed
from office, shall be notified of such fact in writing by the Mayor or the
President Pro Tem of the Council in case the Mayor is the accused and it
shall be unlawful for any such officer, after having been legally removed
from office and having notice of such removal, to perform any official
act or attempt to perform any official act as such officer.
Section
115.180
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
115.200
100:44
ARTICLE III
Mayor — City Clerk
Section 115.210. Mayor.12 [R.O. 2009 §31.40; CC 1981 §2-131; Ord.
No. 86-2, 1-7-1986]
At the general City election to be held the first (1st) Tuesday after the first
(1st) Monday in April every four (4) years, the qualified voters of the City
shall elect some suitable person as Mayor of the City, who shall be the Chief
Executive Officer thereof and who shall hold office for four (4) years.
Section 115.220. Powers and Duties.13 [R.O. 2009 §31.41; CC 1981
§§2-132—2-135; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986]
Section 115.230. City Clerk.14 [R.O. 2009 §31.42; CC 1981 §2-121;
Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986]
There shall be a City Clerk who shall be appointed and may be removed by
the City Council as provided by Section 3.9 of the City Charter. The City
Clerk shall have the powers and duties prescribed by Section 3.9 and other
Sections of the City Charter and by ordinance.
Section 115.240. Duties of Clerk — Secretary of Standing
Committees. [R.O. 2009 §31.43; CC 1981 §§2-122—2-123; Ord. No.
86-2, 1-7-1986]
A. The Mayor shall have the powers and duties presented by Section 4.3
and other Sections of the City Charter.
B. The Mayor may attend all departmental meetings and participate in
deliberations and discussions at those meetings.
C. The Mayor shall appoint and supervise the Director of Emergency
Management and shall have such other powers and duties over the
Office of Emergency Management as may be provided in Chapter 235 of
this Code.
D. The Mayor shall report to the City Council all violations or neglect of
duty on the part of any City Officer which shall come to his/her
knowledge.
A. The City Clerk shall have the custody of and safely keep the common
Seal of the City, the public records, the originals of ordinances and
resolutions of the City Council and such other records, documents and
papers of a public nature as may be delivered into the Clerk's custody.
The Clerk shall affix the common Seal of the City to all public
12.Cross References—As to compensation, charter §4.4; as to mayor, charter §4.1; as to
election, term and qualifications, charter §4.2; as to prohibition—holding other public
office, charter §4.6; as to vacancy—forfeiture of office—filling of vacancies, charter §4.5.
13.Cross Reference—As to powers and duties, charter §4.3.
14.Cross Reference—As to city clerk, charter §3.9.
Section
115.210
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
115.240
100:45
Section 115.250. Assistant City Clerk. [R.O. 2009 §31.44; CC 1981
§2-124; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986]
The City Clerk is authorized and empowered, subject to the approval of the
City Council, to employ some suitable person as Assistant City Clerk; and
further, to employ suitable persons as deputies and stenographers, in such
number as may be approved by the City Council from time to time, to aid
and assist the City Clerk in the duties of his/her office.
Section 115.260. Temporary Clerk. [R.O. 2009 §31.45; CC 1981
§2-125; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986]
Whenever, for any reason, the City Clerk is unable to perform the duties
of his/her office, the City Council may, by resolution, appoint a temporary
Clerk who shall have all the power and perform all the duties of the regular
Clerk and shall receive the same salary for the time he/she so acts.
Section 115.270. (Reserved)15
instruments and official acts of the Mayor, which by law or ordinances
are required to be so attested and countersign the same and affix the
common Seal to and certify to any record, document, copies of papers
or ordinances that may be required for evidence in any court of this
State or the United States by any individual or that may be required for
the use of any officer of the City and shall furnish to the City Attorney
any record or document in the Clerk's office necessary to be used in
any proceeding in court to which the City is a party. The Clerk shall
attend all meetings of the City Council and keep a correct journal of
its proceedings. The Clerk shall prepare all certificates of election,
commissions, appointments and all other official documents required
by ordinances to be issued or which the Mayor, in the discharge of his/
her duty, is required to issue and countersign and affix the common
Seal thereto and keep a record of all such certificates of elections,
commissions, appointments and documents. The Clerk shall record the
official bonds of all City Officers and the bonds of all other persons
executed to the City placed in the Clerk's custody. The Clerk shall
record all City ordinances passed and shall neatly label and file for
safekeeping the original roll and all ordinances and resolutions of the
City Council and such other vouchers, papers, records and documents
that may be delivered into the Clerk's custody. The Clerk shall carefully
and promptly execute every official act that may be required of the City
Clerk by the laws of the State and the ordinances of the City. The Clerk
shall keep a copy of all contracts approved by ordinance.
B. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to serve as secretary of the
standing committees of the City Council and he/she shall prepare such
reports as may be necessary and required for the committees from time
to time.
Section
115.240
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
115.270
100:46
15.Editor's Note: Former Section 115.270, Furnished Copies of Records, derived from R.O.
2009 §31.46, CC 1981 §2-126 and Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986, was repealed 11-17-2015 by §1
of Ord. No. 15-259. See Sections 115.375 through 115.400, Public Records, Public
Meetings and Votes.
Section
115.270
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
115.270
100:47

ARTICLE IV
Financial Disclosure
Section 115.280. Declaration of Policy. [R.O. 2009 §31.60; CC 1981
§2-551; Ord. No. 93-184, 8-25-1993; Ord. No. 94-212, 8-17-1994;
Ord. No. 00-239, 9-6-2000; Ord. No. 08-157, 8-20-2008]
The proper operation of municipal government requires that public officials
and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people;
that government decisions and policy be made in the proper channels of
the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain;
and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In
recognition of these goals, there is established a procedure for disclosure
by certain officials and employees of private financial or other interests in
matters affecting the City.
Section 115.290. Authority. [R.O. 2009 §31.61; CC 1981 §2-552;
Ord. No. 93-184, 8-25-1993; Ord. No. 94-212, 8-17-1994; Ord. No.
00-239, 9-6-2000; Ord. No. 08-157, 8-20-2008]
This Article is enacted under the authority of Section 105.485.4, RSMo.,
which authorizes the City to adopt its own method of disclosing potential
conflicts of interest and substantial interests and thereby excludes the City
and its officers and employees from the requirements of Section 105.485.2,
RSMo.
Section 115.300. Substantial Personal or Private Interest Report.
[R.O. 2009 §31.62; CC 1981 §2-553; Ord. No. 93-184, 8-25-1993;
Ord. No. 94-212, 8-17-1994; Ord. No. 00-239, 9-6-2000; Ord. No.
08-157, 8-20-2008]
A. Any member of the City Council who has a substantial personal or
private interest in any measure, bill, order or ordinance proposed or
pending before the City Council shall, before passing on the measure,
bill, order or ordinance, file a written report of the nature of the interest
with the City Clerk and such statement shall be recorded in the City's
journal or other record of proceedings.
B. Any member of the City Council shall be deemed to have complied with
the requirements of this Section if the member has filed, at any time
before the member passes on such measure, bill, order or ordinance, a
financial interest statement pursuant to Sections 105.483 through
105.492, RSMo., which discloses the basis for the member's substantial
personal or private interest or interests that the member may have
therein. Any such member may amend the member's financial interest
statement to disclose any subsequently acquired substantial interest at
any time before the member passes on any measure, bill, order or
ordinance and shall be relieved of the provisions of Subsection (A) of
this Section.
C. As used in this Section, the following terms mean:
Section
115.280
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
115.300
100:49
Section 115.310. Persons Required To File Financial Disclosure
Reports. [R.O. 2009 §31.63; CC 1981 §2-554; Ord. No. 93-184,
8-25-1993; Ord. No. 94-212, 8-17-1994; Ord. No. 00-239, 9-6-2000;
Ord. No. 04-176, 8-4-2004; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007; Ord. No.
08-157, 8-20-2008;Ord. No. 17-180 § 1, 9-20-2017; Ord. No. 18-175;
8-21-2018]
SUBSTANTIAL PERSONAL OR PRIVATE INTEREST IN ANY
MEASURE, BILL, ORDER OR ORDINANCE — Any interest in a
measure, bill, order or ordinance which results from a substantial
interest in a business entity.
SUBSTANTIAL INTEREST — Ownership by the individual, spouse or
dependent children, whether singularly or collectively, directly or
indirectly, of ten percent (10%) or more of any business entity or of any
interest having a value of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more
or the receipt by an individual, spouse or dependent children, whether
singularly or collectively, of a salary, gratuity or other compensation
or remuneration of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more per year
from any individual, partnership, organization or association within any
calendar year.
A. The following persons shall disclose the information required by
Section 115.320 of this Chapter:
1. Mayor;
2. Council members;
3. Candidates for Mayor or Council;
4. Director of Administration;
5. City Attorney and Assistant City Attorney;
6. City Clerk;
7. Purchasing Coordinator;
8. Director of Public Works;
9. Director of Community Development;
10. Director of Finance;
11. Director of Parks and Recreation;
12. Police Chief;
13. Fire Chief;
14. Director of Convention and Visitors Bureau;
15. Director of Economic Development;
Section
115.300
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
115.310
100:50
Section 115.320. Financial Disclosure Reports. [R.O. 2009 §31.64;
CC 1981 §2-555; Ord. No. 93-184, 8-25-1993; Ord. No. 94-212,
8-17-1994; Ord. No. 97-387, 11-5-1997; Ord. No. 00-239, 9-6-2000;
Ord. No. 08-157, 8-20-2008]
16. Director of Human Resources;
17. Director of Information Technology;
18. Director of Engineering; and
19. Members of boards and commissions:
a. Board of Adjustment;
b. Planning and Zoning Commission;
c. Board of Public Works; and
d. Parks and Recreation Board.
A. The persons listed in Section 115.310 of this Chapter shall disclose the
following information if such transactions were engaged in during the
previous calendar year:
1. For such person and all persons within the first degree of
consanguinity or affinity of such person, the date and the identities
of the parties to each transaction with a total value in excess of five
hundred dollars ($500.00), if any, that such person had with the
City, other than compensation received as an employee or payment
of any tax, fee or penalty due to the City and other than transfers
for no consideration to the City; and
2. The date and the identities of the parties to each transaction known
to the person with a total value in excess of five hundred dollars
($500.00), if any, that any business entity in which such person had
a substantial interest, had with the City, other than payment of any
tax, fee or penalty due to the City or transactions involving
payment for providing utility service to the City and other than
transfers for no consideration to the City.
B. The persons listed in Section 115.310 of this Chapter shall also disclose
for the previous calendar year the following information:
1. The name and address of each of the employers of such person for
whom income of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more was
received during the year covered by the statement;
2. The name and address of each sole proprietorship that the person
owned; the name, address and the general nature of the business
conducted of each general partnership and joint venture in which
the person was a partner or participant; the name and address of
each partner or co-participant for each partnership or joint venture
Section
115.310
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
115.320
100:51
unless such names and addresses are filed by the partnership
or joint venture with the Secretary of State; the names, address
and general nature of the business conducted of any closely held
corporation or limited partnership in which the person owned ten
percent (10%) or more of any class of the outstanding stock or
limited partnership that is listed on a regulated stock exchange
or automated quotation system in which the person owned two
percent (2%) or more of any class of outstanding stock, limited
partnership units or other equity interests;
3. The name and address of each corporation for which such person
served in the capacity of a director, officer or receiver.
C. The financial interest statements shall be filed at the following times,
but no person is required to file more than one (1) financial interest
statement in any calendar year:
1. Each candidate for elective office shall file a financial interest
statement no later than fourteen (14) days after the close of filing
at which the candidate seeks nomination or election and the
statement shall be for the twelve (12) months prior to the closing
date, except that in the event an individual does not become a
candidate until after the date of certification for candidates, the
statement shall be filed within fourteen (14) days of becoming a
candidate. An individual required to file a financial interest
statement because of candidacy for office prior to a primary
election in accordance with this Section is also required to amend
such statement no later than the close of business on Monday prior
to the general election to reflect any changes in financial interest
during the interim. The City Clerk and the appropriate election
authority shall provide to the candidate at the time of filing for
election written notice of the candidate's obligation to file pursuant
to this Section and Sections 105.483 through 105.492, RSMo., and
the candidate shall sign a statement acknowledging receipt of such
notice;
2. Each person appointed to office and each official or employee
described in Section 115.310 who is not otherwise covered in this
Subsection shall file the statement within thirty (30) days of such
appointment or employment;
3. Every other person required by this Chapter to file a financial
interest statement shall file the statement annually not later than
May first (1st) and the statement shall cover the calendar year
ending the immediately preceding December thirty-first (31st);
provided that any member of the City Council may supplement the
financial interest statement to report additional interests acquired
after December thirty-first (31st) of the covered year until the date
of filing of the financial interest statement;
Section
115.320
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
115.320
100:52
Section 115.330. Notice. [R.O. 2009 §31.65; CC 1981 §2-556; Ord.
No. 93-184, 8-25-1993; Ord. No. 94-212, 8-17-1994; Ord. No.
00-239, 9-6-2000; Ord. No. 08-157, 8-20-2008]
The City Clerk shall notify the persons listed in Section 115.310 of the
requirements of this Article and of the State Statutes at least thirty (30)
days prior to any filing deadline.
Section 115.340. Forms. [R.O. 2009 §31.66; CC 1981 §2-557; Ord.
No. 93-184, 8-25-1993; Ord. No. 94-212, 8-17-1994; Ord. No.
00-239, 9-6-2000; Ord. No. 08-157, 8-20-2008]
The City Clerk shall make available to the persons listed in Section 115.310
the appropriate forms for filing in compliance with the State Statutes and
this Article.
Section 115.350. Filing of Reports. [R.O. 2009 §31.67; CC 1981
§2-558; Ord. No. 93-184, 8-25-1993; Ord. No. 94-212, 8-17-1994;
Ord. No. 00-239, 9-6-2000; Ord. No. 08-157, 8-20-2008]
The reports, in the format of a signed letter, shall be filed with the State
Ethics Commission and the City Clerk. The reports shall be available for
public inspection and copying during normal business hours.
Section 115.360. Filing of Ordinance. [R.O. 2009 §31.68; CC 1981
§2-559; Ord. No. 93-184, 8-25-1993; Ord. No. 94-212, 8-17-1994;
Ord. No. 00-239, 9-6-2000; Ord. No. 08-157, 8-20-2008]
The City Clerk shall send a certified copy of the ordinance upon which this
Article is based to the Missouri Ethics Commission within ten (10) days of
its adoption.
4. The deadline for filing any statement shall be 5:00 P.M. of the last
day designated for filing the statement. When the last day of filing
falls on a Saturday or Sunday or on an official State holiday, the
deadline for filing is extended to 5:00 P.M. on the next day which is
not a Saturday or Sunday or official holiday. Any statement
required within a specified time shall be deemed to be timely filed if
it is postmarked not later than Midnight of the day previous to the
last day designated for filing the statement.
Section
115.320
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
115.360
100:53

ARTICLE V
Public Records, Public Meetings and Votes
Section 115.375. Definitions. [Ord. No. 15-259 §2, 11-17-2015]
For purposes of this Article, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Unless specifically
defined below, words or phrases used in this Article shall be interpreted so
as to give them the same meaning they have in common usage and to give
this Article its most reasonable application.
CLOSED MEETING — Any meeting closed to the public.
CLOSED RECORD — Any record closed to the public.
CLOSED VOTE — Any vote closed to the public.
COPYING — If requested by a member of the public, copies provided
as detailed in the provisions of this Article, if duplication equipment is
available.
PUBLIC BUSINESS — All matters which relate in any way to the
performance of the City's functions or the conduct of its business.
PUBLIC GOVERNMENTAL BODY — Any legislative, administrative,
governmental entity created by the Constitution or Statutes of this State,
by order or ordinance of the City, judicial entities when operating in an
administrative capacity or by executive order, including:
PUBLIC MEETING — Any meeting of a public governmental body subject
to this Article at which any public business is discussed, decided or public
policy formulated, whether such meeting is conducted in person or by
means of communication equipment, including, but not limited to,
conference call, video conference. Internet chat or Internet message board.
The term "public meeting" shall not include an informal gathering of
members of a public governmental body for ministerial or social purposes
when there is no intent to avoid the purposes of this Chapter, but the
Any advisory committee or commission appointed by the Mayor or City
Council;
1.
Any other legislative or administrative governmental deliberative body
under the direction of three (3) or more elected or appointed members
having rulemaking or quasi-judicial power;
2.
Any committee appointed by or at the direction of any of the entities
and which is authorized to report to any of the above named entities,
any advisory committee appointed by or at the direction of any of the
named entities for the specific purpose of recommending, directly to
the City Council or the Mayor and/or Clerk, policy or policy revisions
or expenditures of public funds. The custodian of the records of any
public governmental body shall maintain a list of the policy advisory
committees described in this Subsection; and
3.
4. Any quasi-public governmental body.
Section
115.375
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
115.375
100:55
term shall include a public vote of all or a majority of the members of a
public governmental body, by electronic communication or any other means,
conducted in lieu of holding a public meeting with the members of the
public governmental body gathered at one (1) location in order to conduct
public business.
PUBLIC RECORD — Any record, whether written or electronically stored,
retained by or of any public governmental body including any report, survey,
memorandum or other document or study prepared for the public
governmental body by a consultant or other professional service paid for in
whole or in part by public funds, including records created or maintained by
private contractors under an agreement with a public governmental body
or on behalf of a public governmental body. The term "public record" shall
not include any internal memorandum or letter received or prepared by or
on behalf of a member of a public governmental body consisting of advice,
opinions and recommendations in connection with the deliberative decisionmaking
process of said body unless such records are retained by the public
governmental body or presented at a public meeting. Any document or
study prepared for a public governmental body by a consultant or other
professional service as described in this Chapter shall be retained by the
public governmental body in the same manner as any other public record.
PUBLIC VOTE — Any vote, whether conducted in person, by telephone or
by any other electronic means, cast at any public meeting of any public
governmental body.
QUASI-PUBLIC GOVERNMENTAL BODY — Any person, corporation or
partnership organized or authorized to do business in the State of Missouri
pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 352, 353 or 355, of the Revised
Statutes of the State of Missouri, as amended, or unincorporated
association which either:
Section 115.380. Custodian of Records. [Ord. No. 15-259 § 2,
11-17-2015]
The City Clerk shall be the custodian of records of the City of St. Charles
and shall keep the archived records of the City and the minutes of the City
Has as its primary purpose to enter into contracts with public
governmental bodies, or to engage primarily in activities carried out
pursuant to an agreement or agreements with public governmental
bodies; or
1.
Performs a public function, as evidenced by a statutorily based capacity,
to confer or otherwise advance, through approval, recommendation or
other means, the allocation or issuance of tax credits, tax abatement,
public debt, tax exempt debt, rights of eminent domain, or the
contracting of lease-back agreements on structures whose annualized
payments commit public tax revenues; or any association that directly
accepts the appropriation of money from a public governmental body,
but only to the extent that a meeting, record or vote relates to such
appropriation.
2.
Section
115.375
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
115.380
100:56
Council. Each department of the City shall name a custodian of records for
City records kept within that department. The identity and location of a
department's custodian of records shall be made available upon request to
the City Clerk. Each custodian of records may designate deputy custodians
of records.
Section 115.385. Public Access To Records. [Ord. No. 15-259 § 2,
11-17-2015]
A. Except as otherwise provided by law, the City shall provide access to
and, upon request, furnish copies of open public records subject to the
provisions of Section 115.390 relating to copying fees. No person shall
remove any original public record from a City repository where such
record is regularly stored or from the office of any custodian of records
without written permission of the custodian. No public governmental
body shall grant to any person or entity, whether by contract, license or
otherwise, the exclusive right to access and disseminate any public
record unless the granting of such right is necessary to facilitate
coordination with, or uniformity among, industry regulators having
similar authority.
B. The custodian of records may require persons seeking access to public
records to submit such request in writing or on a form designated by
the custodian for such purpose. Such written request shall be
sufficiently particular to reasonably apprise the custodian of the
records sought.
C. Each request for access to a public record shall be acted upon as soon
as possible but in no event later than the end of the third business day
following the date the request is received by the custodian of records. If
records are requested in a certain format, the public body shall provide
the records in the requested format, if such format is available. If
access to the public record is not granted immediately, the custodian
shall give a detailed explanation of the cause for further delay and the
place and earliest time and date that the record will be available for
inspection. This period for document production may exceed three (3)
days for reasonable cause.
D. If a request for access is denied, the custodian of records shall, upon
request, provide a written statement of the grounds for such denial.
Such statement shall cite the specific provision of law under which
access is denied and shall be furnished to the requestor no later than
the end of the third business day following the date that the request for
the statement is received.
E. Any member of a public governmental body who transmits any message
relating to public business by electronic means shall also concurrently
transmit that message to either the member's public office computer or
the custodian of records in the same format. The provisions of this
Subsection shall only apply to messages sent to other members of that
body so that, when counting the sender, a majority of the body's
Section
115.380
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
115.385
100:57
Section 115.390. Copying Fees. [Ord. No. 15-259 § 2, 11-17-2015]
Section 115.395. Meetings, Notice, Access and Minutes. [Ord. No.
15-259 § 2, 11-17-2015]
members are copied. Any such message received by the custodian or
at the member's office computer shall be a public record, subject,
however, to the exceptions for closed records as provided by law.
A. Fees for copying public records shall not exceed ten cents ($0.10) per
page for a paper copy not larger than nine (9) by fourteen (14) inches,
plus an hourly fee for duplicating time not to exceed the average hourly
wage rate, excluding benefits, for the clerical staff of the City. Research
time required for fulfilling records requests may be charged at the
actual cost of research time. Based on the scope of the request, the City
shall produce the copies using employees of the City that result in the
lowest amount of charges for search, research and duplication time.
Prior to producing copies of the requested records, the person
requesting the records may request the City to provide an estimate of
the cost to the person requesting the records. The custodian may
require payment prior to duplicating documents.
B. Fees for providing access to public records maintained on computer
facilities, recording tapes or disks, videotapes or films, pictures, maps,
slides, graphics, illustrations or similar audio or visual items or devices
and for paper copies larger than nine (9) by fourteen (14) inches shall
include only the cost of copies, staff time, which shall not exceed the
average hourly rate of pay for staff of the City required for making
copies and programming, if necessary, and the cost of the disk or tape
or other medium used for the duplication. Fees for maps, blueprints or
plats that require special expertise to duplicate may include the actual
rate of compensation for the trained personnel required to duplicate
such maps, blueprints or plats. If programming is required beyond the
customary and usual level to comply with a request for records or
information, the fees for compliance may include the actual costs of
such programming.
A. All public meetings shall be open to the public and public votes and
public records shall be open to the public for inspection and
duplication.
B. Each public governmental body shall give notice of the time, date and
place of each meeting and its tentative agenda in a manner reasonably
calculated to advise the public of the matters to be considered and if the
meeting will be conducted by telephone or other electronic means, the
notice of the meeting shall identify the mode by which the meeting will
be conducted and the designated location where the public may
observe and attend the meeting. If a public body plans to meet by
Internet chat, Internet message board or other computer link, it shall
post a notice of the meeting on its website in addition to its principal
Section
115.385
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
115.395
100:58
office and shall notify the public how to access that meeting.
Reasonable notice shall include making available copies of the notice to
any representative of the news media who requests notice of meetings
of a particular public governmental body concurrent with the notice
being made available to the members of the particular governmental
body and posting the notice on a bulletin board at City Hall or other
prominent place which is easily accessible to the public and clearly
designated for that purpose at the City Hall.
C. The notice shall be given at least twenty-four (24) hours, exclusive of
weekends and holidays when City Hall is closed, prior to the
commencement of any meeting of any governmental body unless for
good cause such notice is impossible or impractical, in which case as
much notice as is reasonably possible shall be given.
D. Each meeting shall be held at a place reasonably accessible to the
public and of sufficient size to accommodate the anticipated attendance
by members of the public and at a time reasonably convenient to the
public, unless for good cause such a place or time is impossible or
impractical. Every reasonable effort shall be made to grant special
access to the meeting to special needs or disabled persons.
E. When it is necessary to hold a meeting on less than twenty-four hours'
notice, or at a place that is not reasonably accessible to the public, or at
a time that is not reasonably convenient to the public, the nature of the
good cause justifying that departure from the normal requirements
shall be stated in the minutes.
F. A public governmental body shall allow for the recording by audiotape,
videotape or other electronic means of any open meeting. A public
governmental body may establish guidelines regarding the manner in
which such recording is conducted so as to minimize disruption to the
meeting. No audio recording of any meeting, record or vote closed
pursuant to the provisions of Section 610.021, RSMo., shall be allowed
without permission of the public body; any person who violates this
provision shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and punished by
imprisonment for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days, a fine not to
exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00), or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
G. A formally constituted subunit of a parent governmental body may
conduct a meeting without notice as required by this Section during a
lawful meeting of the parent governmental body, a recess in that
meeting or immediately following that meeting, if the meeting of the
subunit is publicly announced at the parent meeting and the subject of
the meeting reasonably coincides with the subjects discussed or acted
upon by the parent governmental body.
H. A journal or minutes of open and closed meetings shall be taken and
retained by the public governmental body, including, but not limited to,
a record of any votes taken at such meeting. The minutes shall include
Section
115.395
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
115.395
100:59
Section 115.400. Votes. [Ord. No. 15-259 § 2, 11-17-2015]
All votes shall be recorded, and when a roll call is taken, as to attribute
each "aye" and "nay" vote, or abstinence if not voting, to the name of the
individual member of the public governmental body. Votes taken during a
closed meeting shall be taken by roll call. All votes taken by roll call in
meetings of a public governmental body consisting of members who are all
elected, except and any committee established by a public governmental
body, shall be cast by members of the public governmental body who
are physically present and in attendance at the meeting or who are
participating via videoconferencing. When it is necessary to take votes by
roll call in a meeting of the public governmental body, due to an emergency
of the public body, with a quorum of the members of the public body
physically present and in attendance and less than a quorum of the
members of the public governmental body participating via telephone,
facsimile, Internet or any other voice or electronic means, the nature of
the emergency of the public body justifying that departure from the normal
requirements shall be stated in the minutes. Where such emergency exists,
the votes taken shall be regarded as if all members were physically present
and in attendance at the meeting.
Section 115.405. Remote Participation Policy. [Ord. No. 16-148 §1,
7-19-2016]
the date, time, place, members present, members absent and a record
of any votes taken.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Code of Ordinances to the
contrary, a member of a public governmental body may attend and
participate in a meeting of that body from a remote location via
videoconferencing; provided, attendance and participation in the
meeting is in compliance with the Remote Participation Policy set forth
in this Section and Missouri law.
B. Definitions. For purposes of this Section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:
BOARD MEMBER — Any elective or appointive member of a public
governmental body of the City of Saint Charles.
CLOSED MEETING — The same meaning as set forth in Section
610.010, RSMo., as amended.
OPEN MEETING LAW — Chapter 610, RSMo., as amended.
PUBLIC GOVERNMENTAL BODY — The same meaning as set forth in
Section 610.010, RSMo., as amended.
PUBLIC MEETING — The same meaning as set forth in Section
610.010, RSMo., as amended, but shall not include a closed meeting.
Section
115.395
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
115.405
100:60
QUASI-JUDICIAL PROCEEDING — Applies to the action of public
governmental bodies, acting in their administrative capacity, who are
required to investigate facts, or ascertain the existence of facts, hold
hearings, and draw conclusions from the facts, as a basis for their
official action, and to exercise discretion of a judicial nature. A
determination of whether a proceeding is quasi-judicial shall be guided
by whether the public governmental body exercised such traditional
judicial powers as the conducting of hearings at which witnesses may
be summoned and examined, documents subpoenaed, and judgments
handed down.
VIDEOCONFERENCE — A conference among board members of a
public governmental body remote from one (1) another who are linked
by interactive communication through duplex audio and video signals
transmitted over a telephone network, data network, or the Internet,
between and among board members of the pubic governmental body
and members of the public physically present at the meeting location.
During any videoconference both the visual and auditory
communications functions of the devices shall be used.
C. Policy Statement. It is the policy of the City of Saint Charles that any
board member of a public governmental body may attend and
participate in a public meeting of that body from a remote location via
videoconferencing; provided, attendance and participation is in
compliance with this policy and any other applicable law. This policy is
promulgated to promote greater participation in government. Board
members are encouraged to make all efforts to physically attend public
meetings whenever possible. Board members have a responsibility to
ensure that remote participation in a public meeting is not used to
thwart the purposes of the Open Meeting Law.16 Remote participation
will not be allowed solely for the convenience of the board member or
merely to avoid attending one or more particular public meetings.
D. Prerequisites. A board member shall be provided the opportunity to
attend a public meeting from a remote location if the board member
meets the following conditions and a majority of the board members
physically present at the public meeting vote to approve the remote
attendance.
1. The board member must notify the City Clerk at least two business
days before the public meeting of his/her intent to remotely
participate in the public meeting;
2. Board members who participate remotely and all persons present
at the public meeting location shall be clearly visible to the greatest
extent practicable and audible to each other;
3. The board member must assert one of the following reasons why he
or she is unable to physically attend a public meeting of the public
16.Editor's Note: See § 610.010, et seq., RSMo.
Section
115.405
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
115.405
100:61
governmental body of which he or she is a member, including either
because of:
a. Personal illness or disability;
b. Employment duties outside the City, military service or other
City business; or
c. A family or personal emergency;
4. A majority of all the members of the public governmental body
must be physically present at the meeting location; and
5. Not more than two board members shall be permitted to
participate remotely during any one (1) public meeting. If more
than two (2) board members desire to participate remotely during
the same public meeting, priority shall be granted to the two (2)
board members that first notified the City Clerk pursuant to
Subsection (D)(1) of this Section.
E. Technology. The public governmental body shall determine the method
of communication technology to be used for remote meeting
participation, subject to the availability of the technology and the
appropriation of funds. The public governmental body chairperson or, in
the chair's absence, the person chairing the meeting, may decide how
to address technical difficulties that arise as a result of utilizing remote
participation, but is encouraged, wherever possible, to suspend
discussion while reasonable efforts are made to correct any problem
that interferes with a remote participant's ability to see and hear or be
seen and heard clearly by persons present at the public meeting
location. If technical difficulties result in a remote participant being
disconnected from the public meeting, that fact and the time which the
disconnection occurred shall be noted in the meeting minutes.
F. Voting Procedures. After the meeting is called to order and the roll call
of board members physically present at the meeting occurs, then a roll
call vote shall be taken, considering the prerequisites set forth in
Subsection (D), on whether to allow a board member to participate
remotely.
G. Quorum And Vote Required. A quorum must be established by board
members physically present at the public meeting before it may
consider whether to allow a board member to participate in the public
meeting remotely. A vote of a majority of the board members physically
present shall be necessary to decide the issue. For the public meeting to
continue there shall always be a quorum physically present.
H. Minutes. The board member participating remotely shall be counted as
present by means of videoconference for that meeting if the board
member is allowed to participate in accordance with Subsection (G).
The meeting minutes shall state whether each board member is
physically present or present by videoconference.
Section
115.405
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
115.405
100:62
I. Participation By Remote Board Member. The board member permitted
to participate remotely will be able to express his or her comments
during the public meeting and participate in the same capacity as those
board members physically present, subject to all general public
meeting guidelines and procedures previously adopted and adhered to.
The remote board member shall be heard, considered, and counted as
to any vote taken. Accordingly, the name of any remote board member
shall be called during any vote taken, and his or her vote counted,
recorded and placed in the meeting minutes. A board member
participating remotely may leave a meeting and return as in the case of
any board member physically present, provided the board member
attending remotely shall announce his or her departure and return.
J. Voting. All votes taken during any meeting in which a board member
participates remotely shall be by roll call vote.
K. Closed Meetings. A majority of all the board members of a public
governmental body must be physically present at any closed meeting.
No board member may remotely participate in a closed meeting by
videoconference.
L. Quasi-Judicial Proceeding. No board member may remotely participate
in any quasi-judicial proceeding. If a quasi-judicial proceeding is only
part of a public meeting in which a board member is participating
remotely, that board member participating remotely shall abstain from
participating or voting in the quasi-judicial proceeding.
M. Costs. Payment of any costs associated with remote participation,
including videoconferencing and other audio and video equipment,
must be approved by the City.
Section
115.405
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
115.405
100:63
Chapter 120
DEPARTMENTS
Cross References—As to administrative code, charter §7.1; as to
administrative organization, charter art. VII.
Section
115.405
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
115.405
100:64
ARTICLE I
Department of Administration
Section 120.010. Director of Administration.17 [R.O. 2009 §32.001;
CC 1981 §2-141; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 07-162,
6-11-2007]
There shall be a Director of Administration who shall be appointed and may
be removed by the Mayor and City Council as provided by the City Charter,
Sections 5.1 and 5.2. The Director of Administration shall have the powers
and duties prescribed by Section 5.3 and other Sections of the City Charter
and by ordinance.
Section 120.020. Duty To Prescribe Rules and Regulations. [R.O.
2009 §32.002; CC 1981 §2-142; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No.
07-162, 6-11-2007]
In addition to the duties prescribed by the Charter, the Mayor shall
prescribe such administrative rules and regulations as may be deemed
necessary or expedient and not inconsistent with the Charter or the
ordinances of the City or agreements with employee groups for the general
conduct of the City's business and for the guidance of any two (2) or
more departments under his/her management in their relation with each
other and with other departments and offices of the City and other public
authorities. The Director of each department of the City shall, in like
manner, prescribe such rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary
and expedient for the proper conduct of his/her department, not
inconsistent with the Charter or ordinances of the City or the general
rules or regulations prescribed by the Mayor or agreements with employee
groups. All such rules and regulations may be revised or amended or added
to at any time by the officer having authority to prescribe them.
Section 120.030. Divisions of Departments. [R.O. 2009 §32.003; CC
1981 §2-143; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 87-96, 5-13-1987;
Ord. No. 02-128, 5-28-2002; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
The Department of Administration shall consist of the office of Mayor and
any other divisions or subdivisions as prescribed by the Mayor as may be
necessary to conduct the business of the Department.
17.Cross References—As to director of administration—appointment, qualifications, charter
§5.1; as to powers and duties, charter §5.3; as to removal, charter §5.2.
Section
120.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
120.030
100:65

ARTICLE II
Community Development Department
Section 120.040. Department Established — Director.18 [R.O. 2009
§32.015; CC 1981 §2-147; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 87-96,
5-13-1987; Ord. No. 04-176, 8-4-2004; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
There shall be a Community Development Department, the Director of
which shall be the Director of Community Development appointed by the
Mayor and City Council in accordance with Section 4.3(e) of the City
Charter. The Department of Community Development shall be responsible
for planning, zoning, Subdivision, development of the City and Code
enforcement. The Director shall act as technical advisor to the City Planning
and Zoning Commission and the Board of Adjustment. The Director shall
have such other duties as may be, from time to time, imposed by the Mayor.
Section 120.050. Divisions of Department. [R.O. 2009 §32.016; CC
1981 §2-148; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 87-96, 5-13-1987;
Ord. No. 97-61, 2-20-1997; Ord. No. 04-194, 8-13-2004; Ord. No.
13-071 §1, 4-3-2013; Ord. No. 17-159 § 1, 8-16-2017]
The Department of Community Development shall consist of the following
divisions: Planning Division, Code Enforcement Division, Building Division,
Administrative Services Division, Community Development Block Grant
(CDBG) Division and such other divisions as may be necessary to conduct
the business of the Department. The Director shall have authority to
establish Subdivisions of the foregoing Divisions of the Community
Development Department or sections under the divisions in order to
conduct the business of the Department.
18.Cross Reference—As to economic development commission, §§125.190 et seq.
Section
120.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
120.050
100:67

ARTICLE III
Convention and Visitors Bureau
Section 120.060. Department Established — Director.19 [R.O. 2009
§32.030; CC 1981 §2-165; Ord. No. 88-138, 7-7-1988; Ord. No.
02-241, 10-7-2002; Ord. No. 05-110, 4-25-2005; Ord. No. 07-162,
6-11-2007]
There shall be a department known as the Convention and Visitors Bureau,
the Director of which shall be the Director of Convention and Visitors
appointed by the Mayor and City Council in accordance with Section 4.3(e)
of the City Charter. The Bureau shall be responsible for the promotion of the
City, its attractions, hotels, motels, restaurants, commercial establishments,
businesses and historical sites to the touring public and meeting planners
and to manage the functions of promotion of the City and its environs. The
Bureau shall manage and operate the Visitor Center of the City and such
other establishments, places of information and business at such places and
at such locations as may be necessary to the fulfillment of the purposes of
the Bureau and the Convention and Visitors Commission.
Section 120.070. Authority To Establish Divisions. [R.O. 2009
§32.031; CC 1981 §2-166; Ord. No. 88-138, 7-7-1988; Ord. No.
07-162, 6-11-2007]
The Director of Convention and Visitors shall have the authority to establish
divisions or Subdivisions of the Bureau in order to conduct the business
of the Bureau. Such divisions and Subdivisions shall be described as to
function and the duty of such division, Subdivision or section head shall be
described in writing by the Director, subject to approval by the Convention
and Visitors Commission and Mayor.
Section 120.080. Quarterly Reports — Travel Request Forms. [R.O.
2009 §32.032; CC 1981 §§2-167—2-168; Ord. No. 88-138, 7-7-1988;
Ord. No. 95-124, 5-4-1995; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
A. Quarterly Reports.
1. The Director of Convention and Visitors shall make a quarterly
report to the City Council.
2. The quarterly report shall include minutes of the Commission
meetings since the last report and information concerning
expenditures, revenues and future programs and trips.
B. Travel Request Forms. The Director of Convention and Visitors and all
employees of the Convention and Visitors Bureau shall submit proper
travel request forms to the Mayor at least three (3) weeks prior to a
trip.
19.Cross Reference—As to greater St. Charles convention and visitors commission, §§125.240
et seq.
Section
120.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
120.080
100:69

ARTICLE IV
Department of Economic Development
Section 120.090. Department Established — Director.20 [R.O. 2009
§32.045; CC 1981 §2-169; Ord. No. 89-114, 6-14-1989; Ord. No.
07-162, 6-11-2007]
There shall be a Department of Economic Development, the Director of
which shall be the Director of Economic Development appointed by the
Mayor and City Council in accordance with Section 4.3(e) of the City
Charter. The Department of Economic Development shall be responsible
for planning and implementing a comprehensive business and industrial
economic development program.
20.Cross Reference—As to economic development commission, §§125.190 et seq.
Section
120.090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
120.090
100:71

ARTICLE V
Finance Department
Section 120.100. Department Established — Director.21 [R.O. 2009
§32.065; CC 1981 §2-149; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 07-162,
6-11-2007]
There shall be a Finance Department, the Director of which shall be the
Director of Finance, appointed by the Mayor and City Council in accordance
with Section 4.3(e) of the City Charter. The Director of Finance shall have
knowledge of municipal accounting and taxation and shall have experience
in budgeting and financial control. The Director of Finance shall have the
powers and duties prescribed by Section 7.4 and other Sections of the City
Charter and by ordinance.
Section 120.110. Divisions of Department.22 [R.O. 2009 §32.066; CC
1981 §2-150; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
The Department of Finance shall consist of the following divisions: Division
of Accounting, Division of Treasury, Division of Purchases, Division of Billing
and Collection and other divisions as may be required to conduct the
business of the Department of Finance. The responsibility of the Division
of Purchases shall be in accordance with the requirements of Section 7.5
of the City Charter and by regulations established by ordinance or by the
Mayor.
Section 120.120. Access To and Inspection of Books and Papers.
[R.O. 2009 §32.067; CC 1981 §§2-151—2-152; Ord. No. 86-2,
1-7-1986]
Section 120.130. Finance Director As Contract Administrator But
Not Purchasing Agent. [R.O. 2009 §32.068; CC 1981 §§2-153—2-154;
Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
A. The Director of Finance shall have free access to all other offices of the
City for the inspection of such books, accounts and papers as concern
the duties of the Director of Finance.
B. The Director of Finance shall keep the books and papers pertaining to
the office at all times open for the inspection of the City Council or any
member thereof or of the Mayor.
A. The Director of Finance shall be the Contract Administrator of the City.
B. The Mayor or his/her appointee shall be the Purchasing Agent of the
City.
21.Cross References—As to audit committee, §§125.170 et seq.; as to department of finance,
charter §7.3; as to director of finance, charter §7.4.
22.Cross Reference—As to division of purchases, charter §7.5.
Section
120.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
120.140
100:73
Section 120.140. Waterworks and Sewerage Systems Revenues Kept
Separate — Order of Payments.23 [R.O. 2009 §32.069; CC 1981
§2-193; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 95-76, 3-21-1995; Ord.
No. 04-194, 8-13-2004]
A. It is the mandatory duty of the City Finance Director:
1. To segregate the revenues derived from the operation of the
combined waterworks and sewerage systems from all other
revenues or funds of the City; to hold such funds separate and
distinct from all other funds thereof and, if such funds shall be
deposited in any bank, to maintain such deposits as an account
separate and distinct from all other bank accounts of the City.
Interest earned in any such account shall be considered income to
the system's accounts and will be available to the system for its
expenses and not to any other branch of the City, unless the City
Council acts under Subsection (A)(5) of this Section to make a
transfer to another branch of the City.
2. To devote the revenues described in Subsection (A)(1) of this
Section:
a. First, to the payment of the expenses of operating and
maintaining such system;
b. Second, to the payment of any and all bonds or other
obligations payable from such revenues;
c. Third, to the establishment of a proper depreciation reserve for
the benefit of such system;
d. Fourth, to the fulfillment of any covenants or agreements
contained in any ordinance which may have authorized
outstanding revenue bonds issued for the benefit of such
system; and
e. Fifth, for the payment of the cost of improvements and
extensions to such system.
3. To install and maintain proper books of records and accounts
(entirely separate from all other records and accounts of the City)
in which correct entries shall be made of all dealings or
transactions of or in relation to the properties, business and affairs
of the combined waterworks and sewerage system. Such accounts
shall show the amount of revenues received from the system, the
application of such revenues and all financial transactions in
connection therewith. At least once a year such accounts shall be
audited properly by a public accountant employed by the City for
that purpose to be paid from the revenues received from the
system. Such audits shall be at all times, during the usual business
23.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
120.140
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
120.140
100:74
hours, open to the examination and inspection by a taxpayer, any
user of the services of the system or any holder of any bonds issued
or by anyone acting for or on behalf of any such taxpayer, user or
bondholder. Such books of records and accounts and such audits
shall conform to any reasonable and valid covenant or agreement
with respect thereto set out in any ordinance which may authorize
the issuance of bonds.
4. To perform all duties with respect to the operation of the combined
waterworks and sewerage system or with respect to the revenues
derived or to be derived from the operation thereof imposed by law
or set out in any reasonable and valid covenant and agreement
contained in any ordinance which shall authorize the issuance of
revenue bonds.
5. No transfer of any funds derived from the operation of the
combined waterworks and sewerage system to any other funds of
the City shall be made except by action of the Council and no such
transfer shall be made unless all expenses of operation and
maintenance of the system shall have been paid, unless the
principal of and the interest on all bonds due at the time of the
transfer shall have been paid and unless all covenants and
agreements requiring the payment of money set out in the
ordinance authorizing any outstanding revenue bonds shall have
been met and unless all obligations requiring the payment of
money payable from such revenues when due shall have been met.
No payments of any indebtedness or expenses incurred by the City,
other than those above stated in Subsection (A)(2) of this Section,
shall be made from the revenues derived from the operation of the
system unless such revenues shall have been transferred to other
funds of the City under the conditions prescribed by this
Subsection.
B. It is the mandatory duty of the City Finance Director:
1. To segregate the revenues derived from the operation of the storm
water drainage system from all other revenues or funds of the City;
to hold such funds separate and distinct from all other funds
thereof and, if such funds shall be deposited in any bank, to
maintain such deposits as an account separate and distinct from all
other bank accounts of the City. Interest earned in any such
account shall be considered income to the system's accounts and
will be available to the system for its expenses and not to any other
branch of the City, unless the City Council acts under Subsection
(B)(5) of this Section to make a transfer to another branch of the
City.
2. To devote the revenues described in Subsection (A) above first, to
the payment of the expenses of operating and maintaining such
system; second, to the payment of any and all bonds or other
obligations payable from such revenues; third, to the establishment
Section
120.140
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
120.140
100:75
of a proper depreciation reserve for the benefit of such system;
fourth, to the fulfillment of any covenants or agreements contained
in any ordinance which may have authorized outstanding revenue
bonds issued for the benefit of such system; and fifth, for the
payment of the cost of improvements and extensions to such
system.
3. To install and maintain proper books of records and accounts
(entirely separate from all other records and accounts of the City)
in which correct entries shall be made of all dealings or
transactions of or in relation to the properties, business and affairs
of the storm water drainage system. Such accounts shall show the
amount of revenues received from the system, the application of
such revenues and all financial transactions in connection
therewith. At least once a year such accounts shall be audited
properly by a public accountant employed by the City for that
purpose to be paid from the revenues received from the system.
Such audits shall be at all times, during the usual business hours,
open to the examination and inspection by any taxpayer, any user of
the services of the system or any holder of any bonds issued or by
anyone acting for or on behalf of any such taxpayer, user or
bondholder. Such books of records and accounts and such audits
shall conform to any reasonable and valid covenant or agreement
with respect thereto set out in any ordinance which may authorize
the issuance of bonds.
4. To perform all duties with respect to the operation of the storm
water drainage system or with respect to the revenues derived or
to be derived from the operation thereof imposed by law or set out
in any reasonable and valid covenant and agreement contained in
any ordinance which shall authorize the issuance of revenue bonds.
5. No transfer of any funds derived from the operation of the storm
water drainage system to any other funds of the City shall be made
except by action of the Council and no such transfer shall be made
unless all expenses of operation and maintenance of said system
shall have been paid, unless the principal of and the interest on all
bonds due at the time of said transfer shall have been paid and
unless all covenants and agreements requiring the payment of
money set out in the ordinance authorizing any outstanding
revenue bonds shall have been met and unless all obligations
requiring the payment of money payable from such revenues when
due shall have been met. No payments of any indebtedness or
expenses incurred by the City, other than those above stated in
Subsection (B)(2) of this Section, shall be made from the revenues
derived from the operation of the system unless such revenues
shall have been transferred to other funds of the City under the
conditions prescribed by this Subsection.
Section
120.140
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
120.140
100:76
ARTICLE VI
Fire Department
Section 120.150. Department Established — Fire Chief.24 [R.O. 2009
§32.080; CC 1981 §2-155; Ord. No. 91-51, 3-8-1991; Ord. No.
03-320, 12-5-2003; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
There shall be a Fire Department, the Director of which shall be the Fire
Chief, appointed by the Mayor and City Council in accordance with Section
4.3(e) of City Charter. The Fire Chief shall have charge of the prevention
and suppression of fires and the provision of ambulance based advanced life
support service that meets the requirements and standards of the Statutes
and regulations set by the Missouri Division of Health and of all employees,
buildings and equipment used for these purposes. Subject to the executive
power of the Mayor, the Fire Chief shall have the authority to promulgate
and adopt rules and regulations for the management of the Fire Department
not inconsistent with the Charter, this Code or any other ordinance of the
City.
24.Cross References—As to fire department, ch. 205; as to fire prevention code, §§205.060—
205.070.
Section
120.150
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
120.150
100:77

ARTICLE VII
Department of Law
Section 120.160. Department Established — City Attorney.25 [R.O.
2009 §32.090; CC 1981 §2-156; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986]
Section 120.170. Special Legal Counsel.26 [R.O. 2009 §32.091; CC
1981 §2-157; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986]
The City Council shall have the power to employ special legal counsel in
accordance with Section 7.8 of the City Charter.
A. Department Established. There shall be a Department of Law, the
Director of which shall be the City Attorney, appointed and removed by
the Mayor with the consent of the City Council as provided by Section
7.6 of the City Charter. The City Attorney shall have the powers and
duties prescribed in Section 7.7 in the City Charter and other Sections
of the City Charter and as may be prescribed by ordinance. The office of
City Attorney shall be the primary full-time occupation of the City
Attorney.
B. City Attorney. The City Attorney may appoint such persons as Assistant
City Attorneys as may be necessary for the operation of the office of
City Attorney. Such assistants shall be attorneys-at-law, licensed to
practice in this State and may be employed on a full-time or part-time
basis.
25.Cross References—As to department of law—city attorney, appointment, qualifications and
compensation of, charter §7.6; as to city attorney, duties of, charter §7.7.
26.Cross Reference—As to special counsel, charter §7.8.
Section
120.160
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
120.170
100:79

ARTICLE VIII
Parks and Recreation Department
Section 120.180. Department Established — Director.27 [R.O. 2009
§32.105; CC 1981 §2-158; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 07-162,
6-11-2007]
There shall be a Parks and Recreation Department, the Director of which
shall be the Director of Parks, appointed and removed by the Parks and
Recreation Board as specified in Section 7.2 of the City Charter. The Parks
and Recreation Department shall be responsible for the care and
maintenance of the City parks and for the administration of recreation
programs as may be authorized by the Parks and Recreation Board.
27.Cross References—As to parks and recreation board, §§125.450 et seq.; as to parks and
recreation board, charter §7.2.
Section
120.180
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
120.180
100:81

ARTICLE IX
Police Department
Section 120.190. Department Established — Chief of Police.28 [R.O.
2009 §32.120; CC 1981 §2-160; Ord. No. 91-51, 3-8-1991; Ord. No.
93-190, 9-8-1993; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
There shall be a Police Department, the Director of which shall be the
Chief of Police appointed by the Mayor and City Council in accordance with
Section 4.3(e) of the City Charter. For the purposes of designating smoking
and non-smoking areas pursuant to State law, the Chief of Police shall have
charge of the buildings used as the Police Department and as the Municipal
Court. The Police Department shall have the powers and duties prescribed
by the City Charter and as may be prescribed by this Code and any other
applicable ordinance of the City.
Section 120.200. Services of Department.29 [R.O. 2009 §32.121; CC
1981 §2-161; Ord. No. 91-51, 3-8-1991; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
There shall be within the Police Department the following services:
Administrative Service, Patrol Service, Traffic Service, Detective Service
and Communication Service. The Director of the Department shall have
the authority to create additional Services or Subdivisions of the foregoing
services of the Department in order to conduct the business of the Police
Department. Such services shall be described as to function and the duty
of such Subdivision heads or section heads shall be described in writing,
subject to the approval of the Mayor. Any reserve Police force shall be under
the supervision of the Police Department.
28.Cross Reference—As to police department, ch. 200.
29.Cross Reference—As to police department, ch. 200.
Section
120.190
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
120.200
100:83

ARTICLE X
Public Works Department
Section 120.210. Department Established — Director.30 [R.O. 2009
§32.135; CC 1981 §2-162; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 95-123,
5-4-1995; Ord. No. 04-194, 8-13-2004; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
There shall be a Public Works Department, the Director of which shall be
the Director of Public Works, appointed by the Mayor and City Council,
in accordance with Section 4.3(e) of the City Charter. The Director of
Public Works shall possess a practical knowledge of civil engineering and
shall be a registered professional engineer and possess other qualifications
established by the Mayor.
Section 120.220. Divisions of Department. [R.O. 2009 §32.136; CC
1981 §2-163; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007;
Ord. No. 16-176 §1, 9-20-2016]
The Public Works Department shall consist of the following divisions:
Division of Public Works and Division of Utilities. The Mayor shall have
authority to establish subdivisions of the foregoing divisions of the
Department or sections under the divisions in order to conduct the business
of the Department.
Section 120.230. Functions and Duties. [R.O. 2009 §32.137; CC
1981 §2-164; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 00-352, 12-22-2000;
Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007; Ord. No. 16-176 §1, 9-20-2016]
A. The Department of Public Works shall have the following functions and
duties:
1. Operation and maintenance of the potable water treatment and
distribution system and wastewater collection and treatment
system;
2. Maintenance of all public streets, sidewalks, alleys, street lights,
buildings, bridges, parking facilities, stormwater collection and
detention systems and appurtenances thereto; and
3. Maintenance of departmental fleet vehicles and equipment.
30.Cross Reference—As to board of public works, §§125.570 et seq.
Section
120.210
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
120.230
100:85

ARTICLE XI
Human Resources Department
Section 120.240. Department Established. [R.O. 2009 §32.145; Ord.
No. 02-128, 5-28-2002; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
There shall be a Human Resources Department, the Director of which
shall be the Director of Human Resources, appointed by the Mayor and
City Council, in accordance with Section 4.3(e) of the City Charter. The
Department of Human Resources shall be responsible for management
and administration of human resources plans, programs, policies and
procedures. The Director shall administer compensation and benefits plans,
provide guidance and information to City departments and employees
regarding human resources matters and counsel and coach supervisors
regarding employee performance problems and standards. The Director
shall participate in meetings with bargaining units and investigate and
review employee grievances. The Director shall be responsible for human
resources record keeping and for ensuring compliance with applicable laws
and regulations as relates to human resources plans, programs, actions and
matters.
Section
120.240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
120.240
100:87

ARTICLE XII
Information Technology Department
Section 120.250. Department Established. [R.O. 2009 §32.150; Ord.
No. 06-95, 4-26-2006; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
There shall be an Information Technology Department, the Director of
which shall be the Director of Information Technology, appointed by the
Mayor and City Council, in accordance with Section 4.3(e) of the City
Charter. The Department of Information Technology shall be responsible for
managing and directing assigned City information and computer processing
systems including determining hardware and software requirements;
designing and implementing systems; and resolving hardware and software
problems. The Director shall provide guidance and recommendations to all
City departments regarding information technology.
Section
120.250
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
120.250
100:89

ARTICLE XIII
Department of Engineering
Section 120.260. Department Established — Director of
Engineering. [Ord. No. 16-176 §3, 9-20-2016]
There shall be a Department of Engineering, the Director of which shall
be the Director of Engineering, appointed by the Mayor and City Council,
in accordance with Section 4.3(e) of the City Charter. The Director of
Engineering shall possess a practical knowledge of civil engineering and
shall be a registered professional engineer and possess other qualifications
established by the Mayor.
Section 120.270. Divisions of Department. [Ord. No. 16-176 §3,
9-20-2016]
The Department of Engineering shall consist of the following divisions:
Division of Design and Division of Construction. The Mayor shall have
authority to establish subdivisions of the foregoing divisions of the
Department or sections under the divisions in order to conduct the business
of the Department.
Section 120.280. Functions and Duties. [Ord. No. 16-176 §3,
9-20-2016]
A. The Department of Engineering shall have the following functions and
duties:
1. Design and construction of streets, sidewalks, alleys, buildings,
parking facilities, structures, bridges, viaducts, waterway,
sewerage systems, stormwater detention and drainage systems,
levees, waterworks, tunnels and appurtenances thereto;
2. Plat review;
3. Creation, maintenance, custody and retention of records of the
location, direction, depth and connection of all City owned
underground structures and equipment;
4. Creation, maintenance, custody and retention of records of all
plats, surveys and drawings and the furnishing of all information
and reports relating to City right-of-way, real estate and
appurtenances thereto; and
5. Granting of all permits to excavate into or disturb right-of-way or
public property or to make any special use thereof.
Section
120.260
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
120.280
100:91
Chapter 125
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
Section
120.280
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
120.280
100:92
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 125.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §33.000; Ord. No. 08-16,
1-23-2008]
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
MEMBER — A person duly appointed to a board, commission or committee
as the case may be.
Section 125.020. Proposed Appointments — Scheduling and
Procedures. [R.O. 2009 §33.001; CC 1981 §§2-171—2-172; Ord. No.
86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 97-17, 1-2-1997; Ord. No. 08-16,
1-23-2008]
Section 125.030. Attendance Required. [R.O. 2009 §33.002; CC
1981 §2-172.1; Ord. No. 88-169, 9-8-1988; Ord. No. 89-128,
6-22-1989; Ord. No. 99-57, 2-4-1999; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
Any member of a board, commission or committee of the City who is absent
from three (3) regularly scheduled consecutive meetings shall automatically
forfeit his/her office unless the Mayor has excused any of those absences. It
shall be the duty of the Chairperson of the board, commission or committee
to promptly notify the Mayor of any absences of members.
Section 125.040. Notice of Meetings — Minutes of Meetings —
Quorum and Voting. [R.O. 2009 §33.003; CC 1981 §2-172.5; Ord. No.
86-110, 5-22-1986; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007; Ord. No. 08-16,
1-23-2008]
A. Proposed Appointments. All appointments proposed to be made by the
Mayor which require confirmation by the City Council shall be
submitted to the City Council, together with a statement containing
address, educational background, employment experience and any
other pertinent information, at least seven (7) days prior to the next
scheduled Council meeting prior to the time the appointment is to be
made.
B. Scheduling And Procedures. Upon review by the Council, the Mayor
shall announce the proposed appointment. Unless otherwise provided,
board and commission members may be removed by the Mayor with the
approval of the Council.
A. Notice Of Meetings. At least twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be
given prior to any meeting of a board or commission. The notice shall be
posted in the City Clerk's office in the City Hall Building and at any
other place that may be deemed appropriate.
B. Minutes Of Meetings. Minutes of meetings of all boards and
commissions of the City shall be filed at the City Clerk's office. Copies of
Section
125.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.040
100:93
Section 125.050. (Reserved)31
Section 125.060. Limitation On Board, Commission or Committee
Service — Filling of Unexpired Terms. [R.O. 2009 §33.005; Ord. No.
04-191, 8-13-2004; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
Section 125.070. Personal Interest. [R.O. 2009 §33.006; Ord. No.
04-258, 11-5-2004; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
No member shall engage in any business or transaction or shall have a
financial interest or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is
incompatible with the proper discharge of his/her official duties in the
public interest or would tend to impair his/her independence or judgment
or action in the performance of his/her official duties.
Section 125.080. Offender Registration With Police Department.
[R.O. 2009 §33.007; Ord. No. 06-250, 9-11-2006; Ord. No. 08-16,
1-23-2008]
all minutes of board and commission meetings shall be forwarded to
the Mayor and City Council for their information, with no formal action
required unless desired or deemed necessary by the City Council.
C. Quorum And Voting. Notwithstanding any ordinance to the contrary, a
quorum shall consist of a majority of those members who have been
appointed. Vacant positions shall not be counted as part of the total
membership in determining a quorum. The affirmative vote of a
majority of the quorum shall be necessary to adopt a motion. [Ord. No.
14-246 §1, 11-18-2014]
A. Except for the Parks and Recreation Board, at the conclusion of a
member's term of appointment, the member shall remain on the board,
commission or committee until such time as he/she is reappointed or
his/her successor has been duly appointed, but in no event for more
than six (6) months after the expiration of the member's term without
reappointment.
B. Vacancies shall be filled, for the unexpired term of any member whose
position becomes vacant, by appointment by the Mayor with the
approval of a majority of City Council.
A. Any person proposed for appointment to a board, commission or
committee that is required to register with the Chief Law Enforcement
Official of the County in which such person resides pursuant to Section
589.400, RSMo., then that person shall register with the City Police
Department prior to City Council confirmation.
31.Editor's Note—Ord. no. 11-238 §1, adopted November 16, 2011, repealed section 125.050
"restrictions pertaining to appointments and membership" in its entirety. Former section
125.050 derived from R.O. 2009 §33.004; ord. no. 95-114, 5-4-95; ord. no. 04-131, 7-6-04;
ord. no. 08-16, 1-23-08. This section has been reserved for the city's future use.
Section
125.040
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
125.080
100:94
Section 125.090. Removal From Board, Commission or Committee.
[R.O. 2009 §33.008; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
Section 125.100. Council Member Liaison and Alternates. [R.O.
2009 §33.009; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
B. Any registration pursuant to Subsection (A) above shall consist of
completion of an offender registration form developed by the Missouri
State Highway Patrol. This registration form is available from the City
Police Department.
C. Any person who violates any of the provisions of Subsection (A) above
shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Section 100.150.
A. Any member who ceases to meet the qualifications for appointment to
his/her respective board, commission or committee shall immediately
forfeit his/her membership.
B. Members may be removed, at the will of the Mayor, with or without
cause, with the consent of the majority of the City Council, except for
the Parks and Recreation Board in which case Section 7.2 of the
Charter permits removal by a four-fifths (4/5) majority vote of the entire
Council.
A. A City Council member who desires to serve as liaison to a board,
commission or committee without a designated Council liaison may do
so after requesting and receiving the authorization of Council subject to
the limitation provided in Section 3.16 of the Charter.
B. The City Council may select one (1) of its members to be an alternate
liaison to any board, commission or committee and the alternate liaison
shall have the power to vote in the absence of the regular liaison.
Section
125.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.100
100:95

ARTICLE II
Board of Adjustment
Section 125.110. Established. [R.O. 2009 §33.015; CC 1981 §2-173;
Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
There shall be a Board of Adjustment, which shall have the composition,
powers and duties prescribed in Sections 400.1060 et seq. of the Zoning
Code set forth in this Code of Ordinances.
Section
125.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.110
100:97

ARTICLE III
Board of Appeals
Section 125.120. Created — Composition and Qualifications. [R.O.
2009 §33.025; CC 1981 §§2-240—2-241; Ord. No. 88-120, 6-23-1988;
Ord. No. 03-323, 12-23-2003; Ord. No. 04-38, 2-13-2004; Ord. No.
04-131, 7-6-2004; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
Section 125.130. Alternate Members — Officers Selection. [R.O.
2009 §33.026; CC 1981 §§2-242—2-243; Ord. No. 88-120, 6-23-1988;
Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
Section 125.140. Powers and Duties. [R.O. 2009 §33.027; CC 1981
§2-244; Ord. No. 88-120, 6-23-1988; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
A. Created. There is created a Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals
shall consist of five (5) members who shall be residents and qualified,
registered voters of the City, appointed by the Mayor with the consent
of the City Council. Each member shall serve for three (3) years.
B. Composition And Qualifications. Each member shall be a licensed
professional engineer, a licensed architect or a builder or
superintendent of building construction with at least five (5) years
experience. One (1) member of the Board shall, at all times, be a
licensed structural or civil engineer.
A. Alternate Members. Four (4) alternate members shall be appointed who
shall be called by the Board Chairperson to hear appeals during the
absence or disqualification of a member. Alternate members shall
possess the qualifications required for Board membership and shall be
appointed for three (3) years or until a successor has been appointed.
B. Officers Selection. The Board shall annually select from its own
members a Chairperson and such other officers as it deems necessary.
A. The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers and duties:
1. To hear an appeal regarding a decision of the Code Official to
refuse to grant a modification of the provisions of the Plumbing
Code (Sections 500.240 et seq. of this Code of Ordinances)
covering the manner of construction or materials to be used in the
erection, alteration or repair of a plumbing system.
2. To hear an appeal regarding a decision of the Code Official to
refuse to grant a modification of the provisions of the Mechanical
Code (Sections 500.150 et seq. of this Code of ordinances) covering
the manner of construction or materials to be used in the erection,
alteration or repair of a mechanical system.
3. To hear an appeal regarding a decision of the Code Official
concerning the Fire Prevention Code (Sections 205.060 and
205.070 of this Code of Ordinances).
Section
125.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.140
100:99
Section 125.150. Right To Hearing — Petition. [R.O. 2009 §33.028;
CC 1981 §2-245; Ord. No. 88-120, 6-23-1988; Ord. No. 08-16,
1-23-2008]
Section 125.160. Appeals Process. [R.O. 2009 §33.029; CC 1981
§§2-246—2-249; Ord. No. 88-120, 6-23-1988; Ord. No. 08-16,
1-23-2008]
4. To hear an appeal regarding a decision of the Code Official
concerning the Existing Building Code (Sections 500.130 and
500.140 of the Code of Ordinances).
5. To hear an appeal regarding a decision of the Code Official to
refuse to grant a modification of the provisions of the Building Code
(Sections 500.040 et seq. of this Code of Ordinances) covering the
manner of construction or materials to be used in the erection,
alteration or repair of a building or structure.
6. Such other powers and duties as the Council may prescribe.
A. Any person affected by any notice or decision which has been issued in
connection with the enforcement of the codes listed in Section 125.140,
or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, shall have the
right to a hearing on the matter before the Board of Appeals.
B. Any appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed in the office of the
Board within twenty (20) days after the notice of decision was served.
C. Any application for appeal shall be on a form provided by the Code
Official and shall be based upon a claim that the true intent of the Code
or rules has been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of the Code do
not fully apply or an equally good or better method is used.
A. Disqualification. A member shall not hear an appeal in which that
member has any personal, professional or financial interest.
B. Notice Of Meeting. The Board of Appeals shall meet upon notice from
the Chairperson within ten (10) days of the filing of an appeal or at
stated periodic meetings.
C. Board Decision. The Board of Appeals may sustain, modify or reverse
the decision of the Code Official. A decision to modify or reverse the
decision of the Code Official shall be made only by a concurring vote of
three (3) members.
D. Court Review. Decisions of the Board of Appeals may be appealed to the
Circuit Court pursuant to Chapter 536, RSMo.
Section
125.140
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
125.160
100:100
ARTICLE IV
Audit Committee
Section 125.170. Audit Committee.32 [R.O. 2009 §33.040; CC 1981
§2-174; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 95-122, 5-4-1995; Ord.
No. 07-162, 6-11-2007; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008; Ord. No. 11-76
§2, 4-20-2011; Ord. No. 14-137 §1, 7-1-2014]
A. Establishment And Purpose. There is hereby established an Audit
Committee of the City of St. Charles, Missouri. The purpose of the Audit
Committee is to ensure fiscal accountability and transparency, and it
shall assist the City Council in fulfilling its financial oversight
responsibilities by reviewing and evaluating the financial reporting
process, compliance with related laws and regulations, the internal
control system and the audit process.
B. Members, Qualifications, Terms And Meetings.
1. Members. The Audit Committee shall consist of two (2) City
Councilmembers and three (3) City residents who are not
Councilmembers. The two (2) Council Committee members shall be
selected by an affirmative vote of a majority of the entire Council.
The three (3) City resident Committee members shall be appointed
by the Mayor and approved by an affirmative vote of a majority of
the entire Council.
2. Qualifications. All members should possess or obtain a basic
understanding of governmental financial reporting and auditing. At
least one (1) of the three (3) City resident members shall be a
financial expert, preferably a certified public accountant, and
possess the following knowledge: an understanding of generally
accepted accounting principles and financial statements;
experience in preparing or auditing financial statements;
experience with internal accounting controls; and understanding of
audit committee functions.
3. Terms. The City Councilmembers of the Audit Committee shall be
appointed for a one-year term consistent with Charter Section 3.16,
but nothing shall prohibit the reappointment of the same
Councilmember to the Audit Committee; provided, no
Councilmember shall serve on the Audit Committee for more than
six (6) consecutive years. The three (3) City resident Committee
members shall be appointed for a three-year term, but shall not
serve more than six (6) consecutive years on the Audit Committee.
Starting January 1, 2016, the City resident Committee member
whose term first expires in 2016 shall be appointed for a three-year
term; the City resident Committee member whose term next
expires in 2016 or thereafter shall be appointed for a two-year
term; and the City resident Committee member whose term last
32.Cross Reference—As to finance department, §§120.100 et seq.
Section
125.170
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.170
100:101
expires in 2016 or thereafter shall be appointed for a one-year
term. Thereafter, the City resident Committee members shall be
appointed for three-year terms. [Ord. No. 15-157 §1, 7-21-2015]
4. Meetings. A majority of the entire Audit Committee shall constitute
a quorum. Any member of the Audit Committee may call a meeting
of the Committee. All members shall be voting members. The
affirmative vote of a majority of the entire Audit Committee shall be
necessary to adopt any motion or resolution. The Audit Committee
shall elect a Chairperson at the first meeting of every calendar
year. The Audit Committee Chairperson shall set the schedule and
agenda and will lead each meeting. Any Audit Committee member
may place an item on a meeting agenda. The Audit Committee shall
meet at least three (3) times a year and may convene additional
meetings, as circumstances require. Audit Committee members are
expected to attend each meeting, in person. The Audit Committee
will invite members of management, auditors or others to attend
meetings and provide pertinent information, as necessary. Meeting
agendas will be prepared by the Audit Committee Chair and
provided in advance to members, along with appropriate briefing
materials. Minutes of each meeting will be prepared and submitted
to the City Council. The Audit Committee Chairperson will also be
responsible for briefing the City Council on Audit Committee
business.
C. Definitions. For purposes of this Section, the following words shall have
the following meanings:
CITY MANAGEMENT — The executive branch of City Government
and includes all of City Government except the City Council and the
Municipal Judge.
INDEPENDENT FINANCIAL STATEMENT AUDITORS or
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR — A certified public accountant or certified
public accounting firm hired to provide an independent audit of City
accounts in accordance with Charter Section 3.14.
INTERNAL AUDITOR — A person or firm employed by or contracted
with by the City for the purpose of providing internal audit services
and who reports directly to and is exclusively under the control and
supervision of the City Council.
D. Duties And Responsibilities. The Audit Committee's responsibilities
shall include:
1. Periodically review this Section and assess its adequacy and
recommend changes to the City Council.
2. Meet at least three (3) times per year, and at additional times when
necessary. Request members of City management or others to
attend meetings and provide pertinent information.
Section
125.170
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
125.170
100:102
3. Conduct executive sessions with the Mayor, Director of
Administration, City Attorney, internal auditor, independent
financial statement auditor, Finance Director, Municipal Judge and
anyone else as determined necessary by the Audit Committee.
4. Advise the City Council on the hiring of professional consultants
and auditors as necessary and in accordance with the City's
procurement ordinance.
5. Review and advise the City Council on the appointment,
replacement, or dismissal of the internal auditor.
6. Oversee the appointment for the City Council of the independent
financial statement auditor.
7. Advise the City Council on the establishment of a regular schedule
for periodically rebidding the independent financial statement
audit contract.
8. Inquire of City management, the internal auditor, and the
independent financial statement auditor about significant financial
risks or exposures and advise the City Council as appropriate.
9. Review with the independent financial statement auditor, the
Finance Director and internal auditor the scope and plan of the
internal auditor and independent auditor. Assess the coordination
of audit efforts to assure the completeness of coverage, reduction
of redundant efforts, and the effective use of audit resources.
10. Review and approve with City management and the internal
auditor and advise the City Council on the following:
a. Internal audit charter, budget, staffing and audit plan at
project initiation;
b. Significant findings on internal audits during the year and City
management's responses;
c. Any difficulties the internal auditor encountered in the course
of an audit, including any restrictions on the scope of their
work or access to required information; and
d. Any changes required in the scope of internal audits.
11. Inquire of City management regarding the City's fiscal condition
and financial status in relation to the budget and report as
appropriate to the City Council.
12. Review with the independent auditor and the internal auditor and
advise the City Council on:
a. Adequacy of internal controls; and
Section
125.170
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.170
100:103
b. Any related significant findings and recommendations of the
independent auditor and internal auditor together with City
management's responses.
13. Review with City management and the independent financial
statement auditor and advise the City Council on the effect of any
regulatory and accounting initiatives.
14. Review with the independent financial statement auditor and
advise the City Council on:
a. Critical accounting policies and practices;
b. Significant accounting and reporting issues, including complex
or unusual transactions and highly judgmental areas, and
recent professional and regulatory pronouncements, and their
impact on the financial statements;
c. Alternative treatments of financial information within
generally accepted accounting principles that have been
discussed with City management, the ramifications of each
alternative, and the treatment preferred by the City.
15. Review significant written communications between the
independent financial statement auditor and City management,
such as any management letter or schedule of unadjusted
differences and advise the City Council as appropriate.
16. Review with City management and the independent financial
statement auditor and advise the City Council regarding:
a. City's annual financial statements, related footnotes, and
management's discussion and analysis;
b. Financial statement audit and report;
c. Independent financial statement auditor judgments about the
quality of the City's accounting principles;
d. Audit report of Federal awards administered by the City;
e. Any significant changes required in the audit plan;
f. Any serious difficulties or disputes with City management
encountered during the audit; and
g. Matters required to be communicated in accordance with
generally accepted auditing standards, U.S. Government
Auditing Standards and OMB Circular A-133 related to the
conduct of audits.
17. Review with the City Attorney and the internal auditor legal and
regulatory matters that, in the opinion of City management or the
Audit Committee, may have a material impact on the financial
Section
125.170
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
125.170
100:104
Section 125.180. (Reserved)
statements and compliance with Federal, State, or local laws and
regulations and advise the City Council.
18. Review with the City Attorney elected official and employee
compliance with City and State conflicts of interest laws. [Ord. No.
15-157 §1, 7-21-201533]
19. Periodically review the City's Code of Ethics.
20. Review the findings of any examinations by regulatory agencies
and any auditor observations.
21. Review the procedures for the receipt, retention, and treatment of
complaints received by the City regarding suspected fraud that
may be submitted by any party internal or external to the City.
22. Review any suspected fraud complaints that might have been
received, current status, and resolution and advise the City Council
as appropriate.
23. Evaluate the performance of the independent financial statement
auditor and the internal auditor and advise the City Council.
24. Confirm annually that all responsibilities outlined in this Section
have been carried out.
25. Evaluate the Audit Committee's performance on a regular basis.
26. Create an agenda for the ensuing year.
33.Editor's Note: Subsection 1 of Ord. No. 15-157 also redesignated former Subsection
(D)(18) through (25) as Subsection (D)(19) through (26), respectively.
Section
125.170
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.180
100:105

ARTICLE V
Economic Development Commission
Section 125.190. Establishment and Purpose.34 [R.O. 2009 §33.050;
CC 1981 §2-176; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 08-16,
1-23-2008]
A Commission to be known as the "St. Charles Economic Development
Commission" is hereby established whose basic purpose is to promote
sound and progressive growth of the City from within the community and
through the attraction of business and industry to the community to
increase employment.
Section 125.200. Composition of Board of Directors. [R.O. 2009
§33.051; CC 1981 §2-177; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 89-13,
1-19-1989; Ord. No. 90-43, 2-21-1990; Ord. No. 95-69, 3-22-1995;
Ord. No. 95-145, 5-17-1995; Ord. No. 95-171, 6-22-1995; Ord. No.
04-131, 7-6-2004; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008; Ord. No. 11-02 §1,
1-6-2011]
A. The St. Charles Economic Development Commission shall consist of
eleven (11) members who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
consent of the City Council. The Commission shall consist of the
following members:
1. One (1) person representative of the manufacturing sector;
2. One (1) person representative of the real estate sector;
3. One (1) person representative of the retail sector;
4. One (1) person who is representative of the utilities or technology
industries;
5. One (1) person who is representative of the City of St. Charles
School District;
6. The Executive Director of the Chamber of Commerce;
7. One (1) member who is a Council member, who shall be selected by
the City Council, serving as liaison to City Council;
8. The Mayor;
9. Two (2) representatives at-large; and
10. One (1) person who is representative of either the Orchard Farms
School District or the Francis Howell School District.
34.Cross Reference—As to department of economic development, §120.090.
Section
125.190
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.200
100:107
Section 125.210. Mayor As Liaison — Funding. [R.O. 2009 §33.052;
CC 1981 §2-178; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 87-210,
10-22-1987; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
B. Appointments of members, except for the Mayor, Council member and
Executive Director of the Chamber of Commerce, shall be for a term of
three (3) years.
C. The Commission shall select from its members one (1) person to serve
as Chairperson and one (1) person to serve as Vice Chairperson. These
officers shall serve a one (1) year term. Elections of officers shall be
held annually at the regularly scheduled Commission meeting in May.
The Chairperson shall not vote except to break a tie. The Commission
shall establish a regular meeting date which shall not be not less
frequent than quarterly and may elect any additional officers that it
deems necessary.
A. Mayor As Liaison. The Mayor shall act as liaison between the
Commission and the City Council and, in keeping with the
responsibilities of the office, shall have the primary responsibility for
the promotion of the City as the proper environment for the location of
manufacturers and businesses interested in relocating and for the
expansion of those manufacturers and businesses already located
within the City.
B. Funding. The City Council shall provide for such funds for the payment
of expenses as may be necessary and expedient for the Mayor to carry
out the functions described in Subsection (A) above including, but not
limited to, travel and advertising expenses.
Section
125.200
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
125.210
100:108
ARTICLE VI
Fair Housing Commission
Section 125.220. Established. [R.O. 2009 §33.060; CC 1981 §2-224;
Ord. No. 86-329, 12-15-1986; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
There is established a Fair Housing Commission. The Fair Housing
Commission shall have such powers and duties as are described in Sections
240.010 et seq. of this Code of Ordinances.
Section 125.230. Membership — Terms. [R.O. 2009 §33.061; CC
1981 §2-225; Ord. No. 86-329, 12-15-1986; Ord. No. 08-16,
1-23-2008]
Section 125.232. through Section 125.239. (Reserved)
A. The Commission established by Section 125.220 shall consist of seven
(7) members broadly representative of the racial, religious and ethnic
groups in the community. Members of the Commission shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the entire City Council.
The terms of appointments shall be for three (3) years each.
B. The Commission shall elect a Chairperson who shall be the Presiding
Officer at Commission meetings. In the absence of the Chairperson or if
the Chairperson is unable to be present at any meeting, a Vice
Chairperson shall have the power to preside. Any five (5) members shall
constitute a quorum. All members of the Commission shall serve
without compensation.
Section
125.220
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.232
100:109

ARTICLE VII
Greater St. Charles Convention and Visitors Commission
Section 125.240. Created.35 [R.O. 2009 §33.080; CC 1981 §2-197;
Ord. No. 88-139, 7-7-1988; Ord. No. 92-82, 4-22-1992; Ord. No.
95-146, 5-17-1995; Ord. No. 00-46, 2-16-2000; Ord. No. 04-131,
7-6-2004; Ord. No. 05-72, 3-29-2005; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007;
Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
A. There is hereby established a thirteen (13) member Commission to be
known as the Greater St. Charles Convention and Visitors Commission
to review and make recommendations to the Mayor and the City
Council regarding expenditures of funds pertaining to the Greater St.
Charles Convention and Visitors Bureau (CVB). Except as otherwise
provided, Commission members shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the consent of the City Council. The Commission shall consist of the
following representatives, none of whom are required to be a City
resident except as set forth in this Subsection: [Ord. No. 15-203 §1,
9-1-2015]
1. A representative of the St. Charles Chamber of Commerce;
2. One (1) person representative of the restaurant industry in the
City;
3. One (1) person representing the South Main Historical District who
shall own property or own a business or be employed by a business
in the South Main Historical District;
4. One (1) person representing the Historic Downtown District who
shall own property or own a business or be employed by a business
in the Historic Downtown District;
5. One (1) person representing the Frenchtown Historical District
who shall own property or own a business or be employed by a
business in the Frenchtown Historical District;
6. One (1) person who is representative of cultural, educational or
historic venues;
7. One (1) person representative of a gaming facility or a large
entertainment, sports or retail attraction;
8. One (1) City Council member who shall be selected by the City
Council for a one (1) year term. The City Council may also select
one (1) of its members to be an alternate member of the
Commission. The alternate member may vote in the absence of the
regular member selected by the City Council;
9. The Mayor who shall serve commensurable with the term of office;
35.Cross Reference—As to convention and visitors bureau, §§120.060 et seq.
Section
125.240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.240
100:111
Section 125.250. Submission of Budget. [R.O. 2009 §33.081; CC
1981 §2-198; Ord. No. 88-139, 7-7-1988; Ord. No. 07-162,
6-11-2007; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
The St. Charles Convention and Visitors Bureau shall prepare and submit
in accordance with the budget calendar for the City a budget setting forth
the various anticipated revenues and expenditures for the forthcoming
fiscal year. Such budget shall be in the format of City enterprise funds
and become part of the annual budget transmitted to the City Council
for approval. The Convention and Visitors Commission shall review and
approve the recommended budget prior to submission to the Mayor for
inclusion in the budget document.
Section 125.260. Annual Audit — Records Available For Inspection.
[R.O. 2009 §33.082; CC 1981 §2-200; Ord. No. 88-139, 7-7-1988;
Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
10. One (1) representative of the hotel/motel industry;
11. One (1) person who is a resident of unincorporated St. Charles
County and who is engaged in the tourism industry as a business
owner, manager or participant in unincorporated St. Charles
County; and [Ord. No. 15-203 §1, 9-1-201536]
12. Two (2) at large representatives who shall be either a City resident
or a business owner in the City or employee of business in the City.
B. All appointments of representatives, except for the Mayor and the
Council member, shall be for a term of three (3) years.
C. The Commission shall select from its members one (1) person to serve
as Chairperson. The Chairperson shall not vote except to break a tie.
The Commission shall establish a regular monthly meeting date and
may elect any additional officers that it deems necessary. Special
meetings may be called by the Chairperson. The Commission shall be
further empowered to establish bylaws for the operation of the
Commission and to establish its policies and goals.
A. Annual Audit. Annually, in accordance with the preparation of the
regular annual audit of the City books and records, the St. Charles
Convention and Visitors Commission shall allow an audit of the books of
the Convention and Visitors Bureau. A full report of the activities of the
Commission and results of the audit shall be supplied to the Mayor and
City Council.
B. Records Of Commission. The books of the St. Charles Convention and
Visitors Commission shall be open and available for inspection by the
Mayor or his/her authorized representative at all reasonable times
during business hours to make such examination and inspection of the
36.Editor's Note: Subsection 1 of Ord. No. 15-203 also redesignated former Subsection
(A)(11) as Subsection (A)(12).
Section
125.240
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
125.260
100:112
Section 125.270. Consistency. [R.O. 2009 §33.083; CC 1981 §2-201;
Ord. No. 88-139, 7-7-1988; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
This Section is intended to be consistent with and supplemental to
Ordinance No. 85-151 (Sections 620.010 et seq.) of the City passed,
September 3, 1985 and approved September 6, 1985 and the St. Charles
Convention and Visitors Commission is intended to be the successor of and
administrator of the funds referred to in Section 1(g) of the ordinance.
The Commission must follow the purchasing procedures established for the
other City departments, including approval by Council when required by the
purchasing procedures.
books and records that may be necessary to determine the correctness
of the reports or verify income or expenses of the Commission.
Section
125.260
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.270
100:113

ARTICLE VIII
(Reserved)
Section 125.280. (Reserved)
Section
125.280
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.280
100:115

ARTICLE IX
Historic Landmarks Preservation and Architectural Review Board
Section 125.290. Established. [R.O. 2009 §33.100; Ord. No. 05-161,
5-27-2005; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
There shall be a Historic Landmarks Preservation and Architectural Review
Board (HLPARB) which shall be known as and referred to as the Landmarks
Board which shall have the composition, powers and duties as prescribed
in Chapters 125 and 400 of this Code of Ordinances. To the extent the
words "Historic Landmarks Preservation and Architectural Review Board
(HLPARB)" appear in this Code of Ordinances, the words shall mean the
"Landmarks Board" as established in this Section. The terms "Historic
Landmarks Preservation and Architectural Review Board", "HLPARB" and
"Landmarks Board" may be used interchangeably.
Section 125.300. Review Guidelines. [R.O. 2009 §33.105; CC 1981
§2-256; Ord. No. 93-5, 1-21-1993; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-16-1996; Ord.
No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
A. When reviewing and acting upon an application, the Historic
Landmarks Preservation and Architectural Review Board will adhere to
the following standards or criteria in the Historic Downtown District:
1. Preservation of the distinctive historical character, natural beauty
and maintenance of the charm and atmosphere of the district's
buildings and properties is of paramount importance.
2. Restorative or adaptive modification to buildings shall serve to
enhance the historic nature of the district while maintaining a
sustainable environment for new development.
3. Efforts at building improvements shall be handled on an individual
basis, based upon a building's own merits, its potential contribution
to the district and appropriateness of any changes to the period the
building best represents.
4. New construction shall exemplify conformity or to be
complimentary to district architecture and neighboring structures.
5. All improvement activities shall have a complimentary relationship,
be sensitive in design, be harmoniously blending and serve to make
use of or to enhance the unique Victorian flair and history of the
district as a mixed use area including, but not limited to, office,
residential, retail, food, entertainment, service and government
uses.
6. The Board shall also use the following standards in evaluating the
historical significance of an applicant property and its bearing upon
an applicant's improvement proposal:
Section
125.290
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.300
100:117
Section 125.310. Review Criteria. [R.O. 2009 §33.119; CC 1981
§2-211; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-16-1996; Ord. No.
08-16, 1-23-2008]
a. It has significant character, interest or value as part of the
development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the City,
State or nation; or is associated with the life of a person
significant in the past.
b. It is the site of a historic event with a significant effect on
society.
c. It exemplifies the cultural, political, economic, social or
historic heritage of the community.
d. It portrays the environment in an era of history characterized
by a distinctive architectural style.
e. It embodies those distinguishing characteristics of an
architectural type or engineering specimen.
f. It contains elements of design, detail, materials or
craftsmanship which represent a significant innovation.
g. It is part of, or related to, a square, park or other distinctive
area which should be developed or preserved according to a
plan based on a historic, cultural or architectural motif.
h. It is in a unique location of singular physical characteristics
which represent an established and familiar visual feature of
the neighborhood, community or City.
i. It has yielded, or is likely to yield, information important in
prehistory or history.
7. Within six (6) months from the date that the Historic Landmarks
Preservation and Architectural Review Board is appointed and
approved, the Board shall develop further detailed review criteria
to be used in the evaluation of improvement proposals in the
Historic Downtown District. The Board's recommended criteria
shall be presented to City Council for approval.
A. When reviewing an application for a structure or structural change, the
Historic Landmarks Preservation and Architectural Review Board shall
be guided to the greatest extent practicable by the following standards:
1. The public necessity of the proposed construction or use.
2. The public purpose or interest in land or buildings to be protected.
3. The historic or architectural value and significance of the structure
and its relationship to the historic value of the surrounding area.
Section
125.300
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
125.310
100:118
Section 125.320. through Section 125.440. (Reserved)
4. The age and character of the historic structure, its condition and its
probable life expectancy and the appropriateness of the proposed
changes for the period during which the structure was built.
5. The general compatibility of the site plan and the exterior design,
arrangement, texture and materials proposed to be used.
6. The view of the structure or area from a public street.
7. The present character of the setting of the structure or area and its
surroundings.
8. The probable effect of the proposed construction on trees, wooded
areas or historic sites.
Section
125.310
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.320
100:119

ARTICLE X
Parks and Recreation Board — Cemetery Advisory Committee
Section 125.450. Created.37 [R.O. 2009 §33.130; CC 1981 §2-183;
Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 91-16, 1-15-1991; Ord. No.
93-202, 9-8-1993; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
Pursuant to Section 7.2 of the Charter, there shall be a Parks and Recreation
Board appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. The
Board shall consist of nine (9) members chosen from the residents of the
City at large, with reference to their fitness for such offices, and who shall
be over twenty-one (21) years of age. No member of the City Government
shall be a member of the Board. Members of the Parks and Recreation
Board shall serve three (3) year terms, with three (3) appointments expiring
each year. An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be made only for the
unexpired vacant term. Members shall serve until a successor has been
appointed, approved and sworn in. Nothing contained in this provision shall
limit the number of terms which may be served by any member.
Section 125.460. Organization and Powers. [R.O. 2009 §33.131; CC
1981 §2-184; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
The members of the Board shall, immediately after appointment, meet and
organize by the election from their number of a President, a Secretary
and such other officers as they may deem necessary. They shall make and
adopt such bylaws, rules and regulations for their own guidance and for
the government of the parks and of the recreation programs of the City
as may be expedient, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter
or the Charter. All taxes collected from a special parks tax, park bond
proceeds and all revenues received from the general operation of the parks
and recreation facilities and programs shall be used solely for the purposes
of parks, recreation and related facilities as directed by the Parks and
Recreation Board.
Section 125.470. Donations — Bond. [R.O. 2009 §33.132; CC 1981
§2-185; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
Any person desiring to make donations of money, personal property or real
estate for the benefit of any park or of recreation of the City shall have the
right to vest the title to the money, property or real estate so donated in the
Board created under this Chapter to be held and controlled by such Board,
when accepted by the Board, according to the terms of the deed, gift, devise
or bequest of such property. As to such property, the Board shall be held
and considered to be special trustees and in all such cases shall give bond
to the City to be approved by the Mayor and to be in such penal sum as the
Council shall, from time to time by resolution or otherwise, direct.
37.Cross Reference—As to parks and recreation department, §§120.180 et seq.
Section
125.450
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.480
100:121
Section 125.480. Park Board Responsible For City Cemeteries. [R.O.
2009 §33.133; CC 1981 §2-186; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No.
08-16, 1-23-2008]
The Park Board shall be responsible for the administration, care and
maintenance of the City cemeteries within the limits of appropriations
approved by the City Council. The Director of Parks and Recreation or his/
her designated appointee shall serve as City Sexton.
Section 125.490. Cemetery Advisory Committee.38 [R.O. 2009
§33.134; CC 1981 §2-187; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 03-323,
12-23-2003; Ord. No. 04-131, 7-6-2004; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
There shall be a Cemetery Advisory Committee which shall advise the Park
Board concerning cemetery matters. The Committee shall consist of five (5)
members to be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of
the entire Council. The members shall be appointed for three (3) year terms.
Appointments to fill a vacancy shall be for the unexpired term.
38.Cross Reference—As to cemeteries, ch. 250.
Section
125.480
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
125.490
100:122
ARTICLE XI
Digital Media Commission
Section 125.500. Digital Media Commission — Created. [R.O. 2009
§33.140; Ord. No. 99-97, 3-18-1999; Ord. No. 99-397, 11-18-1999;
Ord. No. 02-84, 3-25-2002; Ord. No. 03-65, 3-28-2003; Ord. No.
04-131, 7-6-2004; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008; Ord. No. 12-12 §1,
2-9-2012]
There is hereby established the St. Charles Digital Media Commission to
improve the range and quality of video programming on various City-owned
media distribution channels. The Commission shall be composed of seven
(7) members, six (6) of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor and approved
by a majority of the City Council. Each appointed member shall serve a term
of three (3) years. One (1) member shall be a member of the City Council,
appointed by the Council for a one (1) year period.
Section 125.510. Powers. [R.O. 2009 §33.141; Ord. No. 99-97,
3-18-1999; Ord. No. 03-84, 4-7-2003; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008;
Ord. No. 12-12 §1, 2-9-2012]
The Digital Media Commission may meet monthly or as called by the
Chair of the Commission to review local programming on the City's media
distribution channels, make recommendations for new programs or
features, work towards publication and broadcasting of a regular schedule
of programming, make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council
of annual budget and capital needs, work to insure cooperation between
City video programming efforts and local media companies, assist City staff
in generating creative programs and assist in helping to meet community
needs, including those of the arts, education, neighborhood groups,
business community and non-profit civic organizations. The Commission
shall issue an annual report to the Mayor and the City Council detailing
their work.
Section
125.500
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.510
100:123

ARTICLE XII
Beautification Commission
Section 125.520. Created. [R.O. 2009 §33.142; Ord. No. 99-314,
9-7-1999; Ord. No. 04-131, 7-6-2004; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007;
Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
There is hereby established the City Beautification Commission to develop
a master plan for the beautification of the City of St. Charles community.
The Commission shall be composed of eleven (11) members. Eight (8) at
large members shall be appointed by the Mayor, by a majority of the City
Council and shall serve for a three (3) year term. The Mayor and one
(1) Council member shall serve along with eight (8) at large members
and one (1) representative from the Chamber of Commerce. Staff liaisons
from appropriate departments may be assigned by the Mayor as deemed
appropriate.
Section 125.530. Powers. [R.O. 2009 §33.143; Ord. No. 99-314,
9-7-1999; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chair. The Commission is to
review suggestions for projects to be undertaken and develop guidelines for
funding projects or awarding grants. The Commission shall develop a plan
and make recommendations to the Council. In addition to beautification
projects, Code enforcement, zoning and public work projects may be
included in a goal-based format. The Commission shall encourage private
investment and volunteer involvement in projects by individuals, school
groups, civic organizations and any other group of like mind. The
Commission may establish awards and recognition programs as it deems
appropriate to recognize achievement in the beautification of the City.
Section
125.520
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.530
100:125

ARTICLE XIII
Planning and Zoning Commission
Section 125.540. Established. [R.O. 2009 §33.145; CC 1981 §2-188;
Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
There shall be a Planning and Zoning Commission which shall have the
composition, powers and duties prescribed in Sections 400.970 et seq. of
this Code of Ordinances.
Section
125.540
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.540
100:127

ARTICLE XIV
City Arts and Culture Commission
Section 125.550. Created. [R.O. 2009 §33.150; Ord. No. 01-54,
3-9-2001; Ord. No. 04-131, 7-6-2004; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
There is hereby established the City Arts and Culture Commission to work
for the improvement of the artistic and cultural opportunities available in
the City and to make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council. The
Commission shall be composed of five (5) members to be appointed by the
Mayor and approved by a majority of the City Council and who shall serve
for a three (3) year term. There shall also be one (1) Council member, to be
appointed by the City Council, who shall serve as liaison to the Commission.
Section 125.560. Powers. [R.O. 2009 §33.151; Ord. No. 01-54,
3-9-2001; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chair. The Commission is to
review suggestions for artistic and cultural projects, programs and festivals
to be undertaken, to develop guidelines for funding projects or awarding
grants and to make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council. The
Commission shall encourage private participation and volunteer
involvement in the various projects, programs and festivals and may
establish awards and recognition programs, as it deems appropriate, to
recognize artistic and cultural achievement in the City.
Section
125.550
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.560
100:129

ARTICLE XV
Board of Public Works
Section 125.570. Establishment, Composition and Terms. [R.O.
2009 §33.155; Ord. No. 07-158, 6-8-2007; Ord. No. 08-16,
1-23-2008]
Section 125.580. Board To Manage Municipal Utilities. [R.O. 2009
§33.156; Ord. No. 07-158, 6-8-2007; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
A. There is established within the City the Board of Public Works. This
Board shall consist of seven (7) persons.
1. Six (6) members who shall be appointed by the Mayor and
confirmed by the City Council. These members shall hold office for
a term of three (3) years each or until their successors are
appointed and qualified. Of the initial board, two (2) members shall
serve a one (1) year term, two (2) members shall serve a two (2)
year term and two (2) members shall serve a three (3) year term.
2. One (1) member shall be a member of the City Council. This
member shall be appointed by the City Council and shall serve a
one (1) year term in office unless that member's then current
Council term expires or the member resigns from, or is removed
from, the office of Council member.
B. Except for the member of the Board who is a Council member, no
member of the Board shall receive a salary. No Board member shall be
required to post bond in order to serve on the Board.
C. Except for the member of the Board who is a Council member, any
member of the Board who shall accept a nomination or appointment for
any other municipal office during that member's official term shall be
deemed to have resigned as a member of the Board of Public Works and
that member's membership on the Board shall thereby be automatically
vacated. No member of the Board shall be directly or indirectly
interested in any contract that may be let by the Board or that may
come before it for consideration or in the sale or furnishing in any way
of any materials whatever to a contractor who may enter into such
contract.
D. The Board of Public Works shall elect from its members such officers as
it establishes in its rules and regulations.
E. The Director of Public Works shall be responsible to the Board of Public
Works and the Mayor for the administration of the waterworks and
sewerage system.
A. The Board of Public Works shall have the power and duty to take charge
of, and exercise control over, the combined waterworks and sewerage
system which may be owned by the City at the time that this Board is
established or which may be hereafter acquired by the City and the
Section
125.570
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.580
100:131
Section 125.590. Board To Let Work By Contract. [R.O. 2009
§33.157; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
Board shall monitor the performance of all contracts and work and
have charge, custody and control of all property and assets belonging
or appertaining to such combined waterworks and sewerage system.
The Board shall make all necessary rules and regulations for the
government of the combined waterworks and sewerage system; these
rules and regulations shall carry the force of law and they may be
enforced by the appropriate legal authorities of the City.
B. The Board of Public Works shall have the power and duty to take charge
of, and exercise control over, the storm water drainage system which
may be owned by the City at the time that this utility is established or
which may be hereafter acquired by the City. The Board shall monitor
the performance of all contracts and work and have charge, custody
and control of all property and assets belonging or appertaining to the
storm water drainage system. The Board shall make all necessary rules
and regulations for the government of the storm water drainage
system.
C. In addition to the powers and duties established by Subsections (A) and
(B) of this Section, the Board of Public Works shall review and make
recommendations regarding any street project that has an impact upon
the waterworks, sewerage or storm water drainage systems. [Ord. No.
17-017 § 1, 1-17-2017]
A. The doing of all work and furnishing of all supplies for the combined
waterworks and sewerage system under the Board's supervision or
control shall be let out by the Board or, if directed by the Board, by the
Public Works Director as agent for the Board in accordance with
established City policies and regulations regarding purchasing and
contract administration. All contracts shall be submitted to the City
Council for approval; such approval may be by Council adoption of the
Board minutes which initially approved any contract. Purchases made
by the Board shall be made upon purchase order number provided by
the Purchasing Agent of the City.
B. The doing of all work and furnishing of all supplies for the storm water
drainage system under the Board's supervision or control shall be let
out by the Board or, if directed by the Board, by the Public Works
Director as agent for the Board in accordance with purchasing and
contract administration. All contracts shall be submitted for approval to
the City Council or to the Mayor if permitted by ordinance.
Section
125.580
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
125.600
100:132
Section 125.600. Water and Sewer Rates Recommended By Board
of Public Works and Approved By Council Ordinance. [R.O. 2009
§33.158; Ord. No. 07-158, 6-8-2007; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008; Ord.
No. 09-144, 8-5-2009]
The assessment of rates for water or sewer shall be recommended by the
Board of Public Works and approved by ordinance.
Section 125.610. Reports To Be Kept. [R.O. 2009 §33.160; Ord. No.
08-16, 1-23-2008]
Section 125.620. Inspection of Records — Rules and Regulations.
[R.O. 2009 §33.161; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
Section 125.630. (Reserved)
A. It shall be the duty of the Board of Public Works to make monthly
reports to the Mayor and the City Council of all business under the
Board's jurisdiction. An annual report on the state of the utilities shall
be prepared and transmitted to the Mayor and City Council.
B. The Board of Public Works shall cause to be updated annually a five (5)
year utility rate and financing plan. This shall include any revisions to
the development plans and a budget for fiscal year operation. This
update shall be presented to the Mayor and City Council annually at the
first (1st) Council meeting in May of each year.
A. The Board of Public Works shall keep in its offices a full and complete
record of all its proceedings and such record shall, during all normal
business hours, be open to the inspection of the public.
B. The Board of Public Works may establish such necessary rules and
regulations as it is empowered to do under Section 125.580; any such
rules and regulations may be maintained in a volume to be known as the
"Rules and Regulations of the Board of Public Works" and shall be,
during all normal business hours, open to the inspection of the public.
These rules and regulations will relate to such topics as the Board
deems appropriate, but they may include, in particular, the Board's
internal procedures on its meetings, its administration matters
pertaining to contract administration, matter pertaining to the setting
of rates and matters pertaining to disputes on bills.
Section
125.600
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.630
100:133

ARTICLE XVI
Special Business District Advisory Board
Section 125.640. Established. [R.O. 2009 §33.170; CC 1981 §2-196;
Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
There shall be a Special Business District Advisory Board which shall have
the composition, powers and duties as prescribed in Chapter 610 "Special
Business District" of this Code of Ordinances.
Section
125.640
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.640
100:135

ARTICLE XVII
Tax Increment Financing Commission
Section 125.650. Establishment. [R.O. 2009 §33.180; CC 1981
§2-260; Ord. No. 93-90, 5-5-1993; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008; Ord.
No. 11-157 §1, 8-10-2011]
There is established a Commission which shall be known as the Tax
Increment Financing Commission as set forth in Section 99.820.3, RSMo.
Section 125.660. Composition, Appointments and Terms. [R.O. 2009
§33.181; CC 1981 §2-261; Ord. No. 93-90, 5-5-1993; Ord. No. 00-98,
4-19-2000; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008; Ord. No. 11-157 §2,
8-10-2011]
Section 125.670. Powers and Duties. [R.O. 2009 §33.182; CC 1981
§2-262; Ord. No. 93-90, 5-5-1993; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008; Ord.
No. 11-157 §3, 8-10-2011]
A. The Commission shall consist of twelve (12) members to be appointed
as follows:
1. Six (6) members appointed by the St. Charles County Executive;
2. Three (3) members appointed by the Cities, Towns, or Villages in
St. Charles County which have tax increment financing districts, in
a manner in which the chief elected officers of such Cities, Towns
or Villages agree;
3. Two (2) members appointed by the school boards whose districts
are included in St. Charles County, in a manner in which the school
boards agree; and
4. One (1) member appointed by all other districts levying ad valorem
taxes in the proposed redevelopment area, in a manner in which all
such districts agree.
B. Members appointed to the Commission, except those six (6) members
appointed by the St. Charles County Executive, shall serve on the
Commission for a term to coincide with the length of time a
redevelopment project, redevelopment plan, designation of a
redevelopment area, or any amendment thereto is considered for
approval by the Commission. The six (6) members appointed by the St.
Charles County Executive shall serve on the Commission until replaced.
A. The Commission shall have the following duties:
1. To hold public hearings required by Sections 99.800 to 99.865,
RSMo. (the "TlF Act") on any proposed redevelopment plan,
redevelopment project, designation of a redevelopment area or any
amendments thereto. The Commission shall fix a time and place for
such public hearing within fifteen (15) days from receipt of a
Section
125.650
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.670
100:137
Section 125.680. (Reserved)39
Section 125.685. Procedures For Bids and Proposals. [Ord. No.
11-157 §§4—5, 8-10-2011]
redevelopment plan meeting the minimum requirements of Section
99.810 of the TlF Act, as determined by counsel to the City. Such
public hearing shall take place no later than seventy-five (75) days
from receipt of the redevelopment plan.
2. To provide all notices as required by the TIF Act.
3. To vote and make recommendations to the City Council on all
proposed redevelopment plans, redevelopment projects,
designations of redevelopment areas, and amendments thereto
within thirty (30) days following the completion of the public
hearing. If the Commission fails to vote within thirty (30) days
following the completion of the public hearing referred to in
Section 99.825, RSMo., of the TIF Act concerning the proposed
redevelopment plan, redevelopment project, or designation of
redevelopment area, or any amendments thereto, such plan,
project, designation, or amendment thereto shall be deemed
rejected by the Commission.
A. The City hereby adopts the following procedures for bids and proposals
for the implementation of redevelopment projects:
1. The City or the Commission shall solicit proposals with respect to
the implementation of each proposed redevelopment project.
2. Each request for proposals shall state the primary objectives of the
proposed redevelopment area or redevelopment project.
3. Each request for proposals (or notice thereof) shall be mailed to
those persons or firms that the City's Director of Community
Development or the City's Planning Consultant determines might
be interested in submitting a bid, and shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City. Each request for
proposals shall provide at least thirty (30) days for the submission
of a proposal.
4. Each proposal must demonstrate that "but for" the use of tax
increment financing, the project is not feasible and would not be
completed.
5. Criteria for the selection of proposals will include the impact of the
proposed project on the City and other taxing jurisdictions,
including the projected term for which tax increment financing will
39.Editor's Note—Ord. no. 11-157 §§4—5, adopted August 10, 2011, repealed section 125.680
"prepare annual report". Former section 125.680 derived from R.O. 2009 §33.183; CC 1981
§2-263; ord. no. 93-90, 5-5-93; ord. no. 08-16, 1-23-08.
Section
125.670
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
125.685
100:138
be utilized. The City or the Commission may establish such
additional criteria as it deems appropriate for the selection of bids
and proposals. Each request for proposals shall provide reasonable
opportunity for any person to submit alternative proposals or bids.
Section
125.685
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.685
100:139

ARTICLE XVIII
Library Board
Section 125.690. through Section 125.740. (Reserved)
Section
125.690
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.690
100:141

ARTICLE XIX
Public Facilities Authority Board
Section 125.750. through Section 125.800. (Reserved)
Section
125.750
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.750
100:143

ARTICLE XX
Festival of The Little Hills
Section 125.810. Festival of The Little Hills Established. [R.O. 2009
§33.200; CC 1981 §2-214; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 08-16,
1-23-2008; Ord. No. 08-143, 7-16-2008]
Section 125.820. Festival Area Location. [R.O. 2009 §33.201; CC
1981 §2-215; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008;
Ord. No. 08-143, 7-16-2008; Ord. No. 16-131 §1, 6-21-2016]
The Festival of the Little Hills area shall be beginning at the intersection
of Boone's Lick and Fifth Street north along the eastern line of Fifth Street
to Clark Street; thence east to the Missouri River; thence south along the
west bank of the Missouri River to the northern line of Ameristar Boulevard
extended; thence west along the northern line of Ameristar Boulevard;
thence north along the eastern line of South Main Street to Boone's Lick;
thence west along the north line of Boone's Lick to Fifth, the point of
beginning.
A. Establishment—Purpose. There is hereby designated a festival, to be
known as the Festival of the Little Hills, to be held in August annually.
The purpose of the festival shall be to commemorate the historic
background of the City by holding events in keeping with those
practiced by the early citizens of the City, but not historical activities
exclusively.
B. Official Committee. The organization and activities shall be coordinated
by Fetes des Petites Cotes, a not-for-profit corporation, whose members
are comprised of those not-for-profit organizations located in the City,
which have participated in the preceding Festival of the Little Hills.
C. Rules And Regulations. The Festival Committee shall draw up and
present to the City Council such rules and regulations for the orderly
conduct of the festival, for adoption by the Council by resolution.
Amendments to the rules and regulations shall be submitted by the
Executive Committee of Fetes des Petites Cotes to the City Council for
approval prior to implementation.
D. Cooperation From City Personnel. All appropriate City personnel shall
cooperate with the festival committee to ensure that this event shall be
held with due concern for public health and safety and for the
facilitation of enjoyment of the public and preservation of the City's
heritage.
Section
125.810
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.830
100:145
Section 125.830. Temporary Traffic Signs.40 [R.O. 2009 §33.202; CC
1981 §2-216; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007;
Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008; Ord. No. 08-143, 7-16-2008]
Temporary closing of streets, prohibited parking or traffic direction shall be
recommended by Fetes des Petites Cotes to the Mayor who is thereupon
authorized to install suitable temporary signs in accordance with that
recommendation. Temporary stop signs may be placed at any designated
crosswalks within the festival area. Any person violating the provisions
of this Section when the sign has been installed shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
Section 125.840. Sale of Goods and Services in Festival Area.41 [R.O.
2009 §33.203; CC 1981 §2-217; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No.
08-16, 1-23-2008; Ord. No. 08-143, 7-16-2008; Ord. No. 16-131 §2,
6-21-2016]
During the period of the Festival of the Little Hills no person shall sell
any goods, products or food nor offer any services within the festival area
except as shall be specifically approved by the official committee. Any
person located within the area normally conducting a business therein may
continue to conduct that business without Festival Committee approval;
provided that such business has the same products sold year-round and is
conducted upon the premises, either within the building, on the sidewalk,
or on a private outside area of that business. For a business that leases a
space to a private party, that private party must pay a fee to the Festival
Committee and be approved by the Festival Board. Any sales or vending of
goods or services not normally upon such premises shall not be permitted
unless approved by the Festival Committee.
40.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
41.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
125.830
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
125.840
100:146
ARTICLE XXI
Oktoberfest and Fourth of July Celebration Committees
Section 125.850. Fourth of July Celebration Committee. [R.O. 2009
§33.204; Ord. No. 01-222, 9-21-2001; Ord. No. 02-271, 11-22-2002;
Ord. No. 03-219, 9-3-2003; Ord. No. 04-131, 7-6-2004; Ord. No.
08-16, 1-23-2008]
Section 125.860. Oktoberfest Established. [R.O. 2009 §33.205; Ord.
No. 08-143 §1, 7-16-2008; Ord. No. 10-111 §1, 5-28-2010]
A. The Fourth of July Celebration Committee is hereby established.
B. The purposes of this Committee shall be to promote and perpetuate the
Fourth of July as a celebration in the City with a parade, fitting
ceremonies and a festival.
C. The Committee shall formulate rules and regulations for the orderly
conduct of the celebration. The rules and regulations and any
amendments shall be submitted to the City Council for approval prior to
implementation. Any amendments to the rules and regulations shall be
submitted at least thirty (30) days prior to each celebration.
D. The Committee shall consist of the following members:
1. One (1) member of the City Council, selected by the City Council, to
serve as a voting member.
2. Twelve (12) members at large.
E. The appointments shall be made each year by the Mayor with the
consent of the City Council.
A. Establishment—Purpose. There is hereby designated a festival, to be
known as the Oktoberfest, to be held the last weekend in September
annually. The purpose of the Oktoberfest shall be to showcase the
German heritage of the City by holding events in keeping with those
practiced by the early citizens of the City, but not historical activities
exclusively.
B. Official Committee. The organization and activities shall be coordinated
by Saint Charles Oktoberfest, a not-for-profit corporation, whose
members are comprised of those not-for-profit organizations located in
the City, which have participated in the preceding Oktoberfests.
C. Rules And Regulations. The Oktoberfest Committee shall draw up and
present to the City Council such rules and regulations for the orderly
conduct of the Oktoberfest, for adoption by the Council by resolution.
Amendments to the rules and regulations shall be submitted by the
Executive Committee of the not-for-profit organization to the City
Council for approval prior to implementation.
Section
125.850
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.860
100:147
Section 125.865. Oktoberfest Area Location. [R.O. 2009 §33.205;
Ord. No. 08-143 §1, 7-16-2008; Ord. No. 10-111 §1, 5-28-2010]
The Oktoberfest area shall be defined as Frontier Park.
D. Cooperation From City Personnel. All appropriate City personnel shall
cooperate with the Oktoberfest Committee to ensure that this event
shall be held with due concern for public health and safety and for the
facilitation of enjoyment of the public and preservation of the City's
heritage.
E. CVB Appropriation. In the event that the City appropriates funds to
support Oktoberfest, such funding shall be appropriated within the
budget of the Convention and Visitor's Bureau.
Section
125.860
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
125.865
100:148
ARTICLE XXII
Housing Authority
Section 125.870. Established.42 [R.O. 2009 §33.215; CC 1981
§§2-182, 15-26; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
Section 125.880. Determinations of Council. [R.O. 2009 §33.216; CC
1981 §15-25; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
Section 125.890. Commissioners. [R.O. 2009 §33.217; CC 1981
§15-27; Ord. No. 06-171, 6-30-2006; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
The Mayor is hereby authorized to appoint a Board of Commissioners of
the City Housing Authority which shall consist of five (5) Commissioners.
All Commissioners shall be taxpayers who have resided in the City for five
(5) years prior to their appointment. Commissioners shall be appointed for
a term of office for four (4) years, except that all vacancies shall be filled
for the unexpired term. No Commissioner may be an officer or employee
of the City. The Authority shall select a Chairman from the Commissioners
upon a vacancy in the office of Chairman. There shall also be one (1) Council
member, to be appointed by the City Council, who shall serve as liaison to
the Board of Commissioners.
A. There shall be a Housing Authority which shall have the composition,
powers and duties as prescribed in Sections 125.870 through 125.890.
B. The Authority shall be authorized to transact business and to exercise
all the powers, functions and duties of a housing authority under the
laws of the State.
A. The City Council does hereby find, determine and declare that petitions
bearing the signatures of more than fifty (50) taxpayers of the City,
asserting that there is need for a housing authority to function in the
City and requesting that the City Council so declare, have been filed
with the City Council.
B. The City Council has also found and does now find, determine and
declare that unsanitary and unsafe inhabited dwelling accommodations
exist in the City and that there is a shortage of safe and sanitary
dwelling accommodations in the City available to persons of low income
at rentals they can afford and that there is need for a housing authority
in the City.
42.State Law Reference—Housing authority law, §§99.101—99.230, RSMo.
Section
125.870
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.890
100:149

ARTICLE XXIII
(Reserved)
Section 125.900. through Section 125.930. (Reserved)43
43.Editor's Note—Ord. no. 11-137 §1, adopted July 20, 2011, repealed art. XXIII "youth
advisory commission" consisting of sections 125.900—125.930. Former sections
125.900—125.930 derived from R.O. 2009 §§33.235—33.238; CC 1981 §§2-202—2-205; ord.
no. 86-2, 1-7-86; ord. no. 88-169, 9-8-88; ord. no. 89-128, 6-22-89; ord. no. 00-35, 2-4-00;
ord. no. 08-16, 1-23-08. At the editor's discretion, this article and sections have been
reserved for the city's future use.
Section
125.900
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.900
100:151

ARTICLE XXIV
Strategic Plan Implementation Committee
Section 125.940. Establishment — Purpose — Objectives. [R.O. 2009
§33.240; Ord. No. 09-209, 11-23-2009]
Section 125.950. Members — Term and Qualification. [R.O. 2009
§33.241; Ord. No. 09-209, 11-23-2009; Ord. No. 10-117 §1,
6-11-2010]
A. A Strategic Plan Implementation Committee is established which shall
serve as an advisory committee to the Mayor and City Council
concerning strategic plan implementation and shall have the following
purposes and objectives:
1. Assist the Mayor and City Council in strategic plan implementation;
2. Promote relationships and encourage dialogue with all interested
parties, including staff, boards and commissions and the public to
facilitate strategic plan implementation; and
3. Report as to the progress of plan implementation.
A. The Strategic Plan Implementation Committee shall consist of eleven
(11) voting members who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
consent of the City Council. Each member shall serve a term of two (2)
years.
B. Nine (9) of the eleven (11) voting members shall be residents and
registered voters of the City of Saint Charles. Two (2) of the eleven (11)
voting members may be non-residents who have served on a
subcommittee of the Strategic Plan Committee and have unique,
specialized professional experience in any of the following areas:
1. Arts and culture;
2. City services;
3. Economic development;
4. Education;
5. Environmental sustainability;
6. Housing;
7. Infrastructure;
8. Recreation and leisure;
9. Riverfront; or
10. Transportation.
Section
125.940
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.950
100:153
Section 125.960. Meetings — Reports. [R.O. 2009 §33.242; Ord. No.
09-209, 11-23-2009]
Section 125.970. through Section 125.990. (Reserved)
C. There shall be a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson. The Chairperson
shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the City Council.
The Vice Chairperson shall be elected by a majority of the entire
Committee. The Chairperson shall serve as Chairperson for a term of
two (2) years. The Vice Chairperson shall serve as Vice Chairperson for
a term of one (1) year.
D. The Mayor and Director of Administration shall serve as ex officio nonvoting
members.
A. A majority of the entire Committee shall constitute a quorum for the
purpose of conducting business.
B. The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the Committee. The
Vice Chairperson shall act as Chairperson during the absence or
incapacity of the Chairperson.
C. The Committee shall meet monthly and may meet at other times upon
the request of the majority of the entire Committee.
D. The Committee shall prepare a quarterly report for the Mayor and the
City Council concerning the Committee's activities relative to strategic
plan implementation. The Committee's minutes shall be placed upon
the Council consent agenda for receipt thereof.
Section
125.950
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
125.970
100:154
ARTICLE XXV
Citizens With Disabilities Advisory Board
Section 125.1000. Establishment — Objectives. [R.O. 2009 §33.265;
Ord. No. 94-255, 9-27-1994; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
Section 125.1010. Members — Terms. [R.O. 2009 §33.266; Ord. No.
94-255, 9-27-1994; Ord. No. 02-42, 2-22-2002; Ord. No. 02-83,
3-25-2002; Ord. No. 04-131, 7-6-2004; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
A. There is established a Citizens with Disabilities Advisory Board with the
following purposes and objectives:
1. The Advisory Board shall advise the Mayor, City Council and City
Administration as to all matters relating to the welfare of citizens
with disabilities residing in the City.
2. The Advisory Board shall, on a continuing basis, recommend to the
Mayor, City Council and City administration actions to be taken to
remove impediments to citizens with disabilities, such as
architectural, communication and transportation barriers.
3. The Advisory Board shall, on a continuing basis, recommend to the
Mayor, City Council and the City administration actions which will
enable citizens with disabilities residing in the City to participate in
all aspects of community life in accordance with their abilities.
A. The Citizens with Disabilities Advisory Board shall consist of seven (7)
members. Except for the Council member, the members shall hold office
for a term of three (3) years or until their successors are appointed and
confirmed. No member shall serve for more than three (3) consecutive
three (3) year terms. One (1) member shall be a member of the City
Council. This member shall be appointed by the City Council and shall
serve a one (1) year term in office.
B. The members shall be appointed by the Mayor with approval of the
majority of the City Council.
C. When a vacancy occurs on the Board, the Mayor shall, with the
approval of the City Council, appoint a new member to fill the unexpired
term.
D. An annual meeting of the Board will be held in January at a place and
time as the Board may designate. The Board shall have the power to
establish regular meetings at such dates and times as it deems
appropriate. Special meetings of the Board may be called by the
Chairperson.
E. The Board shall adopt rules for its own organization and procedures,
consistent with existing laws and ordinances of the City. The Board shall
elect from its membership a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson who
shall each serve for a one (1) year term. Elections shall be held during
Section
125.1000
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.1010
100:155
the annual January meeting of the Board. The Chairperson and Vice
Chairperson may be re-elected but may serve no more than five (5)
consecutive terms.
F. All meetings of the Board shall comply with the State open meetings
law and the City's applicable law and regulations concerning open
meetings.
Section
125.1010
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
125.1010
100:156
ARTICLE XXVI
Senior Citizen Advisory Commission
Section 125.1020. Establishment — Objectives. [R.O. 2009 §33.270;
Ord. No. 02-278, 11-22-2002; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
Section 125.1030. Members — Terms. [R.O. 2009 §33.271; Ord. No.
02-278, 11-22-2002; Ord. No. 04-131, 7-6-2004; Ord. No. 08-16,
1-23-2008; Ord. No. 11-152 §1, 8-3-2011]
Section 125.1040. Meetings — Attendance. [R.O. 2009 §33.272; Ord.
No. 02-278, 11-22-2002; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
Meetings shall be held periodically as necessary in accordance with rules
established by the Commission. Any member who is absent from three (3)
regularly scheduled consecutive meetings shall automatically forfeit his/her
office unless the Mayor has excused any of those absences. It shall be the
duty of the Chairperson of the Commission to promptly notify the Mayor of
any absences of members.
Section 125.1050. Election of Officers — Terms. [R.O. 2009 §33.273;
Ord. No. 02-278, 11-22-2002; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
The Senior Citizen Advisory Commission shall elect the following officers
from their membership to serve one (1) year terms: Chairperson, Vice
Chairperson and Secretary.
A. There is hereby established a Senior Citizen Advisory Commission in
and for the City with the following purposes and objectives:
1. To promote senior citizen involvement in governmental affairs.
2. To advise the City Council and Mayor on the following areas:
education, cultural development, leisure activities, social concerns
and any other issues requested by the Council and Mayor.
A. The Senior Citizen Advisory Commission shall consist of one (1)
member from each ward and four (4) members at large.
B. Senior citizen members shall be appointed by the Mayor with approval
by the City Council. Members shall be fifty-five (55) years of age or
older at the time of appointment.
C. All members shall be appointed for three (3) year terms. Four (4)
members shall initially be appointed for one (1) year, four (4) members
shall initially be appointed for two (2) years and six (6) members shall
initially be appointed for three (3) years.
D. Annually, the City Council shall designate one (1) of its members as
liaison to the Senior Citizen Advisory Commission.
Section
125.1020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.1050
100:157

ARTICLE XXVII
(Reserved)
Section 125.1060. through Section 125.1090. (Reserved)44
44.Editor's Note—Ord. no. 11-137 §2, adopted July 20, 2011, repealed art. XXVII "early
childhood care advisory commission" consisting of sections 125.1060—125.1090. Former
sections 125.1060—125.1090 derived from R.O. 2009 §§33.280—33.283; ord. no. 03-207,
8-25-03; ord. no. 08-16, 1-23-08. At the editor's discretion, this article and sections have
been reserved for the city's future use.
Section
125.1060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.1060
100:159

ARTICLE XXVIII
(Reserved)
Section 125.1100. through Section 125.1110. (Reserved)45
45.Editor's Note—Ord. no. 11-137 §3, adopted July 20, 2011, repealed art. XXVIII "north 94
redevelopment and revitalization commission" consisting of sections 125.1100—125.1110.
Former sections 125.1100—125.1110 derived from R.O. 2009 §§33.300—33.301; ord. no.
05-11, 1-11-05; ord. no. 08-16, 1-23-08. At the editor's discretion, this article and sections
have been reserved for the city's future use.
Section
125.1100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.1100
100:161

ARTICLE XXIX
(Reserved)
Section 125.1120. through Section 125.1140. (Reserved)46
46.Editor's Note—Ord. No. 11-137 §4, adopted July 20, 2011, repealed art. XXIX "City of St.
Charles wellness commission" consisting of sections 125.1120—125.1140. Former sections
125.1120—125.1140 derived from R.O. 2009 §§33.310—33.312; ord. no. 06-194, 7-28-06;
ord. no. 08-16, 1-23-08. At the editor's discretion, this article and sections have been
reserved for the city's future use.
Section
125.1120
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.1120
100:163

ARTICLE XXX
Human Relations Commission
Section 125.1150. Mission, Vision, Goals and Objectives. [R.O. 2009
§33.320; Ord. No. 08-126, 6-18-2008]
A. Mission Of The Commission. The mission of the Human Relations
Commission is to promote respect, harmony and understanding
throughout the Saint Charles community.
B. Vision Of The Commission. The vision of the Human Relations
Commission is an equal-opportunity community in which all persons
respect one another and give and receive fair treatment.
C. Goals And Objectives Of The Commission.
1. The goals of the Commission shall be:
a. Promote mutual understanding and respect among all social,
racial, religious, cultural and ethnic groups in the community.
b. Endeavor to eliminate prejudice among various groups in the
community and create harmonious relationships among
citizens, groups, agencies and departments within the City.
2. The objectives of the Commission shall be:
a. Plan activities or programs that increase understanding and
respect among all residents of the City.
b. Establish relationships and encourage dialogue with diverse
groups within the community to identify and address tensions
that may arise.
c. Provide methods and resources for citizens to take concerns
and complaints related to discrimination in employment, public
accommodation and housing; or related to bias incidents and
hate crimes motivated because of race, color, religion, national
origin, sex, sexual orientation or disability of the victim.
d. Facilitate mediation services as needed in the community.
e. Support efforts by law enforcement agencies, community
groups and educational institutions to collect and review data
related to the following and serve as repository for such data:
(1) Patterns of discrimination and hate crimes.
(2) Issues of civil rights and human rights.
(3) Community relations efforts within the City.
f. Support the continued assembly and dissemination of
pertinent data, studies and programs for the purposes of:
Section
125.1150
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.1150
100:165
Section 125.1160. Internal Operation. [R.O. 2009 §33.321; Ord. No.
08-126, 6-18-2008]
Section 125.1170. Commission Structure. [R.O. 2009 §33.322; Ord.
No. 08-126, 6-18-2008]
(1) Promoting best practices to improve human relations.
(2) Providing training materials that may be used by civic or
religious organizations, educational institutions, law
enforcement agencies, businesses and others to prevent
unfair treatment and encourage harmonious relations.
(3) Disseminating such information and research as, in its
judgment, will promote good will and minimize or
eliminate discrimination in the City.
(4) Measuring the effectiveness of programs established to
educate the citizens of St. Charles in human relations
issues and actions.
A. Advise and consult with the Mayor and City Council on matters
involving discrimination.
B. Study, advise and make recommendations for legislation, policies,
procedures and practices of the City and other public entities as are
consistent with the purposes of this Chapter.
C. Regularly advise the Mayor and City Council, through distribution of its
agenda, minutes, memoranda, reports and other pertinent documents,
of the programs and activities being planned by the Commission; the
concerns or complaints concerning discrimination or hate crimes
received by the Commission; the patterns within the complaints; and
other terms of business before the Commission.
D. Prepare an annual report for the Mayor and the City Council
concerning the Commission's activities under the provisions of this
Section with recommendations and pertinent comments.
E. All media interaction shall first be approved through the office of the
Mayor.
A. Composition.
1. There shall be a Human Relations Commission consisting of eleven
(11) members, appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the City
Council. Members shall include the St. Charles Police Chief or his/
her designee; one (1) member of the City Council; and one (1)
superintendent or his/her designee from the school districts of the
City of St. Charles, Francis Howell and Orchard Farm.
2. The Mayor of Saint Charles shall serve ex officio as a non-voting
member.
Section
125.1150
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
125.1170
100:166
3. All members shall serve without compensation. All members shall
serve staggered terms of three (3) years each. Appointees to the
first (1st) Commission shall serve shortened terms designated at
the time of appointment, with three (3) Commissioners serving for
one (1) year, three (3) for two (2) years and three (3) for three (3)
years. In the event of death or resignation of any member, the
Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, shall appoint a
successor to serve the unexpired portion of his/her term.
B. Commissioner Qualifications.
1. Commissioners should represent the diversity within the City as
much as possible. Thy should have a strong commitment to human
rights and to the principles of equal opportunity.
2. College and high school students may be appointed to serve one (1)
year terms as non-voting members of the Commission.
C. Internal Elections And Commission Meetings.
1. Each year the Commission shall elect one (1) Commissioner as
Chair, one (1) Commissioner as Vice Chair and one (1)
Commissioner as Secretary/Treasurer.
2. The Chair shall preside at all meetings of the Commission and
perform all the duties and functions of the Chair thereof.
3. The Vice Chair shall act as Chair during the absence or incapacity
of the Chair. When so acting, the Vice Chair shall have and perform
all the duties and functions of the Chair and the Commission.
4. The Secretary/Treasurer shall record or sign minutes of the
Commission's meetings and, as necessary, carry out financial duties
and maintain financial records as stated in the Charter.
5. The terms of office of the Chair, Vice Chair and Secretary/Treasurer
shall be one (1) year. Members may be reappointed to the
Commission and may serve consecutive terms as Chair, Vice Chair
or Secretary/Treasurer.
6. The Chair, Vice Chair or Secretary/Treasurer may resign from
office at any time during the term and may do so without resigning
from the Commission. In such event, the Commission shall elect
another member to replace the resigning officer. Such person shall
serve the unexpired term of the person he/she replaces.
7. A majority of the appointed members of the Commission shall
constitute a quorum for the purpose of conducting the business
thereof.
8. The Commission shall meet monthly. The Commission shall also
meet at other times, as needed, to plan and carry out programs or
activities or to respond to acute needs that may arise.
Section
125.1170
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.1180
100:167
Section 125.1180. Interface With Community. [R.O. 2009 §33.323;
Ord. No. 08-126, 6-18-2008]
With direction and support from the City, the Commission will develop,
implement and annually update a communication plan.
Section 125.1190. Learning Organization. [R.O. 2009 §33.324; Ord.
No. 08-126, 6-18-2008]
Section 125.1200. Funding. [R.O. 2009 §33.325; Ord. No. 08-126,
6-18-2008]
The City shall work with the Commission to seek, apply for and receive
grants and/or funding to support its programs and operations.
A. Commission members shall recognize that their position requires
ongoing education and shall strive to participate in the training made
available to them. The City will facilitate training and education by
various agencies to familiarize Commission members with aspects of
City operations; Federal, State and local hate crime and antidiscrimination
laws; the character and cultural aspects of the City and
its residents; and successful techniques for dispute resolution,
mediation and community reconciliation.
B. Commission members who repeatedly fail to participate in such
training may forfeit their office.
Section
125.1180
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
125.1200
100:168
ARTICLE XXXI
Veteran's Commission
Section 125.1210. Establishment — Purpose — Objectives. [R.O.
2009 §33.410; Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
Section 125.1220. Members and Terms. [R.O. 2009 §33.411; Ord.
No. 08-16, 1-23-2008; Ord. No. 11-02 §2, 1-6-2011]
Section 125.1230. Organization and Powers. [R.O. 2009 §33.412;
Ord. No. 08-16, 1-23-2008]
The members at their first (1st) meeting shall elect a Chairman and Vice
Chairman each who shall serve a term of one (1) year. The Commission shall
meet monthly or at such other times as it may determine.
A. There is hereby established the City of St. Charles Veteran's
Commission with the following objectives and purposes:
1. To further promote and address issues concerning the veterans of
our Armed Forces.
A. The Commission shall consist of nine (9) members who shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Council. There shall
also be one (1) Council member, to be appointed by the City Council,
who shall serve as liaison to the Commission.
B. The nine (9) members will be appointed for a term of three (3) years
but, of the members first (1st) appointed for a term of one (1) year, two
(2) shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years and three (3) shall be
appointed for a term of three (3) years.
Section
125.1210
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.1230
100:169

ARTICLE XXXII
Show Me PACE — Property Assessed Clean Energy
Section 125.1240. Participation in Show Me PACE. [Ord. No. 16-123
§1, 6-7-2016]
A. Title And Definitions.
1. Title. This Article shall be known and may be cited as "The City of
St. Charles, Missouri Property Assessed Clean Energy Ordinance."
2. Definitions. Except as specifically defined below, words and
phrases used in this Article shall have their customary meanings.
Words and phrases defined in Section 67.2800.2, RSMo., as
amended, shall have their defined meanings when used in this
Article. As used in this Article, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings indicated.
DISTRICTS — Both the Missouri Clean Energy District and Show
Me PACE.
MCED — The Missouri Clean Energy District.
PACE ASSESSMENT — A special assessment made against
qualifying property in consideration of PACE funding.
PACE FUNDING — Funds provided to the owner(s) of qualified
property by a district for an energy efficiency or renewable energy
improvement.
QUALIFYING PROPERTY or QUALIFIED PROPERTY — Real
property located within the municipal boundaries of the City of St.
Charles, Missouri, that satisfies the criteria set forth in the PACE
Act.47
SHOW ME PACE — The Show Me PACE District.
B. Program Administration. Eligible City of St. Charles, Missouri,
qualifying property owners may select either MCED or Show Me PACE
to serve as program administrator on a project-by-project basis. Both
districts shall each independently administer the functions of the PACE
program for their projects within the City by:
1. Providing property owners with an application in order to apply for
PACE funding;
2. Developing standards for the approval of projects submitted by
qualifying property owners;
3. Reviewing applications and select qualified projects;
4. Entering into assessment contracts with qualifying property
owners;
47.Editor's Note: See § 67.2800 et seq., RSMo.
Section
125.1240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.1240
100:171
5. Providing a copy of each executed notice of assessment to the
County Assessor and causing a copy of each such notice of
assessment to be recorded in the real estate records of the
Recorder of Deeds of the County of St. Charles, Missouri;
6. Authorizing and disbursing the PACE funding to the qualifying
property owners;
7. Receiving the PACE assessment from the Collector of Revenue of
the County of St. Charles, Missouri;
8. Recording any lien, if needed, due to non-payment of a PACE
Assessment; and
9. Exercising all powers granted by Section 67.2810.2, RSMo., as
amended, including, but not limited to, the power to levy and
collect the PACE assessment pursuant to an assessment contract
with a qualifying property owner.
C. Liability Of City Officials; Liability Of City. Notwithstanding any other
provision of law to the contrary, the City of St. Charles, Missouri, and its
employees, officers and elected and appointed officials, shall not be
liable to any person for claims, of whatever kind or nature, under or
related to the City's participation in the PACE program, including,
without limitation, claims for or related to uncollected PACE
assessments. The City of St. Charles, Missouri, has no liability to a
property owner for or related to energy savings improvements funded
under a PACE program. The districts shall for all purposes be
considered independent entities and shall not be considered a political
subdivision of the City of St. Charles, Missouri.
D. Existing Laws Not Superseded. Any project or improvement at any
qualifying property which is funded in whole or in part by PACE funding
shall be subject to all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations in effect at
that time.
E. City As A Non-Party. The City of St. Charles, Missouri, shall not be a
party to any PACE funding agreement, loan, or other commitment,
however denominated, executed between the districts and the owner(s)
(or their representatives, together with any successors and assigns) of
any qualifying property.
Section
125.1240
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
125.1240
100:172
Chapter 130
PERSONNEL CODE AND EMPLOYMENT POLICIES
Section
125.1240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
125.1240
100:173

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 130.010. Title and Scope. [R.O. 2009 §36.01; CC 1981
§2-330; Ord. No. 83-23, 3-30-1983; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
This Chapter shall be identified and may be referred to as the "Personnel
Code of the City of St. Charles" and shall apply to all classified employees of
all departments, agencies and offices responsible to the Mayor.
Section 130.020. Purpose — Appointments — Promotions.48 [R.O.
2009 §36.02; CC 1981 §2-331; Ord. No. 83-23, 3-30-1983]
Section 130.030. Equal Employment Opportunity. [R.O. 2009
§36.03; CC 1981 §2-332; Ord. No. 83-23, 3-30-1983]
Discrimination against any person in recruitment, examination,
appointment, training, promotion, retention, discipline or any other aspect
of personnel administration because of political or religious opinions or
affiliations or because of race, national origin or other non-merit factors
is prohibited. Discrimination on the basis of age, sex or physical disability
shall be prohibited except where specific age, sex or physical requirements
constitute a bona fide occupational qualification necessary to proper and
efficient administration.
A. The general purpose of this Personnel Code is to provide a
comprehensive system that ensures that all appointments and
promotions of City employees shall be made solely on the basis of merit
and proficiency as demonstrated by examination, service ratings,
length of service or some other evidence of competence in accordance
with the Charter.
B. All personnel administration, including appointment, promotion,
transfer, layoff, removal, discipline, benefits, including wage
administration and other incidents of City employment, shall be based
on merit principles.
C. No person shall willfully or corruptly make any false statement,
certificate, rating or report in regard to any test, certification or
appointment held or made under personnel provisions of this City or in
any manner commit or attempt to commit any fraud preventing the
impartial administration of the rules and regulation made thereunder.
48.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
130.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
130.040
100:175
Section 130.040. Human Resources Director To Administer. [R.O.
2009 §36.04; CC 1981 §2-333; Ord. No. 83-23, 3-30-1983; Ord. No.
02-128, 5-28-2002; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
The Human Resources Director shall administer the personnel system of the
City in accordance with Section 7.9 of the City Charter at the direction of
the Mayor.
Section 130.050. Personnel Procedures Manual. [R.O. 2009 §36.05;
CC 1981 §2-334; Ord. No. 83-23, 3-30-1983; Ord. No. 02-128,
5-28-2002; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007; Ord. No. 10-53 §1,
3-22-2010]
Section 130.060. Classification of Positions. [R.O. 2009 §36.06; CC
1981 §2-340; Ord. No. 83-23, 3-30-1983; Ord. No. 02-128,
5-28-2002; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
A. The Director of Human Resources shall prepare and develop personnel
rules and a manual which shall not conflict with the provisions of the
Charter and the Personnel Code.
B. These rules and manual shall constitute, for approval by the Mayor, the
personnel system and shall provide for:
1. Classification of all City positions, based on duties, authority and
responsibility of each position, with adequate provision for
reclassification of any position whenever warranted by changed
circumstances.
2. Methods for determining the merit and proficiency of candidates
for appointments or for promotions.
3. A pay plan for all City positions.
4. Attendance regulations, hours of work and provisions for vacations,
sick leave and other types of leaves.
5. Discipline procedures, policies and appeal procedures.
6. The policies and procedures regulating the reduction in force and
removal of employees.
7. Policies regarding in-service training programs.
8. The policies and procedures governing persons holding provisional
appointments.
9. Other practices and procedures necessary to the administration of
the City personnel system.
A. The classification plan shall provide a complete inventory of all
positions in City service and an accurate description and specifications
for each class of employment. The plan shall standardize titles, each of
Section
130.040
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
130.060
100:176
Section 130.070. Employee Compensation. [R.O. 2009 §36.07; CC
1981 §2-319; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 96-186, 6-20-1996;
Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
Section 130.080. Probationary Period. [R.O. 2009 §36.08; CC 1981
§2-362; Ord. No. 83-23, 3-30-1983; Ord. No. 86-59, 3-21-1986; Ord.
No. 89-214, 11-8-1989; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
which is indicative of a definite range of duties and responsibilities and
has the same meaning throughout the classified service.
B. The Director of Human Resources, under the direction of the Mayor,
shall administer and maintain the City's classification plan, making
amendments thereto so as to accurately reflect the duties,
responsibilities and requirements of each class or position. The position
classification plan shall set forth for each class or position a class title, a
statement of duties, authority, responsibilities thereof and the
qualifications that are necessary.
A. Administration of pay rates within pay ranges and on the basis of merit
and longevity is the responsibility of the Mayor. The Mayor and the City
Council shall determine the pay rates and the merit and longevity
increases for the position of City Attorney. The City Council shall
determine the pay rate and the merit and longevity increases for the
position of City Clerk and the City Clerk's staff. All positions in the City
service requiring similar qualifications and having similar duties and
responsibilities shall be placed in the same pay ranges. Whenever there
is a large-scale reclassification of positions, the City may choose to
move some or all of the reclassified positions to the new classifications
in increments rather than in a single adjustment.
B. The compensation of all officers and employees of the City shall be fixed
by the Council; but the salary of an officer shall not be changed during
the time for which he/she was elected or appointed.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the probationary period is to establish a time
frame which shall be utilized as a test of fitness and competence of the
new employee or newly promoted employee and allows the City to
measure and reject any employee whose probationary period is
substandard or marginal without right of appeal.
B. General. The probationary or working test period for all non-elected
full-time City employees is six (6) months except appointed police and
fire personnel, park rangers, community service aides and public safety
communications specialists.
C. Police And Fire Personnel. For newly appointed or promoted police and
fire sworn personnel the probationary or working test period shall
normally be one (1) year of continuous City service from the date of
employment. However for untrained sworn Police Officers who lack six
hundred forty (640) hours of police training when hired, the
Section
130.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
130.080
100:177
Section 130.090. Medical Examinations. [R.O. 2009 §36.09; CC
1981 §2-363; Ord. No. 83-23, 3-30-1983]
The City may require an employee or applicant to submit to a medical
examination by a certified, qualified practicing physician to determine the
ability of such an employee or applicant to perform the duties required
of the position held or sought. If the results of the medical examination
indicate an individual may not be able to perform the duties required of the
position, it may be grounds for removal of the employee or rejection of the
applicant.
Section 130.100. Nepotism. [R.O. 2009 §36.10; CC 1981 §3-364;
Ord. No. 83-23, 3-30-1983]
probationary or working test period shall be eighteen (18) months of
continuous City service from the date of employment.
D. Community Services Aides And Public Safety Communications
Specialists. The probationary or working test period for all community
services aides and public safety communications specialists is one (1)
year.
E. Park Rangers. The probationary or working test period for newly
appointed or promoted park rangers who are untrained shall be
eighteen (18) months of continuous City service from the date of
employment. The probationary or working test period for newly
appointed or promoted park rangers who are partially trained shall be
twelve (12) months plus an extension of time equal to the time the
ranger is enrolled in training. The probationary or working test period
for newly appointed or promoted park rangers who have six hundred
forty (640) hours of training shall be one (1) year.
F. Extension. All applicable probationary periods may be extended by the
amount of all unscheduled absences. At the end of the probationary
period, if there is reason to believe that the employee may develop the
ability to perform satisfactorily by an extension of the probationary
period, the department head, with the approval of the Mayor, may grant
an extension of the probationary period which shall not exceed six (6)
months.
A. Two (2) members of an immediate family shall not be employed under
the same supervisor; nor shall two (2) members of an immediate family
be employed at the same time, regardless of the department, if such
employment would result in an employee supervising a member of his/
her immediate family. This policy applies to promotions, demotions,
transfers, reinstatements and new employment. The provisions of this
Section shall not be retroactive and no action is taken concerning those
members of the same family employed on or before June 18, 1983.
B. For the purpose of this Section only, the immediate family is classified
as husband, wife, mother, father, brother, sister, children, stepchildren,
Section
130.080
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
130.100
100:178
Section 130.110. Employing Residents. [R.O. 2009 §36.11; CC 1981
§2-366; Ord. No. 84-135, 11-20-1984; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
The Mayor shall adopt and implement rules giving preference for initial
employment to residents of the City.
Section 130.120. Educational Assistance Program. [R.O. 2009
§36.12; CC 1981 §3-367; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986]
The City Council may establish an educational assistance program for
permanent full-time employees of the City subject to such rules and
regulations as may be adopted by the City Council.
Section 130.130. Offender Registration With Police Department.
[R.O. 2009 §36.14; Ord. No. 06-250, 9-11-2006; Ord. No. 07-162,
6-11-2007]
Section 130.140. Department Directors — Removal of. [R.O. 2009
§36.15; Ord. No. 08-110, 5-30-2008]
Except as otherwise provided in the Charter, no department director shall
be removed except by executive order of the Mayor with the approval of a
majority vote of the entire Council.
Section 130.150. Department Directors — Residency. [R.O. 2009
§36.16; Ord. No. 10-160 §1, 8-5-2010; Ord. No. 11-224 §1,
11-4-2011]
After November 4, 2011, a person appointed as the Director of
Administration, Director of Community Development, Director of Public
mother-in-law, father-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, grandparents,
grandchildren, stepfather, stepmother, brother-in-law, sister-in-law,
uncle or aunt.
A. Any person employed by the City that is required to register with the
Chief Law Enforcement Official of the County in which such person
resides pursuant to Section 589.400, RSMo., then that person shall
register with the City Police Department prior to the start of the first
(1st) work shift after registering pursuant to Section 589.400, RSMo.
B. Any registration pursuant to Subsection (A) above shall consist of
completion of an offender registration form developed by the Missouri
State Highway Patrol. This registration form is available at the City
Police Department.
C. Any person who violates any of the provisions of Subsection (A) above
shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Section 100.150.
D. Any City employee who becomes aware of any individual in violation of
this Section shall notify the Chief of Police, Mayor and City Clerk who
will notify the City Council.
Section
130.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
130.150
100:179
Works, Chief of Police or Fire Chief shall become a City resident by a date
established by the Council at the time of appointment. The Council may
waive this requirement by an affirmative vote of the entire Council.
Section
130.150
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
130.150
100:180
ARTICLE II
Personnel Board
Section 130.160. Established.49 [R.O. 2009 §36.25; CC 1981 §2-335;
Ord. No. 83-23, 3-30-1983; Ord. No. 10-49 §1, 3-22-2010]
A City Personnel Board is hereby established. The Board shall be composed
of seven (7) members. Members of the Board shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the consent of a majority of all members of the City Council for
a term of three (3) years. The Mayor, with the consent of a majority of all
the members of the City Council, shall fill any vacancies for any unexpired
term. A member of the Board may be removed for cause in the same manner
as prescribed by ordinance for the removal of other City appointive officers.
Section 130.170. Qualifications — Oath of Office.50 [R.O. 2009
§36.26; CC 1981 §2-336; Ord. No. 83-23, 3-30-1983; Ord. No. 84-98,
8-23-1984; Ord. No. 04-108, 5-28-2004; Ord. No. 10-49 §1,
3-22-2010]
Section 130.180. Meetings — Officers — Compensation — Voting.
[R.O. 2009 §36.27; CC 1981 §§2-337—2-338; Ord. No. 83-23,
3-30-1983; Ord. No. 02-128, 5-28-2002; Ord. No. 10-49 §1,
3-22-2010]
A. Each member of this Board shall be a resident and qualified, registered
voter of the City at time of appointment. Any member of the Board who
ceases to meet the qualifications of the Board shall immediately forfeit
Board membership. No Board member shall hold a full-time position in
City Government during their term of appointment.
B. Members of the Board shall be required to take the oath of office
prescribed by ordinance for City Officers, including a statement that
they are in sympathy with the merit principle as it is specified by the
City Charter.
A. Meetings—Officers—Compensation. The Personnel Board shall be
subject to call and shall meet at such times and places as may be
designated by the Board Chairperson. The Chairperson to be elected by
the Board shall preside at all Board meetings. The Board members shall
also elect a Vice Chairperson. The Board shall elect officers at its first
(1st) meeting and shall elect new officers in January of each year. The
Board may adopt rules governing its internal operation and file a copy
of same with the City Clerk. Board members shall serve without
compensation. It shall take the affirmative vote of the majority of the
entire Board to adopt a resolution or motion.
B. Secretary. The Director of Human Resources shall serve as staff liaison
and Secretary to the Board.
49.State Law Reference—Personnel board, §85.541(2), RSMo.
50.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
130.160
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
130.190
100:181
Section 130.190. Powers and Duties — Hear Appeals — Serve As
Police and Fire Personnel Board — Make Advisory
Recommendations. [R.O. 2009 §36.28; CC 1981 §2-339; Ord. No.
83-23, 3-30-1983; Ord. No. 86-3, 1-8-1986; Ord. No. 91-201,
10-2-1991; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007; Ord. No. 10-49 §1,
3-22-2010]
A. The Personnel Board shall have the following powers and duties:
1. Hear appeals as set forth in this Code, the employee personnel
manual or a labor agreement.
2. Serve as the Police and Fire Personnel Board with such powers and
duties as established by ordinance.
3. As directed by the Mayor or Council, review, study and make
recommendations regarding employment policies, practices and
procedures.
Section
130.190
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
130.190
100:182
ARTICLE III
Employees' Code of Ethics
Section 130.195. Standards of Behavior. [Ord. No. 11-175 §1,
9-7-2011]
General Elected Official, Appointed Official and Employee Conduct.
The City expects elected officials, appointed officials and employees will
perform their duties conscientiously, honestly, and in accordance with the
best interests of the public. Elected officials, appointed officials and
employees shall not use their position or the knowledge gained as a result
of their position for private or personal advantage.
The City expects its elected officials, appointed officials and employees to
conduct themselves in a businesslike manner. For example, the use of illegal
substances, consumption of alcoholic beverages, gambling, fighting, and
similar unprofessional activities are strictly prohibited while on the job.
Elected officials, appointed officials and employees shall not engage in
sexual harassment, or conduct themselves in a way that could be construed
as such, for example, by using inappropriate language, keeping or posting
inappropriate materials in their work area, or accessing inappropriate
materials on their computer.
Section 130.200. Fair Treatment of Citizens.51 [R.O. 2009 §36.40; CC
1981 §2-342; Ord. No. 83-23, 3-30-1983; Ord. No. 11-175 §1,
9-7-2011]
Elected officials, appointed officials and employees shall give fair and equal
treatment to every citizen. No elected official, appointed official or
employee shall grant special consideration or treatment or advantage to any
citizen beyond that which is available to every other citizen.
Section 130.205. Gift in Connection With Appointments.52 [R.O.
2009 §36.41; CC 1981 §2-343; Ord. No. 83-23, 3-30-1983; Ord. No.
11-175 §1, 9-7-2011]
No person seeking appointment to, or promotion in, the service of the City
shall either directly or indirectly give, render or pay any money, service or
other thing of value to any person for, or on account of, or in connection with
his or her test, appointment, proposed appointment, promotion or proposed
promotion.
Section 130.210. Financial Interest in City Contracts — Sales To
City and Purchases from City of Surplus Property.53 [R.O. 2009
51.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
52.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
53.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
130.195
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
130.210
100:183
§36.42; CC 1981 §2-351; Ord. No. 83-23, 3-30-1983; Ord. No. 11-175
§1, 9-7-2011; Ord. No. 15-060 §1, 4-7-2015]
Section 130.215. Engaging in Private Interest.54 [R.O. 2009 §36.43;
CC 1981 §2-345; Ord. No. 83-25, 3-30-1983; Ord. No. 11-175 §1,
9-7-2011]
No elected official, appointed official or employee shall engage in any
business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct,
or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her
official duties in the public interest or would tend to impair his or her
independence or judgment or action in the performance of his or her official
duties.
Section 130.220. Accepting Gifts From Person Dealing With City.
[R.O. 2009 §36.45; CC 1981 §2-347; Ord. No. 83-23, 3-30-1983; Ord.
No. 11-175 §1, 9-7-2011]
A. Sales To City. No elected official, appointed official or employee shall
sell or barter anything to the City, or to a contractor to be supplied to
the City, or be financially interested, directly or indirectly, in the sale to
the City of any land, materials, supplies, equipment or services.
Nothing herein shall prohibit an employment contract between the City
and an employee.
B. Financial Interest In City Contracts - Purchase Of Surplus Property. No
elected official, appointed official or employee shall purchase any City
property except such property that is declared surplus and which is
offered generally to the public for purchase and then only on the same
terms and conditions as are offered to the public, except that a
department director shall not purchase any surplus property
originating from the director's department.
A. No elected official, appointed official or employee shall accept any gift,
whether in the form of service, loan, thing, promise, or in any other
form from any person which, to his knowledge, is interested, directly or
indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in business dealings with the City,
which would affect the performance or non-performance of duty for
personal or financial gain.
B. Employees are expected to perform their duties in a fair and evenhanded
manner and are prohibited from taking payment, gifts, loans or
other items of value from anyone in exchange for performing their
duties. Delivery of services should be able to stand up to full public
disclosure and should in no way be granted or withheld because of gifts,
favors or other considerations given to an employee. However,
acceptance of a nominal gift up to fifty dollars ($50.00) in value is
permitted when not given in exchange for the performance of duties. In
all such matters involving gifts, the primary consideration is that the
54.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
130.210
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
130.220
100:184
Section 130.225. Disclosure or Improper Use of Confidential
Information.55 [R.O. 2009 §36.46; CC 1981 §2-348; Ord. No. 83-23,
3-30-1983; Ord. No. 11-175 §1, 9-7-2011]
No elected official, appointed official or employee shall disclose confidential
information concerning the property, government, employees or affairs of
the City, nor shall he or she use or seek such information to advance the
financial or other private interest of himself or others, or to damage or
impede City business or fellow employee(s).
Section 130.230. Unauthorized Use of City Property.56 [R.O. 2009
§36.47; CC 1981 §2-349; Ord. No. 83-23, 3-30-1983; Ord. No. 11-175
§1, 9-7-2011]
No elected official, appointed official or employee shall request or permit
the use of City-owned property for any purpose except the conduct of City
business. No elected official, appointed official or employee shall, directly
or indirectly, attempt to obtain any service or benefit from an employee for
the personal benefit of such elected official, appointed official or employee.
Section 130.235. Outside Employment.57 [R.O. 2009 §36.48; CC
1981 §2-350; Ord. No. 83-23, 3-30-1983; Ord. No. 02-128,
5-28-2002; Ord. No. 11-175 §1, 9-7-2011]
No full-time employee in the classified service shall accept outside
employment, whether part-time, temporary or permanent, without prior
written approval of their department director. Each change in outside
employment shall require separate approval. A duplicate copy of the
approval shall be filed with the Human Resources Department. Approval
shall not be granted when such outside employment interferes or is likely
to conflict with the employee's City service. Employees shall not engage in
any private business or activity while on duty. No employee shall engage
in or accept private employment or render any service for private interest
when such employment or service is incompatible or creates a conflict of
interest with the employee's official duties. No department director shall
prohibit outside employment unless such employment shall conflict with the
employee's City service.
donor not receives, or appears to receive, treatment not given to any
other citizen. If an employee has any concern about the wisdom,
legality or honorability of accepting a gift, this concern should be
brought to the attention of the City Attorney.
55.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
56.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
57.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
130.220
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
130.240
100:185
Section 130.240. Disclosing Private Interest in Proposed City
Legislation. [R.O. 2009 §36.44; CC 1981 §2-346; Ord. No. 83-23,
3-30-1983; Ord. No. 11-175 §1, 9-7-2011]
An elected official, appointed official or employee who has a financial or
other private interest in any proposed City legislation shall disclose on the
records of the Council the nature and extent of such interest. City Council
members should follow City Code Sections 115.280 et seq., and disclose all
matters as appropriate.
Section 130.245. Political Activities. [R.O. 2009 §36.49; CC 1981
§2-352; Ord. No. 83-23, 3-30-1983; Ord. No. 85-24, 3-20-1985; Ord.
No. 85-88, 7-19-1985; Ord. No. 99-386, 11-18-1999; Ord. No. 01-29,
2-23-2001; Ord. No. 11-175 §1, 9-7-2011]
A. Coverage. The provisions of this Section extend to all full-time and parttime
employees of the City. Nothing in this Section shall be construed or
interpreted as to prohibit any City employee from:
1. Exercising his or her right to vote in any election or casting his or
her vote for or against any candidate or ballot measure,
2. Being an officer or member of, or participating in, any labor
organization, or paying dues or making any other contribution to a
labor organization, which represents the employee and other
similarly situated City employees with respect to the terms and
conditions of those employees' employment,
3. Except as prohibited by Subsections (C)(2) or (3) below, displaying
a yard or other sign on his or her own property or vehicle, wearing
a badge or button, or expressing his or her views, with respect to
any such election or candidate, or
4. Except as prohibited by Subsection (C)(2) below, running or
campaigning for any elective office, or soliciting or accepting
contributions in support of any such candidacy.
B. Candidate For Elective Office.
1. A City employee may seek election to a partisan political office. The
employee shall not use his or her official authority to affect the
result of the election. If elected to political office and such office is
clearly inconsistent, incompatible, in conflict with, or inimical to his
or her duties as a City employee, the employee shall terminate City
employment prior to assuming the elected position.
2. An employee may be a candidate for a non-paid non-partisan board
such as, but not limited to, a school board or a library board, while
retaining active City employment and, if elected, may retain City
employment.
Section
130.240
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
130.245
100:186
3. Any employee who becomes a candidate for elective office with the
City shall be terminated upon being elected and assuming office.
C. General Prohibitions On Political Activities.
1. No City employee shall participate in the management or
administration of any political campaign for or against a person's
election to any elective office with the City, or in any campaign to
support or oppose the recall or removal of any person who holds an
elective office with the City.
2. A City employee may not campaign with respect to any person on
the ballot in any Federal, State, City, local or municipal election, or
solicit contributions or other financial assistance for or against any
candidate while in a City uniform (or a uniform normally identified
with the City), while the employee is on duty, or while the employee
is in a work area of the City. This would include, but not be limited
to, verbally or otherwise identifying oneself as a City employee
while campaigning, carrying any sign or placard, handing out
campaign materials or literature, endorsing a certain candidate for
office or verbally soliciting or encouraging support for or against a
particular candidate.
3. No City employee shall utilize, nor allow anyone else to utilize, his
or her name, or position, title or employment with the City, in any
political advertisement, campaign material, endorsement or speech
concerning the election of any person to any elective office with the
City, or concerning the removal or recall of any City elected official.
4. A City employee shall not (other than with respect to his or her own
candidacy, or the candidacy of his or her spouse, child, grandchild,
or parent) accept, or act as an agent for accepting, any financial
assistance or contribution for or against any candidate for City
Council or any other elective office with the City, or any political
organization, political action committee, or political club which
supports or opposes any such candidate.
5. City employees shall not be appointed, discriminated against or
retained based upon their activity, or lack thereof, in any political
campaign, or based upon their support, or lack thereof, of any
candidate for a City office. City employees shall not be coerced, or
subjected to any pressure or influence, by any person who is an
employee or elected official of the City, or anyone related to any
such person, to take part in a political campaign, to support or
oppose a particular candidate or ballot measure, to solicit votes for
or against a particular candidate or ballot measure, or to solicit or
contribute funds to support or oppose any candidate or ballot
measure.
Section
130.245
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
130.250
100:187
Section 130.250. Conflicts of Interest. [Ord. No. 11-175 §1,
9-7-2011]
Situations may arise when there appears to be a conflict between official
responsibilities and personal interests. These may be situations involving
financial dealings, spending City funds, regulating businesses or persons,
purchasing supplies or materials or contracting for services. In order to
avoid violating the public's trust, or of giving the appearance of such
a violation, employees shall alert their supervisor immediately of such
conflicting situation. If the employee and the supervisor are unclear about
the appropriateness of the situation, the matter should be promptly referred
to the City Attorney.
Section 130.255. Kickbacks and Secret Commissions. [Ord. No.
11-175 §1, 9-7-2011]
The acceptance of a kickback, secret commission or payment of anything
of value from a person doing business with the City except as set forth
above regarding accepting gifts from person dealing with City is strictly
prohibited. Any violation of this policy shall result in immediate termination
and prosecution to the fullest extent of the law.
Section 130.260. City Funds. [Ord. No. 11-175 §1, 9-7-2011]
Section 130.265. Organization Records and Communications. [Ord.
No. 11-175 §1, 9-7-2011]
A. Whenever a City employee is responsible for handling cash or other
financial matters, the job of the employee is to document every aspect
of the transaction fully and completely. All City cash and bank accounts
must be handled so as to avoid any question of bribery, kickbacks,
improper payment, illegal activity or suspicion of any impropriety
whatsoever.
B. When an employee incurs an approved expense or spends their own
funds on City needs, that expense must be appropriate and documented
promptly and properly on the forms provided by their appointing
authority.
A. Accurate and reliable records of many kinds are necessary to meet the
City's legal and financial obligations and to manage the affairs of the
City. The City's books and records must reflect in an accurate and
timely manner all transactions. The employees responsible for
accounting and recordkeeping must fully disclose and record all assets,
liabilities, or both, and must exercise diligence in enforcing these
requirements.
B. Elected officials, appointed officials and employees shall not make or
engage in any false record or communication of any kind, whether
internal or external, including, but not limited to:
Section
130.250
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
130.265
100:188
Section 130.270. Dealing With Outside People and Organizations.
[Ord. No. 11-175 §1, 9-7-2011]
Section 130.275. Prompt Communications. [Ord. No. 11-175 §1,
9-7-2011]
In all matters pertaining to citizens, customers, suppliers, vendors,
governmental authorities, and the public at large, employees shall make
every effort to achieve complete, accurate, and timely communications
and shall respond promptly and courteously to all proper requests for
information and to all complaints.
Section 130.280. Privacy and Confidentiality. [Ord. No. 11-175 §1,
9-7-2011]
1. False expense, attendance, production, financial, or similar reports
and statements.
2. Misleading representations.
A. Employees shall take care to separate their personal activities from
their City positions when communicating on matters not involving City
business. Employees shall not use City identification, stationery,
supplies, and equipment for personal or political matters.
B. When communicating publicly on matters that involve City business,
employees shall not presume to speak for the City on any topic, unless
they are certain that the views they express are those of the City, and it
is the City's desire that such views be publicly disseminated.
C. When performing City business, employees shall take care not to
compromise the integrity or damage the reputation of the City, any
person, business or government body.
A. When handling financial and personal information about the public or
others with whom the City has dealings, observe the following
principles:
1. Collect, use, and retain only the personal information necessary for
the City's business. Whenever possible, obtain any relevant
information directly from the person concerned. Use only reputable
and reliable sources to supplement this information.
2. Retain information only for as long as necessary or as required by
law. Protect the physical security of this information.
3. Limit internal access to personal information to those with a
legitimate business reason for seeking that information. Use only
personal information for the purposes for which it was originally
obtained. Obtain the consent of the person concerned before
externally disclosing any personal information, unless legal process
or contractual obligation require otherwise.
Section
130.265
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
130.285
100:189
Section 130.285. Safety and Health. [Ord. No. 11-175 §1, 9-7-2011]
Safety is every employee's responsibility. The elimination of workplace
accidents and injuries are the responsibility of every employee. Employees
shall comply with all safety rules and regulations. An employee shall
promptly report any unsafe condition or any accident to their supervisor,
even in cases where there was no injury or property damage.
Section 130.290. Honesty. [Ord. No. 11-175 §1, 9-7-2011]
Employees shall be completely honest in their dealings with the public,
elected officials, appointing authorities, supervisors and fellow employees.
Lying, in any form, is prohibited.
Section 130.295. Discussion, Dissent, Support. [Ord. No. 11-175 §1,
9-7-2011]
City administration frequently relies on the views and opinions of employees
when determining a course of action or policy. Employees are obligated
to provide as much information as possible and their own best opinion to
administration when determining a course of action or policy. However,
once a decision has been made by administration, it is the responsibility of
every employee to make it succeed.
Section 130.298. Reporting Fraud and Other Irregular Activities.
[Ord. No. 11-175 §1, 9-7-2011]
Section 130.300. Penalties. [R.O. 2009 §36.51; CC 1981 §2-355; Ord.
No. 83-23, 3-30-1983; Ord. No. 11-175 §1, 9-7-2011]
Any employee violating any Section of this Code of Ethics may be subject to
disciplinary action up to and including termination of employment and may
also be subject to such other penalties as may be provided by City ordinance
or State or Federal law.
Section 130.310. Supplemental Rules — Procedures For
Interpretation. [R.O. 2009 §36.50; CC 1981 §§2-353—2-354; Ord. No.
A. Employees should be alert to situations in which other employees
commit or are about to commit acts which violate the law or this Code
of Ethics. Illegal, unethical or dishonest acts harm us all. Each
employee has the responsibility to report such acts whenever and
wherever he or she finds them. This means advising a coworker when
his or her acts appear ethically or legally questionable.
B. If an employee becomes aware of any evidence of fraud and dishonesty,
administration should immediately be advised. If the employee has
reason to believe that their supervisor may be involved or is not
comfortable reporting the occurrence to their supervisor, the employee
shall immediately notify the City Attorney or report the occurrence
through the fraud hotline (phone number and website).
Section
130.285
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
130.310
100:190
83-23, 3-30-1983; Ord. No. 02-128, 5-28-2002; Ord. No. 07-162,
6-11-2007]
A. Supplemental Rules. Each department director with the approval of the
Mayor shall supplement the employees' Code of Ethics with provisions
which would be uniquely peculiar or applicable only to their
department.
B. Procedures For Interpretation. Any question regarding the application
or interpretation of the employees' Code of Ethics to a specific action,
case situation or event shall be brought to the attention of the Mayor by
the employee or employees concerned. The Mayor shall dispose of each
by appropriate administrative decision. The employee(s) shall be
notified of such decision in writing with a copy forwarded to the Human
Resources Department for filing in the employee's personnel records.
Section
130.310
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
130.310
100:191

ARTICLE IV
Employee Benefits
Section 130.320. Eligibility. [R.O. 2009 §36.65; CC 1981 §2-356;
Ord. No. 83-23, 3-30-1983; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
Section 130.330. Vacation. [R.O. 2009 §36.66; CC 1981 §2-357; Ord.
No. 83-23, 3-30-1983; Ord. No. 91-257, 12-18-1991; Ord. No.
07-162, 6-11-2007]
Section 130.335. Mandatory Vacation Leave For Personnel. [Ord.
No. 11-050 §1, 3-30-2011]
A. All benefits included within Sections 130.330, 130.340, 130.350(A) and
130.360(A) shall be available to all permanent full-time City employees,
except where supplemented with or modified by a memorandum of
understanding/work resolution between a particular group of
employees and representation of a bargaining unit.
B. The Mayor may approve certain benefits for permanent part-time
employees, provided such benefits do not meet or exceed those
available to permanent full-time employees.
A. Vacation benefits shall begin accruing from the date of full-time
employment. Every full-time employee of the City shall receive at least
eighty (80) hours of paid vacation (fire shift personnel shall receive one
hundred forty-four (144) hours or six (6) twenty-four (24) hour work
shifts) after each full and continuous year of service.
B. Vacation leave may be taken following accumulation, at a time
approved by the department director, so as not to interfere with
scheduled activities.
C. Employees may not carry more than one (1) week of vacation into each
subsequent year, except when recommended by the department
director and approved by the Mayor.
A. During each calendar year, the Director of Finance, Assistant Director
of Finance, Accounting Manager and any employee occupying a job
classification designated by Administration, whose job duties include
the handling of money or access to the City financial accounting system,
shall each take at least five (5) consecutive workdays as vacation or out
of office leave.
B. During the vacation or out of office leave mandated in Subsection (A),
the employee on leave shall not have access to the City financial
accounting system during the leave.
C. Mandatory vacation leave shall not apply to part-time seasonal
employees.
Section
130.320
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
130.335
100:193
Section 130.340. Observance of Holidays — Other Types of Leave.
[R.O. 2009 §36.67; CC 1981 §§2-358—2-359; Ord. No. 83-23,
3-30-1983]
Section 130.350. Social Security. [R.O. 2009 §36.68; CC 1981
§§2-360, 2-377—2-380; Ord. No. 76-72, 9-29-1976; Ord. No. 83-23,
3-30-1983; Ord. No. 02-128, 5-28-2002]
D. Mandatory leave may consist of vacation days, time out of office
attending professional conferences, or time allowed by the Director of
Administration.
A. Observance Of Holidays. [Ord. No. 15-289 §1, 12-15-2015; Ord. No.
16-011 §1, 1-12-2016]
1. The following holidays shall be considered part of the full-time
employee's normal workweek, excluding police, fire and
communications shift personnel, and shall be excused without loss
of pay on the following designated holidays:
New Year's Day January 1
Martin Luther King Jr. Day Third Monday in January
Presidents Day Third Monday in February
Memorial Day Last Monday in May
Independence Day July 4
Labor Day First Monday in September
Veterans Day November 11
Thanksgiving Day Fourth Thursday in
November
Friday following
Thanksgiving
Fourth Friday in November
Christmas Eve Day December 24
Christmas Day December 25
2. Employees absent without authorized leave on the work shift
before or the work shift following a holiday shall not receive
compensation for said holiday.
3. Time-off holiday benefit for each of the aforementioned holidays
shall be constructed by the department head in each police and
communications shift employee's schedule and shall be excused
without loss of pay.
B. Other Types Of Leaves. Provisions for all other types of leaves shall be
included in the personnel procedures manual.
A. Social Security.
Section
130.335
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
130.350
100:194
1. In addition to the rates of compensation provided for employees
and officials, the City shall extend to all eligible employees and
officials of the City, who are not excluded by law or by this Chapter
and employed in connection with a governmental or propriety
function of the City, the benefits of the system of Federal Old Age
and Survivors' Insurance as authorized by the Social Security Act,
Amendments of 1950 and by Sections 105.300 through 105.440,
RSMo., as the same may now and hereafter be in effect.
2. Employee contributions shall be deducted from the wages of all
employees and officials of the City, with the City providing a
matching and equal contribution which shall be deposited into the
appropriate funds created by Sections 105.300 through 105.440,
RSMo.
B. Extended To Certain City Employees And Officers. It is hereby declared
to be the policy and purpose of the City to extend to all eligible
employees and officials of the City, who are not excluded by law or by
this Section and whenever employed in connection with a governmental
or proprietary function of the City, the benefits of the system of Federal
Old-Age and Survivors' Insurance as authorized by the Social Security
Act, Amendments of 1950 and by Sections 105.300 to 105.440, RSMo.,
as the same may now and hereafter be in effect.
C. Deductions From Wages. Commencing on the first (1st) day of the
month following the date of the approval of the plan and agreement of
this City by the Division of Budget and Comptroller of the State as the
State agency, there shall be deducted from the wages of all employees
and officials of the City, to whom the benefits of the system of Federal
Old-Age and Survivors' Insurance are extended by virtue of the plan
and agreement hereinbefore provided for, the amount of each of the
employees' and officials' contributions, as determined by the applicable
State and Federal laws and by such plan and agreement, the aggregate
amount of the deductions to be paid into the contributions fund created
by Sections 105.300 to 105.440, RSMo.; provided that from the first
(1st) payment of wages made to each of the employees and officials
after the benefits of the system have been extended to such employees
and officials, there shall be deducted a sum equal to the amount which
would have been due and payable from each of the employees and
officials had such extension of benefits been provided and effective on
the first (1st) day of January, 1951.
D. Contributions By City. Commencing on the first (1st) day of the month
following the date of the approval of the plan and agreement of this City
by the Division of Budget and Comptroller of the State as the State
agency, there is hereby authorized to be appropriated from the General
Fund, Public Park Maintenance Fund, Public Library Fund and the
Waterworks General Fund of the City and there is and shall be
appropriated the sum of money necessary to pay the contributions of
the City which shall be due and payable by virtue of the extension of the
benefits of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors' Insurance System to the
Section
130.350
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
130.350
100:195
Section 130.360. Local Government Employees Retirement System.
[R.O. 2009 §36.69; CC 1981 §§2-361, 2-368; Ord. No. 83-23,
3-30-1983; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986]
eligible employees and officials of the City, such sum of money to be
paid into the contributions fund created by Sections 105.300 through
105.440, RSMo.; provided that in making the first (1st) payment to such
contributions fund, after the benefits of the system have been extended
to such employees and officials, such first (1st) payment shall include
a sum equal to the amount which would have been due and payable
had such extension of benefits been provided and effective on January
1, 1951. The fund from which such appropriation is made, will, at all
times, be sufficient to pay the contributions of the City directed by this
Section to be paid to such contributions fund.
E. Administration Of Plan. The City, from and after the approval of the plan
and agreement of this City by the State agency as referred to in the
preceding Sections, shall fully comply with and shall keep such records,
make such reports and provide such methods of administration of such
plan and agreement as may be required by all applicable State and
Federal laws, rules and regulations now and hereafter in effect with
respect to the extension of the benefits of the Federal Old-Age and
Survivors' Insurance System to the employees and officials of this City.
For the purpose of administering such plan and agreement, the Director
of Human Resources shall be the official who shall make all required
reports, keep all records and be responsible for the administration of
such plan and agreement on behalf of this City; and any and all notices
and communications from such State agency to this City with respect to
such plan and agreement shall be addressed to the Personnel Director.
A. Local Government Employees Retirement System. The City shall extend
to all eligible full-time employees and eligible officials of the City, who
are not excluded by law or by this Chapter and employed by the City,
participation and benefits of the Missouri Local Government Employees
Retirement System as established and authorized by Sections 70.600
through 70.755, RSMo., and Sections 105.660 through 105.685, RSMo.,
as the same may now and hereafter be in effect.
B. City Employees Covered By Local Government Employees' Retirement
System—Deductions. The City is a political Subdivision, as defined in
Sections 70.600 through 70.660, RSMo., and hereby elects to have
covered by the Missouri Local Government Employees Retirement
System all its eligible employees in the following classes:
1. Present and future general employees.
2. Present and future Firefighters.
3. Present and future Police Officers.
Section
130.350
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
130.370
100:196
Section 130.370. Employee's Group Insurance. [R.O. 2009 §36.70;
CC 1981 §§2-314—2-318; Ord. No. 3535, 4-24-1968; Ord. No. 3846,
7-7-1971; Ord. No. 78-40, 6-28-1978]
A. Policy And Purpose. It is declared to be the policy and purpose of the
City to provide, maintain and pay the premiums on a group
hospitalization, major medical, accident and sickness insurance plan in
which each regular employee of the City shall be, and in which plan an
employee's dependents may also be, enrolled as members by contract
or contracts to be entered into in behalf of the City by the Mayor with
such companies as are recommended by the City Council.
B. Additional Compensation Generally. In addition to the rates of
compensation provided for each regular employee by ordinance or
resolution, such ordinances and resolutions are amended to provide as
additional compensation for each regular employee and dependents the
total cost for providing and maintaining group hospitalization, major
medical, accident and sickness insurance plan, which compensation is
to be used to defray the cost of such group insurance plan for each
regular employee of the City.
C. Source—How Treated.
1. There is authorized to be appropriated from the General Fund,
Public Park Maintenance Fund, Public Library Fund, Waterworks
Maintenance and Operation Fund and the Sanitary Sewer
Maintenance and Operation Fund of the City and there is and shall
be appropriated, the sum not to exceed the total cost for providing
and maintaining each regular employee and dependents in the
group hospitalization, major medical, life, accident and sickness
insurance plan.
2. The amount so paid to each employee and dependents shall not be
considered as taxable income to such employee and shall not be
deemed part of his/her compensation for tax reporting purposes,
although for the purposes of this Subsection (C)(2) such premiums
shall be considered partial compensation for such employee's
services to the City.
D. Full-Time Elected And Appointed Employees. All full-time elected and
appointed employees of the City shall, and dependents of regular
employees of the City may, receive additional compensation, which
compensation shall be used to pay the cost of the group hospitalization,
major medical, life, accident and sickness insurance plan. Until the
expiration of their new term of office, each full-time elected or
appointed employee of the City shall receive additional compensation
as provided in Subsection (B) of this Section, which shall be used to
defray the total cost of the group insurance plan.
E. Life Insurance. In addition to the rates of compensation provided for
each regular employee by ordinance or resolution, such ordinances and
resolutions are amended to provide additional compensation for each
Section
130.370
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
130.370
100:197
Section 130.375. Retirement Incentive Program. [Ord. No. 13-225
§1, 11-19-2013; Ord. No. 14-067 §1, 4-1-2014; Ord. No. 14-092 §1,
5-6-2014; Ord. No. 16-146 §1, 7-19-2016]
All full-time employees of the City meeting the eligibility requirements as
set forth in this Section shall be eligible to participate in the retirement
incentive program as set forth herein (the "Program").
regular employee in an amount not to exceed the total employee cost,
excluding employee's dependents, for providing and maintaining the
life insurance plan, which compensation is to be used to defray the cost
of such group insurance plan for each regular employee of the City.
A. Eligibility. As of December 31, 2016, all full-time employees whose
years of service in the Local Government Employees Retirement System
plus age is equal to or greater than seventy-eight (78) years are eligible
to participate in the Program.
B. Participation Date. All eligible employees who desire to participate in
the Program shall provide the City with a declaration of irrevocable
intent to retire by delivery of a fully executed retirement incentive
program election and waiver of claims form or equivalent to the Human
Resources Department by no later than 5:00 P.M. on January 31, 2017.
C. Retirement Date. All employees who elect to participate in the Program
must retire from City employment no later than December 31, 2017.
The City shall have the authority to determine the last day of
employment for each employee.
D. Retirement Incentive Benefits. Each participating employee shall
receive the following retirement incentive benefits:
1. As of December 31, 2016 each, employee with at least seventeen
(17) years of full-time City employment ("service") but less than
twenty (20) years of service shall receive up to three (3) additional
years of service credit in order to attain not more than twenty (20)
years of service toward the Retiree Health Insurance Program
established by Ordinance No. 11-216;
2. At each employee's election, the employee shall receive a one-time
lump sum payment equal to fifteen percent (15%) of the employee's
base salary as of January 1, 2017, which shall be payable in the last
month of employment; or four payments paid in the two
consecutive months immediately preceding the employee's
retirement date with each payment equal to three and threequarters
percent (3.75%) of the employee's base salary as of
January 1, 2017; and
3. At each employee's election, the employee shall receive:
a. A one-time lump sum payment equal to the employee's accrued
and unused vacation leave and the employee's sick leave
Section
130.370
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
130.375
100:198
buyout pursuant to Personnel Manual Rule 20.2 which shall be
payable in the last month of employment;
b. The lump sum payment stated in Subsection (D)(3)(a) divided
into four (4) equal payments, and the four (4) payments shall
be paid in the two (2) consecutive months immediately
preceding the employee's retirement date; or
c. The payout of the employee's accrued and unused vacation
leave and the employee's sick leave buyout pursuant to
Personnel Manual Rule 20.2 as a service continuation pursuant
to Personnel Manual Rule 11.9(d).
Section
130.375
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
130.375
100:199

ARTICLE V
Central Personnel Records System
Section 130.380. Established. [R.O. 2009 §36.80; CC 1981 §2-369;
Ord. No. 80-134, 12-17-1980; Ord. No. 02-128, 5-28-2002]
The Human Resources Department shall establish a central personnel
records system for all employees of the City.
Section 130.390. Content of File. [R.O. 2009 §36.81; CC 1981
§2-370; Ord. No. 80-134, 12-17-1980; Ord. No. 02-128, 5-28-2002]
Section 130.400. Procedure For New Employees. [R.O. 2009 §36.82;
CC 1981 §2-371; Ord. No. 80-134, 12-17-1980; Ord. No. 02-128,
5-28-2002]
A. The employee's personnel file shall contain the following:
1. Name.
2. Latest home address.
3. Date of birth.
4. Sex of employee.
5. Occupation.
6. Rate of pay.
7. Wage or compensation records.
B. The following records should be filed with the Human Resources
Department:
1. Original application for employment.
2. New employee hire sheet.
3. Promotion record.
4. Employee evaluation.
5. Merit increase justification.
6. Commendations.
7. Disciplinary actions.
8. Exit interview.
9. Such other information as may be required.
A. Permanent Full-Time Employees. New permanent full-time employees
shall be sent to the Human Resources Department on their first (1st)
Section
130.380
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
130.400
100:201
Section 130.410. Termination Procedure. [R.O. 2009 §36.83; CC
1981 §2-372; Ord. No. 80-134, 12-17-1980; Ord. No. 02-128,
5-28-2002]
Section 130.420. Filing Time Sheets. [R.O. 2009 §36.84; CC 1981
§2-373; Ord. No. 80-134, 12-17-1980]
day of employment. They will complete necessary payroll forms and
insurance and retirement applications. The Human Resources
Department will furnish the employee with information on group
insurance, retirement and fringe benefits. The employee shall receive a
copy of general personnel policies. The department head shall forward
to the Human Resources Department, prior to the new employee's first
(1st) day, the employee's application and new employee hire sheet and
such other information as may be available.
B. Temporary And Part-Time Employees. The department head shall
forward to the Human Resources Department the employee's
application and new employee hire sheet. He/she shall ensure that all
necessary payroll information is furnished.
C. All Employees. The Human Resources Department shall notify the
department head of the new employee's payroll number and confirm
the employee's classification and pay scale.
A. All Employees. The department head shall notify the Human Resources
Department immediately of the termination of an employee, giving the
last day to be worked and reason for termination (resignation, quit,
fired, laid off and the like).
B. Permanent Full-Time. Upon termination of a permanent full-time
employee, he/she shall be sent to the Human Resources Department.
The Human Resources Department shall complete an exit interview and
have the employee complete necessary forms for refund of retirement
contributions.
A. The department head shall submit, with payroll vouchers, time sheets
for all employees. Time sheets shall contain the following information:
1. Name.
2. Employee number.
3. Job classification.
4. Pay period.
5. Days worked.
6. Absences (vacation, sick leave, emergency leave, leave of absence,
excused absence, unexcused absence and the like).
7. Such other information as may be required.
Section
130.400
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
130.430
100:202
Section 130.430. Computing Vacation and Sick Leave. [R.O. 2009
§36.85; CC 1981 §2-374; Ord. No. 80-134, 12-17-1980; Ord. No.
02-128, 5-28-2002]
Section 130.440. Release of Information Contained in Records.
[R.O. 2009 §36.86; CC 1981 §2-375; Ord. No. 80-134, 12-17-1980;
Ord. No. 91-245, 10-29-1991; Ord. No. 02-128, 5-28-2002; Ord. No.
07-162, 6-11-2007]
A. The Human Resources Department shall semi-annually furnish to each
department a list of employees indicating vacation time and sick leave
available.
B. The Human Resources Department shall quarterly furnish payroll
summaries on all employees in the department to the department head.
A. Any request for personnel records of the Human Resources Department
shall be in writing addressed to the Personnel Director stating the
record requested and reason for the request.
B. Information contained in the personnel files will be released only by the
Mayor and Director of Human Resources as follows:
1. For three (3) years following termination of employment, the Mayor
and Director of Human Resources shall release only information as
to an employee's position, title and length of service to the City,
unless such release of records is to the employee, a governmental
agency or pursuant to court order.
2. Records of former employment more than three (3) years following
termination shall be destroyed or reduced to only that information
necessary for pension or personnel statistical records as the
Director of Human Resources shall determine.
C. In cases of layoff, at the request of the employee, the Department
Director or the Mayor may issue letters on behalf of the employee laid
off stating the employee's position, title, length of service to the City,
the fact that the employee had been terminated solely because of
layoffs and not because of performance and other appropriate
information.
Section
130.430
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
130.440
100:203

ARTICLE VI
Drug and Alcohol Policy
Section 130.450. Drug and Alcohol Policy. [Ord. No. 10-24 §§1—2,
2-19-2010]
The City hereby adopts a Drug and Alcohol Testing Policy for employees
of the City of St. Charles which is on file in the City offices and shall be
effective from and after 12:00 A.M. on May 1, 2010.
Section
130.450
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
130.450
100:205

ARTICLE VII
Fraud Policy
Section 130.460. Purpose. [Ord. No. 11-175 §2, 9-7-2011]
Section 130.470. Definitions. [Ord. No. 11-175 §2, 9-7-2011]
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have these prescribed
meanings:
OCCUPATIONAL FRAUD — Defined by the Association of Certified Fraud
Examiners as the use of one's occupation for personal enrichment through
the deliberate misuse or misapplication of the employing organization's
resources or assets. There are three (3) major categories of occupational
fraud:
A. The City of St. Charles (the "City") is committed to protecting its
revenue, property, information and other assets from any attempt,
either by members of the public, contractors, vendors, agents, elected
officials, appointed officials or employees, to gain by deceit, financial or
other benefits at the expense of City taxpayers.
B. Elected officials, appointed officials and employees shall, at all times,
comply with all applicable laws and regulations. The City will not
condone the activities of elected officials, appointed officials or
employees who achieve results through violation of the law or unethical
business dealings. The City does not permit any activity that fails to
withstand the closest possible public scrutiny.
C. This policy sets out specific guidelines and responsibilities regarding
appropriate actions that must be followed for the investigation of fraud
and other similar irregularities.
ASSET MISAPPROPRIATIONS: Theft or misuse of an organization's
assets.
Cash.
FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS: Perpetrator causes
organization to disburse funds through some trick or device
(e.g., submitting false invoices/timecards/sheets, expense
reimbursement schemes, check tampering, etc.).
(1)
SKIMMING: Cash is stolen from an organization before it is
recorded on the organization's books and records.
(2)
CASH LARCENY: Cash is stolen from an organization after it
has been recorded on the organization's books and records.
(3)
a.
Inventory and all other assets.
MISUSE: Misuse of an organization's inventory or assets for
personal use (e.g., City vehicles, computers, supplies, etc).
(1)
b.
1.
Section
130.460
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
130.470
100:207
OTHER SIMILAR IRREGULARITIES — Any activity involving questionable
behavior or business dealings by members of the public, contractors,
vendors, agents or employees, that put City revenue, property, information
and other assets at risk of waste or abuse.
Section 130.480. Applicability. [Ord. No. 11-175 §2, 9-7-2011]
This policy applies to all elected officials, appointed officials and employees
of the City as well as any entity or person doing business with the City.
Section 130.490. General Policy and Responsibilities. [Ord. No.
11-175 §2, 9-7-2011]
LARCENY: Inventory or other assets are stolen from an
organization.
(2)
CORRUPTION: Wrongfully use influence in a business transaction in
order to procure some benefit for themselves or another person,
contrary to duty to employer or the rights of another.
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: An undisclosed economic or personal
interest in a transaction that adversely affects the employer.
a.
BRIBERY: The offering, giving, receiving, or soliciting of any thing
of value to influence an official act or a business decision.
b.
ILLEGAL GRATUITIES: A party who benefits from an official act or
a business decision gives a gift to a person who made the decision.
An illegal gratuity does not require proof of an intent to influence.
c.
ECONOMIC EXTORTION: An employee demands that a vendor/
contractor/etc. pay to influence an official act or a business
decision.
d.
2.
FRAUDULENT STATEMENTS: Falsification of an organization's
financial statements.
3.
A. It is the City's intent to fully investigate any suspected acts of fraud or
other similar irregularity. An objective and impartial investigation will
be conducted regardless of the position, title, length of service or
relationship with the City of any party who might be or becomes
involved in or becomes/is the subject of such investigation.
B. Each elected official, department director, supervisory employee and
employee whose job responsibilities may require is responsible for
instituting and maintaining a system of internal control to provide
reasonable assurance for the prevention and detection of fraud,
misappropriations and other irregularities. Management should be
familiar with the types of improprieties that might occur within their
area of responsibility and be alert for any indications of such conduct.
C. The City Attorney has the primary responsibility for the investigation of
all activity defined in this policy.
Section
130.470
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
130.490
100:208
Section 130.500. Procedures. [Ord. No. 11-175 §2, 9-7-2011]
D. The City Attorney will notify the Audit Committee of the City Council of
a reported allegation of fraudulent or irregular conduct upon the
commencement of the investigation to the extent practical. Throughout
the investigation the Chairperson will be informed of pertinent
investigative findings.
E. Upon conclusion of the investigation, the results will be reported to the
Audit Committee of the City Council and others as determined
necessary by the City Attorney.
F. At the direction of the Audit Committee of the City Council, the City
Attorney will pursue every reasonable effort, including court ordered
restitution, to obtain recovery of the City losses from the offender, or
other appropriate source.
A. All Employees.
1. Any employee who has knowledge of an occurrence of irregular
conduct, or has reason to suspect that a fraud has occurred, shall
immediately notify his/her supervisor. If the employee has reason to
believe that their supervisor may be involved or does not feel
comfortable reporting the occurrence to their supervisor, the
employee shall immediately notify City Attorney or report the
occurrence through the fraud hotline (phone number and website).
2. Employees have a duty to cooperate during an investigation.
3. Employees who knowingly make false allegations are subject to
discipline.
B. City Management/Elected Officials. Upon notification from an employee
of suspected fraud, or if management has reason to suspect that a fraud
has occurred, they shall immediately notify the City Attorney or report
the occurrence through the fraud hotline (phone number and website).
C. City Attorney.
1. Upon notification or discovery of a suspected fraud, the City
Attorney will promptly review the suspected fraud.
2. After an initial review and a determination that the suspected fraud
warrants additional investigation, the City Attorney will notify the
Audit Committee of the City Council to the extent practical.
Throughout the investigation the Audit Committee will be informed
of pertinent investigative findings, as appropriate.
3. Upon conclusion of the investigation, the results will be reported by
the City Attorney to the Audit Committee of the City Council and
others as determined necessary.
Section
130.490
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
130.500
100:209
4. The City Attorney will pursue every reasonable effort, including
court ordered restitution, to obtain recovery of the City losses from
the offender, or other appropriate source.
D. Security Of Evidence. Once a suspected fraud is reported, the City
Attorney will meet with appropriate City management. City
management in coordination with the City Attorney shall take
immediate action to prevent the theft, alteration, or destruction of
relevant records. Such actions include, but are not necessarily limited
to, removing the records and placing them in a secure location, limiting
access to the location where the records currently exist, and preventing
the individual suspected of committing the fraud from having access to
the records.
E. Personnel Actions. If a suspicion of fraud is substantiated by the
investigation, disciplinary action shall be taken by City management, in
consultation with the Human Resources and the City Attorney.
F. Whistle-Blower Protection.
1. Under Missouri State Statute 610.021(16) records relating to
municipal hotlines established for the reporting of abuse and
wrongdoing are considered closed records and are not open to the
public. Therefore, "whistle-blowers" can stay anonymous.
2. In addition, no employer or person acting on behalf of an employer
shall:
a. Dismiss or threaten to dismiss an employee;
b. Discipline or suspend or threaten to discipline or suspend an
employee;
c. Impose any penalty upon an employee; or
d. Intimidate or coerce an employee,
because the employee has acted in accordance with the
requirements of this policy. The violation of this Section will
result in discipline up to and including dismissal.
G. Media Issues.
1. Any City employee or elected official contacted by the media with
respect to a fraud investigation shall refer the media to the City
Attorney. The alleged fraud or audit investigation shall not be
discussed with the media by any person other than through the City
Attorney.
2. The City Attorney will not discuss the details of any ongoing fraud
investigation with the media that may compromise the integrity of
the investigation.
H. Documentation.
Section
130.500
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
130.500
100:210
1. At the conclusion of the investigation, the results will be reported
to the Chairperson of the Audit Committee of the City Council and
others as determined necessary by the City Attorney.
2. The City Attorney may also make recommendations to the
appropriate City management/elected official to assist in the
prevention of future similar occurrences.
I. Completion Of The Investigation. Upon completion of the investigation,
including all legal and personnel actions, any records, documents and
other evidentiary material will be returned by the City Attorney to the
appropriate department.
J. Reporting To External Auditors. The City Attorney will report to the
external auditors of the City all information relating to investigations as
deemed appropriate.
K. Training.
1. New employees are trained at the time of hiring about the City's
Code of Ethics and Fraud Policy. This training explicitly covers
expectations of all employees regarding:
a. Their duty to communicate certain matters;
b. A list of the types of matters, including actual or suspected
fraud, to be communicated along with specific examples; and
c. Information on how to communicate those matters.
2. In addition to training at the time of hiring, employees receive
refresher training periodically thereafter.
EMPLOYEE CONFIRMATION
I have read and understand the Fraud Policy and will comply with
the Fraud Policy.
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
DEPARTMENT
Section
130.500
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
130.500
100:211
Chapter 135
MUNICIPAL COURT
Section
130.500
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
130.500
100:212
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 135.010. Municipal Court Established — Jurisdiction. [R.O.
2009 §37.01; CC 1981 §§19-1—19-2; Ord. No. 78-97, 12-20-1978;
Ord. No. 79-50, 5-30-1979]
Section 135.020. Supreme Court. [R.O. 2009 §37.02; CC 1981
§19-10; Ord. No. 78-97, 12-20-1978; Ord. No. 79-50, 5-30-1979]
The Municipal Court of the City shall be subject to the rules of the Circuit
Court of which it is a part and to the rules of the State Supreme Court. The
Municipal Court shall be subject to the general administrative authority of
the Presiding Judge of the Circuit Court and the Judge and Court personnel
of the Court shall obey his/her directives.
A. Established. There is established in this City a Municipal Court to be
known as the City of St. Charles Municipal Court, a Division of the
Eleventh Judicial Circuit Court of the State.
B. Jurisdiction. The jurisdiction of the Municipal Court shall extend to all
cases involving alleged violations of this Code of Ordinances and any
other ordinance of the City.
Section
135.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
135.020
100:213

ARTICLE II
Municipal Judge
Section 135.030. Elected Official — Qualifications For Office.58 [R.O.
2009 §37.15; CC 1981 §§19-3, 19-6; Ord. No. 78-97, 12-20-1978;
Ord. No. 79-50, 5-30-1979]
Section 135.040. Term of Office — Vacation of Office. [R.O. 2009
§37.16; CC 1981 §§19-4—19-5; Ord. No. 78-97, 12-20-1978; Ord. No.
79-50, 5-30-1979]
A. Judge—Selection. The Judge of the Municipal Court shall be known as a
Municipal Judge of the Eleventh Judicial Circuit Court and shall be
elected to his/her position by the qualified voters of this City for a term
as specified in this Chapter.
B. Qualifications For Office. The Municipal Judge shall possess the
following qualifications before he/she shall take office:
1. He/she must be a licensed attorney qualified to practice law within
the State.
2. He/she must reside within the City.
3. He/she must be a resident of the State.
4. He/she must be between the ages of twenty-one (21) and seventyfive
(75) years.
5. He/she may not serve as Municipal Judge for any other
municipality.
6. He/she may not hold any other office within the City Government.
7. The Municipal Judge shall be considered holding a part-time
position and as such may accept other employment.
A. Term Of Office. A person elected to the office of Municipal Judge shall
hold his/her office for a period of four (4) years and until his/her
successor is duly elected and qualified. Such election under the
Eleventh Judicial Circuit Court of the State shall first be held on the first
(1st) Tuesday after the first (1st) Monday of April, 1979 and every
fourth (4th) year thereafter. If for any reason the Municipal Judge
vacates his/her office, his/her successor shall complete that term of
office, even if the same be for a term less than four (4) years.
B. Vacation Of Office. The Municipal Judge shall vacate his/her office
under the following circumstances:
58.State Law Reference—Municipal courts, ch. 479, RSMo.
Section
135.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
135.040
100:215
Section 135.050. Powers and Duties. [R.O. 2009 §37.17; CC 1981
§19-7; Ord. No. 78-97, 12-20-1978; Ord. No. 79-50, 5-30-1979]
1. Upon removal from office by the State Commission on the
Retirement, Removal and Discipline of Judges as provided in
Missouri Supreme Court Rule 12;
2. Upon attaining his/her seventy-fifth (75th) birthday; or
3. If he/she should lose his/her license to practice law within the
State.
A. The Municipal Judge shall be and is authorized to:
1. Establish a Violations Bureau as provided for in the Missouri Rules
of Practice and Procedure in Municipal and Traffic Courts and
Section 479.050, RSMo.
2. Administer oaths and enforce due obedience to all orders, rules and
judgments made by him/her and may fine and imprison for
contempt committed before him/her while holding Court in the
same manner and to the same extent as a Circuit Judge.
3. Commute the term of any sentence, stay execution of any fine or
sentence, suspend any fine or sentence and make such other orders
as the Municipal Judge deems necessary relative to any matter that
may be pending in the Municipal Court.
4. Make and adopt such rules of practice and procedure as are
necessary to implement and carry out the provisions of this
Chapter and to make and adopt such rules of practice and
procedure as are necessary to hear and decide matters pending
before the Municipal Court and to implement and carry out the
provisions of the Missouri Rules of Practice and Procedure in
Municipal and Traffic Courts. Any and all rules made or adopted
hereunder may be annulled or amended by an ordinance limited to
such purpose; provided that such ordinance does not violate or
conflict with the provisions of the Missouri Rules of Practice and
Procedure in Municipal and Traffic Courts or State Statutes.
5. The Municipal Judge of the Municipal Court is authorized to
appoint an attorney to represent an indigent defendant in
Municipal Court when the Municipal Judge finds that the City
Attorney has informed the Municipal Judge that he/she will
recommend a jail sentence if the defendant is found guilty and if
the defendant is found to be without sufficient funds or property
with which to retain an attorney. The appointed attorney shall be
entitled to compensation for his/her services in an amount not
exceeding the sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Such
amount shall be determined by the Municipal Judge upon proof
presented by the attorney of his/her services rendered.
Section
135.040
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
135.050
100:216
Section 135.060. Monthly Report To Council. [R.O. 2009 §37.18; CC
1981 §19-8; Ord. No. 78-97, 12-20-1978; Ord. No. 79-50, 5-30-1979]
The Municipal Judge shall cause to be prepared within the first ten (10) days
of every month a report indicating the following: A list of all cases heard
and tried before the Court during the preceding month, giving in each case
the name of the defendant, the fine imposed, if any, the amount of cost,
the names of the defendants committed and in the cases where there was
an application for trial de novo, respectively. The same shall be prepared
under oath by the Municipal Court Clerk or the Municipal Judge. This report
will be filed with the City Clerk who shall thereafter forward the same to
the City Council for examination at its first (1st) session thereafter. The
Municipal Court shall, within ten (10) days after the first (1st) of the month,
pay to the City Collector the full amount of all fines collected during the
preceding month, if they have not previously been paid.
Section 135.070. Docket and Court Records. [R.O. 2009 §37.19; CC
1981 §19-9; Ord. No. 78-97, 12-20-1978; Ord. No. 79-50, 5-30-1979]
The Municipal Judge shall be a conservator of the peace. He/she shall keep
a docket in which he/she shall enter every case commenced before him/her
and the proceedings therein and he/she shall keep such other records as
may be required. Such docket and records shall be records of the Circuit
Court of the County. The Municipal Judge shall deliver the docket and
records of the Municipal Court and all books and papers pertaining to his/
her office to his/her successor in office or to the Presiding Judge of the
Circuit.
Section 135.080. Absence of Judge — Procedure.
If a Municipal Judge be absent, sick or disqualified from acting pursuant to
the general administrative authority of the Presiding Judge of the Circuit
Court over the Municipal Divisions within the circuit contained in Section
478.240, RSMo., a special Municipal Judge may be designated in
accordance with the provisions of Section 479.230, RSMo., until such
absence or disqualification shall cease.
Section 135.085. Special Municipal Judge — Compensation. [Ord.
No. 15-128, 6-5-2015]
The compensation of the Special Municipal Judge shall be two hundred
dollars ($200.00) per hour.
6. The Municipal Judge shall have such other powers, duties and
privileges as are or may be prescribed by the laws of this State, this
Code of Ordinances or any other ordinance of the City.
Section
135.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
135.085
100:217

ARTICLE III
Arrests, Warrants and Trial Procedures
Section 135.090. Issuance and Execution of Arrest Warrants —
Arrests Without Warrants. [R.O. 2009 §37.30; CC 1981
§§19-12—19-13; Ord. No. 78-97, 12-20-1978; Ord. No. 79-50,
5-30-1979; Ord. No. 96-276, 10-2-1996; Ord. No. 98-70, 2-9-1998]
Section 135.100. Search Warrants — Procedures. [R.O. 2009 §37.31;
CC 1981 §19-21.1; Ord. No. 91-68, 4-3-1991; Ord. No. 96-68,
3-6-1996; Ord. No. 96-276, 10-2-1996; Ord. No. 98-231, 5-20-1998;
Ord. No. 05-288, 11-4-2005; Ord. No. 06-139, 6-14-2006; Ord. No.
07-162, 6-11-2007]
A. Issuance And Execution Of Warrants. All arrest warrants issued or
authorized by the Municipal Judge shall be directed to the Chief of
Police or any other Police Officer of the municipality or to the Sheriff of
the County. The warrant shall be executed by the Chief of Police, Police
Officer or Sheriff any place within the limits of the County and not
elsewhere unless the warrants are endorsed in the manner provided for
warrants in criminal cases and, when so endorsed, shall be served in
other Counties as provided for in warrants in criminal cases.
B. Arrests Without Warrants. The Chief of Police or other Police Officer of
the City may, without a warrant, make arrest of any person who
commits an offense in the officer's presence or when the officer has
reasonable grounds to believe any such person has violated any
ordinance of the City, but such officer shall, before the trial, file a
written complaint with the Judge hearing violations of municipal
ordinances.
A. Authority.
1. The Municipal Judge shall have the authority to issue search
warrants for searches or inspections to determine the existence of
violations of any of the following provisions of this Code of
Ordinances:
a. Chapter 210, Animals;
b. Chapter 500, Building Regulations (including the Building,
Electrical, Plumbing, Residential, Energy Conservation,
Property Maintenance, Mechanical, Existing Building Code,
Fuel Gas Codes; and Heating, Ventilation and Air-Conditioning
Code and Dangerous Building Code);
c. Chapter 205, Fire Prevention;
d. Chapter 220, Health, Safety and Sanitation;
e. Title VI, Business Regulations;
Section
135.090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
135.100
100:219
f. Chapter 400, Zoning Code;
g. Chapter 350, Parking Regulations.
2. Business premises shall include all premises used or designed for
use as any permitted use or conditional use listed under the "HCD",
"C-1", "C-2", "C-3" or "OBP" districts as listed in the Zoning Code,
except that it shall not include dwelling units.
3. Dwelling unit shall mean a room or group of rooms occupied or
intended to be occupied as separate living quarters.
4. The search warrants may be issued for:
a. Business premises, or
b. A dwelling unit, but only for:
(1) Violations of the Property Maintenance Code as adopted
by Section 500.110 and amended by Section 500.120.
(2) Animal bite cases as provided in Section 210.190 of this
Code.
B. Warrants and searches or inspections made pursuant thereto shall
conform to and be governed by the following provisions:
1. The Chief of Police, City Attorney or Prosecuting Attorney or a
designated assistant may make application for the issuance of a
search warrant.
2. The application shall:
a. Be in writing;
b. State the time and date of the making of the application;
c. Identify the property, article, material, substance, person or
other evidence which is to be searched for and seized in
sufficient detail and particularity that the officer executing the
warrant can readily ascertain it;
d. Identify the person, place or thing which is to be searched in
sufficient detail and particularity that the officer executing the
warrant can readily ascertain whom or what is to be searched;
e. State facts sufficient to show:
(1) Probable cause for the issuance of the search warrant; and
(2) That the owner and the occupant of the premises were
sent two (2) notices in writing, either by personal service
or by certified mail, that a search warrant would be
sought. This notification requirement shall not apply if the
persons signing the application determine that an
Section
135.100
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
135.100
100:220
emergency exists or that the application is for an animal
bite case.
(a) The first (1st) notice shall state that they would be
allowed at least seven (7) calendar days from the date
of personal service or from the date of mailing in
which to provide access to the premises.
(b) The second (2nd) notice shall be issued after
expiration of the time period required in the first (1st)
notice and shall state that they would be allowed at
least seven (7) calendar days from the date of personal
service of the second (2nd) notice in which to provide
access to the premises. If the second (2nd) notice is
mailed, then a copy of the second (2nd) notice shall be
posted on the door of the premises to be searched on
or before the date of mailing.
f. Be verified by the oath or affirmation of the applicant;
g. Be filed in the Municipal Court;
h. Be signed by the Chief of Police, City Attorney or the
Prosecuting Attorney or a designated assistant and by both the
appropriate department director and the Mayor.
3. The application may be supplemented by a written affidavit verified
by oath or affirmation. Such affidavit shall be considered in
determining whether there is probable cause for the issuance of a
search warrant and in filling out any deficiencies in the description
of the person, place or thing to be searched or of the property,
article, material, substance, person or other evidence to be seized.
Oral testimony shall not be considered. The application may be
submitted by facsimile or other electronic means.
4. The Municipal Judge shall hold a non-adversary hearing to
determine whether sufficient facts have been stated to justify the
issuance of a search warrant. If it appears from the application and
any supporting affidavit that there is probable cause to believe that
property, article, material, substance, person or other evidence
subject to seizure is on the person or at the place or in the thing
described, a search warrant shall immediately be issued. The
warrant shall be issued in the form of an original and two (2)
copies.
5. The application and any supporting affidavit and a copy of the
warrant shall be retained in the records of the Municipal Court.
6. The search warrant shall:
a. Be in writing and in the name of the City;
b. Be directed to any Peace Officer in the City;
Section
135.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
135.100
100:221
c. State the time and date the warrant is issued;
d. Identify the material, article, substance, person or other
evidence which is to be searched for and seized in sufficient
detail and particularity that the officer executing the warrant
can readily ascertain it;
e. Identify the person, place or thing which is to be searched in
sufficient detail and particularity that the officer executing the
warrant can readily ascertain whom or what the officer is to
search;
f. Command that the described person, place or thing be
searched and that any of the described property, article,
material, substance, person or other evidence found thereon or
therein be seized or photographed or copied and be returned
or the photograph or copy be brought, within ten (10) days
after filing of the application, to the Municipal Judge who
issued the warrant, to be dealt with according to law;
g. Be signed by the Judge, with title of office indicated;
h. Not authorize the seizure of real property.
7. A search warrant issued under this Section may be executed only
by a Police Officer. The warrant shall be executed by conducting the
search and seizure commanded. The search warrant issued under
this Section may be issued by facsimile or other electronic means.
8. A search warrant shall be executed as soon as practicable and shall
expire if it is not executed and the return made within ten (10) days
after the date of the making of the application.
9. After execution of the search warrant, the warrant, with a return
thereon signed by the officer making the search, shall be delivered
to the Judge who issued the warrant. The return shall show the date
and manner of execution, what was seized and the name of the
possessor and of the owner, when the owner and possessor are not
the same person, if known. The return shall be accompanied by a
copy of the itemized receipt required by Subsection (C)(5) below.
The Judge or Clerk shall, upon request, deliver a copy of such
receipt to the person from whose possession the property was
taken and to the applicant for the warrant.
10. A search warrant shall be deemed invalid:
a. If it was not issued by the Municipal Judge;
b. If it was issued without a written application having been filed
and verified;
c. If it was issued without probable cause;
Section
135.100
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
135.100
100:222
d. If it does not describe the person, place or thing to be searched
or the property, article, material, substance or person to be
seized with sufficient certainty;
e. If it is not signed by the Municipal Judge;
f. If it was not executed within the time prescribed by Subsection
(B)(8) above; or
g. If it was issued without an affidavit supplementing the
application.
C. Search Warrant—Execution.
1. The search shall be conducted in a reasonable manner. The search
warrant shall be executed only between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and
5:00 P.M., except where its execution during those hours is not
practicable, in which case the search warrant may be executed no
later than 9:00 P.M.
2. An officer making a search pursuant to an invalid warrant, the
invalidity of which is not apparent on its face, may use such force as
would be justified if the warrant were valid.
3. The officer may summon as many persons as deemed necessary to
assist in executing the warrant. Such persons shall not be held
liable as a result of the illegality of the search and seizure. If the
application was initiated by a City inspector, then that inspector
shall not assist in executing the warrant or in determining
compliance with subsequent orders resulting from the search.
4. If any property is seized, the officer shall give to the person from
whose possession it is taken, if the person is present, a copy of the
warrant and an itemized receipt of the property taken. If no person
is present, the officer shall leave the copy and the receipt at the site
of the search.
5. A copy of the itemized receipt of any property taken shall be
delivered to the office of the City Attorney within two (2) working
days of the search.
D. A person aggrieved by an unlawful seizure made by an officer and
against whom there is a pending proceeding growing out of the subject
matter of the seizure may file a motion to suppress the use in evidence
of the property or matter seized. For the purposes of this Section, a
"pending proceeding" shall mean any investigation being conducted
with the intention of using the seized subject matter in seeking an
information or when an information has been issued. The procedures
for a motion to suppress contained in Section 542.296, RSMo., shall
apply.
E. The disposition of property seized pursuant to a search warrant under
this Section shall be in accordance with Section 542.301, RSMo.
Section
135.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
135.110
100:223
Section 135.110. Search Warrants For Abatement of Weeds,
Nuisances and Abandoned, Wrecked, Dismantled or Inoperative
Motor Vehicles. [R.O. 2009 §37.31.1; Ord. No. 98-482, 11-19-1998;
Ord. No. 06-139, 6-14-2006]
A. The Municipal Judge shall have the authority to issue search warrants
to allow authorized officials of the City to enter onto private property
for the purpose of abating nuisances and enforcing Section 375.070
(Removal of Motor Vehicles From Property), Section 225.160 (Notice to
Remove—Removal by City Upon Owner's Failure) and Section 220.100
(Abatement of Nuisance) of the City Code except that the warrant
authorized hereunder shall not be used for a nuisance under Chapter
220 of the Code that is located within any building or structure.
B. For purposes of this Subsection, an official of the City, or that official's
designees, whose duties involve the enforcement of the Code Sections
here set out may apply for a search warrant to enforce the ordinance
and abate an existing nuisance by filing an application for a search
warrant with a Municipal Judge of the City.
C. The application shall:
1. Be in writing;
2. State the time and date of the making of the application;
3. State facts sufficient to show that a violation or nuisance under the
Code provision exists;
4. Identify the nature of the nuisance or violation and the matter of its
proposed abatement;
5. State that the premises are occupied and that the owner or person
in possession has refused or has not granted permission to enter
onto the premises to abate the ordinance violation or nuisance;
6. Be verified by the oath or affirmation of the applicant;
7. Be signed by one (1) of the following or a designee: the Chief of
Police, City Attorney, Assistant City Attorney, Prosecuting Attorney,
Assistant Prosecuting Attorney or the director of the department of
the City whose duty it is to enforce the Code Chapter and Section
involved;
8. Be filed in the Municipal Court.
D. The search warrant shall:
1. Be in writing and in the name of the City;
2. Be directed to any Peace Officer or Enforcement Official in the City;
3. State the time and date the warrant is issued;
Section
135.110
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
135.110
100:224
Section 135.120. Jury Trials. [R.O. 2009 §37.32; CC 1981 §19-14;
Ord. No. 78-97, 12-20-1978; Ord. No. 79-50, 5-30-1979; Ord. No.
95-117, 5-2-1995]
Any person charged with a violation of a municipal ordinance of this City
shall be entitled to a trial by jury as in prosecutions for misdemeanors
before an Associate Circuit Judge. Whenever a defendant accused of a
violation of a municipal ordinance demands trial by jury, the Municipal
Court shall certify the case to the Presiding Judge of the Circuit Court for
reassignment as provided by applicable State law.
Section 135.130. Duties of City's Prosecuting Attorney. [R.O. 2009
§37.33; CC 1981 §19-15; Ord. No. 78-97, 12-20-1978; Ord. No.
79-50, 5-30-1979]
It shall be the duty of an attorney designated by the municipality to
prosecute the violations of the Code of Ordinances and any other ordinance
of the City before the Municipal Judge or before any Circuit Judge hearing
such violations. The salary or fees of the attorney and his/her necessary
expenses incurred in such prosecutions shall be paid by the City. The
compensation of such attorney shall not be contingent upon the result in
any case.
4. Identify the place or thing which is to be searched and the nuisance
or violation to be abated in sufficient detail and particularity that
the officer or enforcement official executing the warrant can
readily determine what is to be abated;
5. Be signed by the Judge, with title of office indicated.
E. A search warrant issued under this Section may be executed by a Police
Officer or the City Official, or his/her designees, whose duty it is to
enforce the Code Chapter and Section which prompted the issuance of
the warrant.
F. A search warrant shall be executed as soon as practicable and shall
expire if it is not executed and the return made within ten (10) days
after the date of the making of the application.
G. After execution of the search warrant, the warrant, with a return
thereon signed by the person making the search, shall be delivered to
the Judge who issued the warrant. The return shall show the date and
manner of execution, what was abated, the method and manner of
abatement and the name of the person, if any, upon whom the warrant
was served.
Section
135.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
135.140
100:225
Section 135.140. Summoning of Witnesses. [R.O. 2009 §37.34; CC
1981 §19-16; Ord. No. 78-97, 12-20-1978; Ord. No. 79-50,
5-30-1979]
It shall be the duty of the Municipal Judge to summon all persons whose
testimony may be deemed essential as witnesses at the trial and to enforce
their attendance by attachment, if necessary. The fees of witnesses shall
be the same as those fixed for witnesses in trials before Associate Circuit
Judges and shall be taxed as other costs in the case. When a trial shall be
continued by a Municipal Judge, it shall not be necessary to summon any
witnesses who may be present at the continuance; but the Municipal Judge
shall orally notify such witnesses as either party may require to attend
before him/her on the day set for trial to testify in the case and enter the
names of such witnesses on his/her docket, which oral notice shall be valid
as a summons.
Section 135.150. Transfer of Complaint To Associate Circuit Judge.
[R.O. 2009 §37.35; CC 1981 §19-17; Ord. No. 78-97, 12-20-1978;
Ord. No. 79-50, 5-30-1979]
If, in the progress of any trial before a Municipal Judge, it shall appear to the
Judge that the accused ought to be put upon trial for an offense against the
criminal laws of the State and not cognizable before him/her as Municipal
Judge, he/she shall immediately stop all further proceedings before him/
her as Municipal Judge and cause the complaint to be made before some
Associate Circuit Judge within the County.
Section 135.160. Jailing Defendant — Parole and Probation. [R.O.
2009 §37.36; CC 1981 §§19-18—19-19; Ord. No. 78-97, 12-20-1978;
Ord. No. 79-50, 5-30-1979]
Section 135.170. Right of Appeal — Appeal From Jury Verdict. [R.O.
2009 §37.37; CC 1981 §§19-20—19-21; Ord. No. 78-97, 12-20-1978;
Ord. No. 79-50, 5-30-1979]
A. Jailing Of Defendants. If, in the opinion of the Municipal Judge, the City
has no suitable and safe place of confinement, the Municipal Judge may
commit the defendant to the County Jail and it shall be the duty of the
Sheriff, if space for the prisoner is available in the County Jail, upon
receipt of a warrant of commitment from the Judge to receive and safely
keep such prisoner until discharged by due process of law. The
municipality shall pay the board of such prisoner at the same rate as
may now or hereafter be allowed to such Sheriff for the keeping of such
prisoner in his/her custody. The same shall be taxed as cost.
B. Parole And Probation. Any Judge hearing violations of this Code and any
other ordinance of the City may, when in his/her judgment it may seem
advisable, grant a parole or probation to any person who shall plead
guilty or who shall be convicted after a trial before such Judge.
Section
135.140
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
135.170
100:226
Section 135.180. Breach of Recognizance. [R.O. 2009 §37.38; CC
1981 §19-22; Ord. No. 78-97, 12-20-1978; Ord. No. 79-50,
5-30-1979]
In the case of a breach of any recognizance entered into before a Municipal
Judge or an Associate Circuit Judge hearing a Code or ordinance violation
case, the same shall be deemed forfeited and the Judge shall cause the same
to be prosecuted against the principal and surety, or either of them, in the
name of the municipality as plaintiff. Such action shall be prosecuted before
a Circuit Judge or Associate Circuit Judge and in the event of cases caused
to be prosecuted by a Municipal Judge, such shall be on the transcript of
the proceedings before the Municipal Judge. All monies recovered in such
actions shall be paid over to the Municipal Treasury to the General Revenue
Fund of the municipality.
Section 135.190. Disqualification of Municipal Judge. [R.O. 2009
§37.39; CC 1981 §19-23; Ord. No. 78-97, 12-20-1978; Ord. No.
79-50, 5-30-1979]
A Municipal Judge shall be disqualified to hear any case in which he/she is in
any way interested or, if before the trial is commenced, the defendant or the
prosecutor files an affidavit that the defendant or the municipality, as the
case may be, cannot have a fair and impartial trial by reason of the interest
or prejudice of the Judge. Neither the defendant nor the municipality shall
be entitled to file more than one (1) affidavit or disqualification in the same
case.
A. Right Of Appeal. In all cases tried before the Municipal Court, except
where there has been a plea of guilty or where the case has been tried
with a jury, the defendant shall have a right of trial de novo before a
Circuit Judge or on assignment before an Associate Circuit Judge. An
application for a trial de novo shall be filed within ten (10) days after
judgment and shall be filed in such form and perfected in such manner
as provided by Supreme Court rules.
B. Appeal From Jury Verdicts. In all cases in which a jury trial has been
demanded, a record of the proceedings shall be made and appeals may
be had upon that record to the appropriate Appellant Court.
Section
135.170
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
135.190
100:227

ARTICLE IV
Administration and Enforcement
Section 135.200. Clerk of Municipal Court. [R.O. 2009 §37.50; CC
1981 §19-25; Ord. No. 78-97, 12-20-1978; Ord. No. 79-50,
5-30-1979]
Section 135.210. Court Costs. [R.O. 2009 §37.51; CC 1981 §19-26;
Ord. No. 78-97, 12-20-1978; Ord. No. 79-50, 5-30-1979; Ord. No.
79-102, 12-12-1979; Ord. No. 96-367, 12-31-1996; Ord. No. 01-192,
8-27-2001; Ord. No. 01-223, 9-21-2001; Ord. No. 02-264, 11-8-2002;
Ord. No. 04-242, 10-6-2004]
A. The Municipal Court Clerk is designated as the Clerk of the Municipal
Court. The duties of the Clerk shall be as follows:
1. To collect such fines for violations of such offenses as may be
described and the Court costs thereof and to pay over all fines and
costs into the City Treasury.
2. To take oaths and affirmations.
3. To accept signed complaints and allow the same to be signed and
sworn to or affirmed before him/her.
4. Sign and issue subpoenas requiring the attendance of witnesses
and sign and issue subpoenas duces tecum.
5. Accept the appearance, waiver of trial and plea of guilty and
payment of fine and costs in Violation Bureau cases or as directed
by the Municipal Judge; generally act as Violations Clerk of the
Violations Bureau.
6. Perform all other duties as provided for by ordinance, by rules of
practice and procedure adopted by the Municipal Judge and by the
Missouri Rules of Practice and Procedure in Municipal and Traffic
Courts and by Statute.
7. Maintain, properly certified by the City Clerk, a complete copy of
this Code and any other ordinance of the City which shall constitute
prima facie evidence of such Code or ordinance before the Court.
Further, to maintain a similar certified copy on file with the Clerk
serving the Circuit Court of the County.
8. The Clerk of the Municipal Court of the City is authorized to issue
warrants and summons as the result of complaints or information
filed by the City Attorney; provided that no such summons or
warrants shall be issued without the authority of the Municipal
Judge.
A. In addition to any fine that may be imposed by the Municipal Judge,
there shall be assessed as costs in all cases the following:
Section
135.200
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
135.210
100:229
Section 135.220. Assessment Against Prosecuting Witness. [R.O.
2009 §37.52; CC 1981 §19-27; Ord. No. 78-97, 12-20-1978; Ord. No.
79-50, 5-30-1979]
The costs of any action may be assessed against the prosecuting witness
and judgment be rendered against him/her that he/she pay the same and
stand committed until paid in any case where it appears to the satisfaction
1. Costs of court in the amount of twelve dollars ($12.00). [Ord. No.
19-162, 8-20-2019]
2. In all cases, except those for non-moving traffic violations,
submitted to the Violation Bureau and/or the Municipal Court,
there shall be an additional fee of two dollars ($2.00) assessed for
the training of Police Officers pursuant to Sections 590.100
through 590.150, RSMo.
3. A surcharge of one dollar ($1.00) to be collected for the State's
Peace Officer Standards and Training Commission Fund as
required by Section 590.140, RSMo.
4. A surcharge of seven dollars fifty cents ($7.50) to be collected for
the State's Crime Victims' Compensation Fund as required by
Section 595.045, RSMo.
5. A surcharge of two dollars ($2.00) to be collected for the Inmate
Security Fund as required by Section 488.5026, RSMo.
6. A surcharge of seven dollars ($7.00) to be collected for Statewide
court automation as required by Section 488.012, RSMo. [Ord. No.
19-162, 8-20-201959]
7. A surcharge of four dollars ($4.00) to be collected for the Domestic
Shelter Fund as allowed by Section 488.607, RSMo. [Ord. No.
19-162, 8-20-201960]
8. Other costs, such as for the issuance of a warrant, a commitment or
a summons, as provided before the Associate Circuit Judge in
criminal prosecutions.
9. Actual costs assessed against or incurred by the City by or from any
County Sheriff for transportation to and from, apprehension or
confinement in any County Jail and service costs, witness fees and
jail costs.
10. Mileage, in the same amount as provided to the Sheriff in criminal
violations, for each mile and fraction thereof the officer must travel
in order to serve any warrant or commitment or order of this Court.
59.Editor's Note: The court automation fee set out herein shall be effective January 1, 2020
per Ord. No. 19-162.
60.Editor's Note: Former Subsections (A)(6 — 8), which immediately followed, were relettered
to be Subsections (A)(8 — 10), respectively.
Section
135.210
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
135.220
100:230
of the Municipal Judge that the prosecution was commenced without
probable cause and from malicious motives.
Section 135.230. Installment Payment of Fine. [R.O. 2009 §37.53;
CC 1981 §19-28; Ord. No. 78-97, 12-20-1978; Ord. No. 79-50,
5-30-1979]
When a fine is assessed for violating a provision of this Code or any other
ordinance of the City, it shall be within the discretion of the Judge assessing
the fine to provide for the payment of a fine on an installment basis under
such terms and conditions as he/she may deem appropriate.
Section 135.240. Violations Bureau.61 [R.O. 2009 §37.54; CC 1981
§§18-68—18-71, 19-11; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975; Ord. No. 78-97,
12-20-1978; Ord. No. 79-50, 5-30-1979]
A. Bureau Authorized. Should the Municipal Judge determine that there
shall be a Violations Bureau, the City shall provide all expenses incident
to the operating of the same. A Municipal Court Clerk is established or
designated as the Violations Clerk for such Bureau, if established.
B. When Person Charged May Elect To Appear At Bureau Or Before
Magistrate.
1. Any person charged with an offense for which payment of a fine
may be made to the Violations Bureau shall have the option of
paying such fine within the time specified in the notice of arrest at
the Violations Bureau upon entering a plea of guilty and upon
waiving appearance in Court; or may have the option of depositing
required lawful bail and upon a plea of not guilty shall be entitled to
a trial as authorized by law.
2. The payment of a fine to the Bureau shall be deemed an
acknowledgment of conviction of the alleged offense and the
Bureau, upon accepting the prescribed fine, shall issue a receipt to
the violator acknowledging payment thereof.
C. Duties. The following duties are imposed upon the Violations Bureau in
reference to traffic offenses:
1. It shall accept designated fines, issue receipts and represent in
Court such violators as are permitted and desire to plead guilty,
waive court appearance and give power of attorney;
2. It shall receive and issue receipts for cash bail from the persons
who must or wish to be heard in Court, enter the time of their
appearance on the Court docket and notify the arresting officer and
witnesses, if any, to be present.
61.State Law References—Similar provisions, §§300.555, 300.560, 300.565 and 300.570,
RSMo.
Section
135.220
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
135.240
100:231
Section 135.250. Failure To Appear. [R.O. 2009 §37.55; CC 1981
§19-29 (part); Ord. No. 84-61, 6-13-1984]
Section 135.260. Reimbursement of Cost For Alcohol and Drug-
Related Offenses. [R.O. 2009 §37.56; CC 1981 §19-30; Ord. No.
92-285, 11-18-1992]
D. Bureau To Keep Records. The Violations Bureau shall keep records and
submit summarized monthly reports to the Municipal Court of all
notices issued and arrests made for violations of the traffic laws and
ordinances in the City and of all the fines collected by the Violations
Bureau or the Court and of the final disposition or present status of
every case of violation of the provisions of such laws and ordinances.
Such records shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations
and the totals of each such records shall be public records.
E. Additional Duties. The Violations Bureau shall follow such procedure as
may be prescribed by this Traffic Code and any other traffic ordinance
of the City or as may be required by any laws of this State.
A. In addition to the forfeiture of any security which was given or pledged
for his/her release, any person who, having been released upon a
recognizance or bond pursuant to any other provisions of law, willfully
fails to appear before the Judge of the Municipal Court as required shall
be guilty of an offense and punished by penalty provisions set forth in
Section 100.150 of this Code.
B. Nothing in this Section shall prevent the exercise of the Municipal
Court of its power to punish for contempt.
A. Upon a plea of guilty, finding of guilt or conviction for violation of the
provisions of Section 320.060 (Driving While Intoxicated) or Section
320.070 (Driving With Certain Blood Alcohol Content), the Court may,
in addition to imposition of any penalties provided by law, order the
person to reimburse law enforcement authorities for the costs
associated with such arrest.
B. Such costs shall include the reasonable cost of making the arrest,
including the cost of any chemical tests to determine the alcohol or
drug content of the person's blood, and the cost of processing,
charging, booking and holding such person in custody.
C. Law enforcement authorities may establish a schedule of such costs for
submission to the Court; however, the Court may order the costs
reduced if it determines that the schedule of costs is excessive given the
circumstances of the case or for good cause shown.
D. These fees shall be calculated as additional costs by the Municipal
Court and shall be collected by the Court in the same manner as other
costs and fees are collected and remitted.
Section
135.240
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
135.260
100:232
E. The Finance Director shall retain these fees in a separate fund known
as the DWI-Drug Enforcement Fund. Monies within the DWI-Drug
Enforcement Fund shall be appropriated by the City Council to law
enforcement authorities from such fund in amounts equal to those costs
so incurred and shall be specifically used to enhance and support the
enforcement and prosecution of alcohol- and drug-related traffic laws
within the City.
Section
135.260
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
135.260
100:233
Chapter 140
TAXATION - FINANCE - REVENUE
Cross References—As to business regulations, licensing and taxation, Title
VI; as to cigarette sales tax, §§605.350 et seq.; as to gross receipts tax on
retail merchants, §§605.270 et seq.; as to sales tax, §§605.470 et seq.; as to
business licensing and taxation, charter art. XIII; as to financial procedures,
charter art. VIII; as to water line repair, §700.160; as to sewer lateral repair
fee, §705.280.
Section
135.260
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
135.260
100:234
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 140.010. Fiscal Year. [R.O. 2009 §39.01; CC 1981 §2-461;
Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No. 00-327, 12-1-2000]
The fiscal year of the City shall commence on January first (1st) and
terminate on December thirty-first (31st) in each year and the books,
accounts and reports of the officers shall be made to conform thereto.
Section 140.020. Reporting To Council of Transfers Pursuant To
Charter Section 8.10 in Excess of $10,000.00. [R.O. 2009 §39.04; CC
1981 §2-460; Ord. No. 81-83, 9-1-1981; Ord. No. 95-122, 5-4-1995;
Ord. No. 11-09 §§1—3, 1-7-2011; Ord. No. 11-54 §1, 3-30-2011]
Any intra-departmental transfer authorized by Charter Section 8.10
aggregating ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more shall be reported
to the City Council at the second (2nd) meeting of the month following the
transfer as a Director of Administration Report on the City Council Consent
Agenda.
Section 140.030. Fees For Applications and Reviews Under The
Zoning Code. [R.O. 2009 §39.05; Ord. No. 98-236, 5-20-1998; Ord.
No. 99-322, 9-23-1999; Ord. No. 04-176, 8-4-2004]
A. Any person making an application to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for rezoning or conditional use shall pay, in advance, a fee
of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). The fee may be refunded only if
the application is withdrawn before publication of a public hearing
notice in the newspaper or prior to review by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
B. Any person making an application to the Board of Adjustment shall pay,
in advance, a non-refundable fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00)
for the first (1st) variance request on a property and an additional fee of
fifty dollars ($50.00) for each additional request involving the same
property. The fee may be refunded only if the application is withdrawn
before publication of a public hearing notice in the newspaper or prior
to review by the Board of Adjustment. Any application involving an
existing duplex unit or an existing single-family home shall pay, in
advance, a non-refundable fee of fifty dollars ($50.00).
C. Any person submitting a site plan for review by the Planning and
Zoning Commission or HLPARB shall pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00)
per building.
D. Any person making an application to the HLPARB for exterior changes
shall pay a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
Section
140.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
140.040
100:235
Section 140.040. Insufficient Funds or No Account Check Fee. [R.O.
2009 §39.06; Ord. No. 98-253, 6-17-1998]
Any person who writes a check to the City which is subsequently returned
to the City because of insufficient funds shall pay to the City a fee of twentyfive
dollars ($25.00).
Section 140.050. Release and Settlement of Claims Against The
City — Procedure. [R.O. 2009 §39.07; Ord. No. 08-271, 12-19-2008]
Section 140.055. Credit or Debit Card Payment For Bills, Fees,
Court Fines and Costs — Fees Paid Directly By Cardholder. [Ord. No.
11-057 §1, 3-30-2011; Ord. No. 15-017 §1, 1-20-2015]
A credit or debit card may be accepted for payment of water bills, sewer
bills, ambulance bills, permit fees, court fines and costs and other City
service payments. The exact fee charged by a credit/debit card payment
processor for the convenience of the cardholder's transaction shall be
added to the transaction total at the time the credit/debit card payment is
processed and shall be paid entirely by the cardholder.
A. No claim for damages made against the City shall be paid without the
claimant first executing a release and settlement of claim in the form
approved by the City Attorney and the Finance Director as required by
Charter Section 7.4(b).
B. Nothing in this Section is intended to guarantee payment of any claim
made against the City.
C. Claims for damages shall be paid within five (5) business days from the
date of the claimant's and Mayor's execution of the release and
settlement of claim form.
D. The release and settlement of claim form shall be in substantially a form
on file in the City Clerk's office.
Section
140.040
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
140.055
100:236
ARTICLE II
City Depositories
Section 140.060. Selection Process, Receipt of Proposal. [R.O. 2009
§39.15; Ord. No. 3746, 6-9-1970; Ord. No. 96-35, 2-7-1996]
Receipt Of Proposals—Notice—Statement Of Rate Payable To
City—Disclosure Of Amount Of Bid Prior To Selection. Subject to the
provisions of the laws of the State, the City Council shall periodically
receive sealed proposals for the deposit of City funds from bank institutions
doing business within the City that desire to be selected as the depository
of funds of the City.
Section 140.070. Securities To Be Deposited With Depository
Agent.62 [R.O. 2009 §39.16; CC 1981 §2-472; Ord. No. 3746,
6-9-1970; Ord. No. 96-35, 2-7-1996; Ord. No. 00-61, 2-16-2000]
It shall be the duty of the banking corporation, association or individual
bank selected as a depository to pledge to the City and deposit with a
depository agent to be designated by the City Council securities of the value
to be fixed by order of the City Council, not less than one hundred ten
percent (110%) of the actual amount of the funds on deposit pursuant to
the Federal Deposit Act of 1950 (12 USC 1811 et seq.) as heretofore or
hereafter amended, which shall be securities of the character prescribed by
the City's investment policy.
Section 140.080. Release of Pledged Securities. [R.O. 2009 §39.17;
Ord. No. 00-61, 2-16-2000; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
The Mayor or the Finance Director are authorized to release pledged
securities, required by Section 140.070, because of maturity or other fiscal
matters provided that there remain with the depository agent pledged
securities valued at not less than one hundred ten percent (110%) of the
City's deposits.
62.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150. State Law Reference—City depository generally,
§§95.280 et seq., RSMo.
Section
140.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
140.080
100:237

ARTICLE III
Financing Public Improvements
Section 140.090. Application — Preliminary Report By Mayor. [R.O.
2009 §39.30; CC 1981 §24-201; Ord. No. 91-164, 8-21-1991; Ord.
No. 98-97, 2-19-1998; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
Section 140.100. Work Authorized By City Council. [R.O. 2009
§39.31; CC 1981 §24-202; Ord. No. 91-164, 8-21-1991; Ord. No.
98-97, 2-19-1998]
Any proposed public improvement to be paid for in whole or in part by
special assessments upon real property shall be initiated by a resolution
of the City Council authorizing the Department of Public Works to proceed
with the engineering for such proposed improvement. Such resolution may
be submitted at the same meeting that the preliminary report set forth in
Section 140.090 of this Chapter is submitted or at any subsequent meeting
of the Council.
Section 140.110. Procedure Relative To Approval and Payment of
Costs.63 [R.O. 2009 §39.32; CC 1981 §24-203; Ord. No. 91-164,
8-21-1991; Ord. No. 98-97, 2-19-1998; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
A. Upon the application of any person for a public improvement to be paid
for in whole or in part by special tax bills upon real property or upon the
order of the City Council, the Mayor may prepare and submit to the City
Council a preliminary report substantially setting out the improvement
proposed, together with such other information and data as may be
available from the Department of Public Works concerning any such
proposed public improvement.
B. "Public improvement" in this Article means to grade, pave (the word
"pave" as herein used meaning to improve with all kinds of street
paving, including macadamizing), gutter, curb or otherwise improve
streets and alleys and parts of same and to reconstruct and repair any
paving, grading, guttering and curbing and to make and repair
sidewalks, bridges, culverts and crosswalks and to exercise control over
streets and alleys and establish and re-establish grades thereon.
A. After authorization by the City Council as set forth above, the following
procedure shall be used for the proposed public improvements project
to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessments upon real
property:
1. The Mayor shall cause to be prepared, filed with the City Clerk,
subject to inspection of the public and submitted to the City
Council, plans and specifications for the proposed public
improvement project, including construction costs which may
include labor, material, construction contingency and fees and
63.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
140.090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
140.110
100:239
Section 140.120. Acceptance of Improvements — Issuance of
Special Tax Bills. [R.O. 2009 §39.33; CC 1981 §24-204; Ord. No.
other expenses and an estimate of the portion of the total cost to
be assessed against each property to be benefitted by the project,
i.e., the cost per individual lot or tract of ground in the district,
exclusive of the public highways. Any error or inaccuracy in such
estimate, as compared with actual cost of the work, shall not affect
the validity of the proceedings or of any assessments made or of
special bills issued.
2. If the City Council shall deem the public improvement project
necessary, it shall by resolution, referring to the plan, specifications
and estimates of cost filed in the office of the City Clerk, declare the
public improvement necessary, state the benefits of the proposed
public improvement project to the property abutting the proposed
public improvement project and state the nature and the method of
payment of the proposed public improvement project. The
resolution shall set a time, date and place for a public hearing on
the proposed public improvement project. At the public hearing
citizens may express their assent or objection to such project.
3. The City Council shall cause the resolution to be published in some
newspaper printed in the County for two (2) consecutive insertions
in a weekly paper and for seven (7) consecutive insertions in a daily
paper or as may be provided by State law. At the same time, the
Council shall cause not less than three (3) copies of the resolution
to be posted in conspicuous places within the limit of the proposed
public improvement.
4. After the public hearing, the City Council may, by ordinance, adopt
the plans and specifications filed with the City Clerk.
5. The Director of Public Works shall advertise for bids for the
proposed public improvements construction project set forth in the
plans and specifications. On receipt of such bids, the Director of
Public Works shall, at the time and place designated in the
advertisement for bids, publicly open them and the Mayor shall in
writing report to the City Council the name and bid of the lowest
and best bidder. No bid may be considered which is above the
estimate of cost previously filed. Thereafter, the City Council may,
by ordinance, authorize the Mayor to enter into a contract with
such bidder for the work on behalf of the City and require and
authorize the Mayor to approve a bond from the contractor for
faithful performance of the contract and for the payment by the
contractor for all labor done or materials used in the improvement.
Where the bids are above the estimate or no bids are received or
for any reason a legally enforceable contract cannot be let,
readvertisement for bids by the Director of Public Works may be
made as often as may be deemed expedient.
Section
140.110
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
140.120
100:240
91-164, 8-21-1991; Ord. No. 98-97, 2-19-1998; Ord. No. 07-162,
6-11-2007]
When a public improvement to be paid for in whole or in part by special
assessments upon real property is completed in accordance with the
contract, the Mayor shall, in writing, so report to the City Council. The
report of the Mayor shall include a separate report of the Director of Public
Works, wherein the Director of Public Works shall compute the whole cost
thereof and apportion the same against the lots, tracts or parcels of ground
in proportion to the area of the whole district, exclusive of public highways.
The City Council shall, by ordinance, after conducting a public hearing on
the benefits conferred by the public improvement project, accept the public
improvement project and, for that part to be paid for by special assessment,
levy and assess special tax bills in accordance with the report of the
Director of Public Works and order the issuance of special tax bills. The
Director of Finance shall issue tax bills payable to the City against each lot,
tract or parcel of ground for the amount for which it is liable. The Director
of Finance shall be responsible for all aspects of the collection of tax bills
made payable to the City, including the filing of liens and undertaking of
legal actions for the collection of amounts due under the tax bills issued.
Section 140.130. Installment Payments.64 [R.O. 2009 §39.34; CC
1981 §24-205; Ord. No. 91-164, 8-21-1991]
A. Each tax bill shall contain a brief general statement of the facts
authorizing its issue, the amount for which it is issued, the name of the
record owner and the description of the property against which it is
issued, the rate of interest which it bears, when it begins to bear
interest and shall state that it is a lien against the land therein
described and give the time that the lien continues.
B. Tax bills shall bear no interest for sixty (60) days after the date of issue,
at which time such tax bills shall be due and payable in full. After the
expiration of sixty (60) days, tax bills shall bear interest, on the unpaid
balance, at a rate not to exceed the rate on ten (10) year United States
Treasury notes as established at the most recent auction, which rate
shall be set forth in the ordinance authorizing the issuance thereof.
Every tax bill shall be a lien against the lot, tract or parcel of land
described therein for a period of ten (10) years after date of issue,
unless sooner paid. The lien, for tax bills payable in installments, shall
expire one (1) year after the date of maturity of the last installment,
except when it becomes necessary to bring suit to enforce the lien, in
which case the lien shall continue until the expiration of the litigation.
All tax bills shall be assignable and the owner or holder of any tax bill
may enforce the collection thereof by filing suit in a court of competent
jurisdiction, in the name of the City to his/her own use or in an action
brought by the City in its own name and for its own use. If the property
owner cannot be served by legal process, a suit may be brought by
64.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
140.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
140.130
100:241
Section 140.140. Payment of Tax Bills. [R.O. 2009 §39.35; CC 1981
§24-207; Ord. No. 91-164, 8-21-1991; Ord. No. 98-97, 2-19-1998]
attachment or by any other legal remedy. Tax bills shall be prima
facie evidence of what they contain, of their own validity, of the facts
authorizing their issue, that they are a lien on the land described and,
in all tax bills issued in payment for sewers, the liability of the person
named as the owner of such property. No mere informality or clerical
mistake in any of the proceedings shall be a defense thereto. Any error
made in issuing any tax bill may be corrected by the City Clerk, either
by interlineation or by issuing a new tax bill in lieu of the erroneous
one. When a tax bill is corrected by interlineation, the date of making
same shall be certified by the Clerk on the margin or back of the bill. In
any action brought on any tax bill, the court shall have the authority to
correct any error in the tax bill.
C. The owner of any tract of land, against which a tax bill has been issued,
may, not later than sixty (60) days after the issuance of the tax bill,
enter into an agreement with the City to pay the tax bill in ten (10)
annual installments. Each payment shall be in an amount equal to onetenth
(1/10) of the unpaid balance of the tax bill, together with all
accrued interest. The agreement shall provide that if any installment is
not paid when due, the balance shall be then due and payable in full,
together with all accrued interest. Prepayments may be made without
penalty.
A. Manner Of Payment. The owner of property described in a special tax
bill may pay such tax bill at the time and in the amounts therein
specified to either the legal holder of such special tax bill or, if the
owner of any property shall make representation that the legal holder
cannot be found or refuses to accept tender of payment, then payment
may be made to the Director of Finance. The Director of Finance shall
be deemed the lawful agent in such cases to accept payment on behalf
of the legal holder of the special tax bill.
B. Procedure Upon Payment. When payment of a special tax bill in full,
with interest, shall be made directly to the legal holder of such bill, such
holder shall endorse on the back thereof a receipt for the amount paid
and deliver the same to the party making such payment, together with a
certificate addressed to the Director of Finance stating that such tax bill
has been paid and that the owner of the property therein described is
entitled to have satisfaction thereof entered on the register of special
assessments for improvements. The Director of Finance shall file such
certificate upon receipt of the same and shall certify on the back of such
bill that such satisfaction has been properly entered on such register.
When payment of a special tax bill in full, with interest, shall be made
directly to the Director of Finance, the Director shall prepare a
certificate, a copy of which shall serve as a receipt, indicating that such
payment has been made and that the owner of the property described in
the tax bill is entitled to have satisfaction thereof entered on the
Section
140.130
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
140.140
100:242
Section 140.150. Partial Release of Tax Bill Lien. [R.O. 2009 §39.36;
CC 1981 §24-207; Ord. No. 91-164, 8-21-1991; Ord. No. 98-97,
2-19-1998]
Section 140.160. Appeals.65 [R.O. 2009 §39.37; CC 1981 §24-208;
Ord. No. 91-164, 8-21-1991; Ord. No. 98-97, 2-19-1998]
In all cases where work is done or improvements are made and the cost
thereof is assessed as a special tax bill, any owner of property upon which
such tax is levied may request, and the City Council shall grant, a public
hearing to determine whether such assessment is excessive or is levied not
in proportion to the work done. The City Council may adjust or reduce such
assessment which is determined to be excessive or levied not in proportion
to the work done. If such adjustments or reductions result in the collection
of special taxes insufficient to pay the costs for work done or improvements
made, the City Council may pay the difference between costs accrued and
special assessments collected out of other revenue.
register of special assessments for improvements, which certificate
shall be filed with the certificates hereinbefore required and the
Director of Finance shall at that time enter satisfaction of such tax bill
on the register of special assessments for improvements. The Director
of Finance shall then secure the tax bill from the legal holder thereof,
certifying on the back of such tax bill that satisfaction has been properly
entered on the record and endorsing a receipt on the back of the bill
for the amount paid; thereafter surrendering the tax bill to the person
having paid such bill.
C. Lost Tax Bill Prior To Satisfaction. If any tax bill shall be lost before
satisfaction thereof has been entered on the record of special
assessments, the Director of Finance shall, upon the affidavit of the
person entitled to such bill that the same has been lost, if payment shall
be made to the legal holder thereof, enter satisfaction of such bill on the
register of special assessments.
A. The Director of Finance may release, upon proper payment due under a
tax bill, from the lien of a bill a portion of the property against which the
tax bill was issued by stamping or otherwise noting upon the tax bill the
words "partially released".
B. The Director of Finance shall cause to be kept all statements of partial
release of special tax bills in one (1) or more books kept for that
purpose and whenever the lien of any special tax bill has been partially
released, the Director of Finance shall enter into the register of special
assessments, in the place where the special tax bill is recorded, the
words "partially released".
65.Cross Reference—As to streets and sidewalks, ch. 505.
Section
140.140
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
140.160
100:243

ARTICLE IV
Sewer Construction
Section 140.170. Creation of Sewer Districts. [R.O. 2009 §39.40;
Ord. No. 97-277, 8-25-1997; Ord. No. 98-98, 2-19-1998]
The general sewer system of the City shall be composed of four (4) classes
of sewers, to wit: public, district, joint district and private sewers. The
City Council may create by ordinance such sewer districts that it deems
necessary for sanitary or other purposes. The boundaries of a sewer district
that has been paid for wholly by special assessments shall not be altered or
changed after any sewer has been constructed in and for the same.
Section 140.180. Application For Project — Preparation of
Preliminary Report By Mayor. [R.O. 2009 §39.41; Ord. No. 97-277,
8-25-1997; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
Upon being petitioned by a majority of the property owners in a designated
sewer district wherein a sewer construction project may be paid for in
whole or in part by special assessments upon real property or upon the
order of the City Council, the Mayor shall prepare and submit to the
City Council a preliminary report substantially setting out the sewer
construction proposed, together with such other information and data as
may be available from the Department of Public Works concerning any such
proposed sewer construction project.
Section 140.190. Authorization of Sewer Construction By City
Council. [R.O. 2009 §39.42; Ord. No. 97-277, 8-25-1997]
A. Any proposed sewer construction project to be paid for in whole or in
part by special assessments upon real property shall be initiated by a
resolution of the City Council authorizing the Department of Public
Works to proceed with the engineering for such proposed sewer
construction project. Such resolution may be submitted at the same
meeting that the preliminary report set forth in Section 140.180 is
submitted or at any subsequent meeting of the Council.
B. Lift stations and force mains designed to lift sewage which has flowed
by gravity to a low area having no outlet from such area to places from
which it can continue to flow by gravity to an outlet or treatment facility
are a vital and necessary part of any sewer system. Therefore,
whenever the preliminary report referred to in Section 140.180 shall
note that any district or joint district sewer will not drain in whole or in
part by gravity and there is required for the proper drainage of the area
that a sewage lift station and force main be constructed and the City
Council shall authorize engineering for the proposed sewer district as
provided in Subsection (A) of this Section, then the proceedings relative
to construction of facilities in said district or joint district shall be the
same proceedings as provided in Section 140.200, except that the
resolution required in Section 140.200(2) shall note that the
Section
140.170
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
140.190
100:245
Section 140.200. Procedure Relative To Approval and Payment of
Costs. [R.O. 2009 §39.43; Ord. No. 97-277, 8-25-1997; Ord. No.
07-162, 6-11-2007]
construction proposed includes a lift station and a force main. The
cost of the construction of such lift station and force main shall be
assessable against the lands located in the district or joint district.
A. After authorization by the City Council as set forth above, the following
procedure shall be used for the proposed sewer construction project to
be paid for in whole or in part by special assessments upon real
property:
1. The Mayor shall cause to be prepared, filed with the City Clerk,
subject to inspection of the public and submitted to the City
Council, plans and specifications for the proposed sewer
construction project, including construction costs which may
include the costs of lift stations and force mains, construction
contingency and fees and other expenses and an estimate of the
portion of the total cost to be assessed against each property to be
benefited by the project, i.e., the cost per individual lot or tract of
ground in the district, exclusive of the public highways. Any error
or inaccuracy in such estimate as compared with actual cost of the
work shall not affect the validity of the proceedings or of any
assessments made or of special bills issued.
2. The City Council shall, if it deems the project necessary for sanitary
or other purposes or if a majority of the property owners of the
district shall have petitioned for construction of sewers, by
resolution, referring to the plan, specifications and estimates of
cost filed in the office of the City Clerk, declare the work or
improvement necessary, state the benefits of the proposed sewer
construction project to the property of the district and state the
nature and the method of payment of the proposed sewer
construction project. The resolution shall set a time, date and place
for a public hearing on the proposed sewer construction project. At
the public hearing citizens may express their assent or objection to
such project.
3. The City Council shall cause the resolution to be published in some
newspaper printed in the County for two (2) consecutive insertions
in a weekly paper and for seven (7) consecutive insertions in a daily
paper or as may be provided by State law.
4. After the public hearing, the City Council may, by ordinance, adopt
the plans and specifications filed with the City Clerk.
5. The Director of Public Works shall advertise for bids for the
proposed sewer construction project set forth in the plans and
specifications. On receipt of such bids, the Director of Public Works
shall, at the time and place designated in the advertisement for
Section
140.190
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
140.200
100:246
Section 140.210. Acceptance of Improvements — Issuance of
Special Tax Bills. [R.O. 2009 §39.44; Ord. No. 97-277, 8-25-1997;
Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
When a sewer construction project to be paid for in whole or in part by
special assessments upon real property is completed in accordance with
the contract, the Mayor shall, in writing, so report to the City Council.
The report of the Mayor shall include a separate report of the Director of
Public Works, wherein the Director of Public Works shall compute the whole
cost thereof and apportion the same against the lots, tracts or parcels of
ground in proportion to the area of the whole district, exclusive of public
highways. The City Council shall, by ordinance, after conducting a public
hearing on the benefits conferred by the sewer construction project, accept
the sewer construction project and, for that part to be paid for by special
assessment, levy and assess special tax bills in accordance with the report
of the Director of Public Works and order the issuance of special tax bills.
The Director of Finance shall issue tax bills against each lot, tract or parcel
of ground for the amount for which it is liable. Each special tax bill shall
include, but is not limited to, the City Clerk's certification of the amount
assessed against the property, interest per annum, a description of the
property against which the special assessment is levied and the names of
the property owners at the time of the assessment. The Director of Finance
shall be responsible for all aspects of the collection of tax bills made payable
to the City, including the filing of liens and undertaking of legal actions for
the collection of amounts due under the tax bills issued.
Section 140.220. Installment Payments. [R.O. 2009 §39.45; Ord. No.
97-277, 8-25-1997]
bids, publicly open them and the Mayor shall in writing report to
the City Council the name and bid of the lowest and best bidder.
No bid may be considered which is above the estimate of cost
previously filed. Thereafter, the City Council may, by ordinance,
authorize the Mayor to enter into a contract with such bidder for
the work on behalf of the City and require and authorize the Mayor
to approve a bond from the contractor for faithful performance of
the contract and for the payment by the contractor for all labor
done or materials used in the improvement. Where the bids are
above the estimate or no bids are received or for any reason a
legally enforceable contract cannot be let, readvertisement for bids
by the Director of Public Works may be made as often as may be
deemed expedient.
A. Each tax bill for the completed sewer construction project shall contain
a brief general statement of the facts authorizing its issue, the amount
for which it is issued, the name of the record owner and the description
of the property against which it is issued, the rate of interest which it
bears, when it begins to bear interest and shall state that it is a lien
against the land therein described and give the time that the lien
continues.
Section
140.200
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
140.220
100:247
Section 140.230. Payment of Special Tax Bills. [R.O. 2009 §39.46;
Ord. No. 97-277, 8-25-1997]
The manner of payment, procedure upon payment and partial release of tax
bill liens shall be the same as set forth in Sections 140.140 and 140.150.
B. Tax bills for the completed sewer construction project shall bear no
interest for sixty (60) days after the date of issue, at which time the tax
bills shall be due and payable in full. After the expiration of sixty (60)
days, tax bills shall bear interest, on the unpaid balance, at a rate not to
exceed the rate on ten (10) year United States Treasury notes as
established at the most recent auction, which rate shall be set forth in
the ordinance authorizing the issuance thereof. Every tax bill for the
completed sewer construction project shall be a lien against the lot,
tract or parcel of land described therein for a period of up to twenty
(20) years after date of issue, unless sooner paid. The lien, for tax bills
payable in installments, shall expire one (1) year after the date of
maturity of the last installment, except when it becomes necessary to
bring suit to enforce the lien, in which case the lien shall continue until
the expiration of the litigation. All tax bills for completed sewer
construction shall be assignable and the owner or holder of any tax bill
may enforce the collection thereof by filing suit in a court of competent
jurisdiction in the name of the City to the owner's or holder's own use or
in an action brought by the City in its own name and for its own use. If
the property owner cannot be served by legal process, a suit may be
brought by attachment or by any other legal remedy. Tax bills for
completed sewer construction projects shall be prima facie evidence of
what they contain, of their own validity, of the facts authorizing their
issue, that they are a lien on the land described and, in all tax bills
issued in payment for sewers, the liability of the person named as the
owner of such property. No mere informality or clerical mistake in any
of the proceedings shall be a defense thereto. Any error made in issuing
any tax bill may be corrected by the Director of Finance, either by
interlineation or by issuing a new tax bill in lieu of the erroneous one.
When a tax bill is corrected by interlineation, the date of making same
shall be certified by the Director of Finance on the margin or back of
the bill. In any action brought on any tax bill, the court shall have the
authority to correct any error in the tax bill.
C. The owner of any tract of land, against which a tax bill for completed
sewer construction has been issued, may, not later than sixty (60) days
after the issuance of the tax bill, enter into an agreement with the City
to pay the tax bill in equal annual installments as may be authorized by
ordinance. Each principal payment shall be in an equal amount,
together with all accrued interest. The agreement shall provide that if
any installment is not paid when due, the balance shall be then due and
payable in full, together with all accrued interest. Prepayments may be
made without penalty.
Section
140.220
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
140.240
100:248
Section 140.240. Appeals. [R.O. 2009 §39.47; Ord. No. 97-277,
8-25-1997]
In all cases where sewer construction work is done and the cost thereof is
assessed as a special tax bill, any owner of property upon which such tax
is levied may request, and the City Council shall grant, a public hearing
to determine whether such assessment is excessive or is levied not in
proportion to the work done. The City Council may adjust or reduce such
assessment which is determined to be excessive or levied not in proportion
to work done. If such adjustments or reductions result in the collection
of special assessments insufficient to pay the costs for work done or
improvements made, the City Council may pay the difference between costs
accrued and special assessments collected out of other revenues.
Section
140.240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
140.240
100:249

ARTICLE V
Property Taxes
Section 140.250. Date Property Liable For Taxation.66 [R.O. 2009
§39.52; CC 1981 §26-3]
Every person owning or holding property on January first (1st), including
all property purchased on that day, shall be liable for taxes thereon for the
ensuing year.
Section 140.260. Valuation of Property. [R.O. 2009 §39.53; CC 1981
§26-4; Ord. No. 84-137, 11-20-1984]
Section 140.270. Each Tract of Land Chargeable With Its Own Taxes
— Notice To Owner.67 [R.O. 2009 §39.54; CC 1981 §26-5]
Each tract of land or lot shall be chargeable with its own taxes, no matter
who is the owner, nor in whose name it is or was assessed. The assessment
of land or lots in numerical order or by plats in a "land list" in alphabetical
order as provided by Statute or ordinance shall be deemed and taken in
all courts and places to impart notice to the owner thereof, whoever or
whatever they may be, that it is assessed and liable to be sold for taxes,
A. For purposes of real property taxation, the following categories of real
property are established:
1. Classes.
a. Class A. All real property not defined as Class B property.
b. Class B. All property designated by the Saint Charles County
Assessor as "Farm Program" property, as long as such property
remains undeveloped.
2. The City Council shall use these categories in developing revenue
projections and real estate property taxes in the annual budget.
B. The Assessor shall value all property on the Assessor's books according
to its true value in money at the time of the assessment and all other
personal property shall be valued at its cash price at the time and place
of listing the same for taxation. Each tract of land or lot shall be
assessed and valued separately, but all lots in a square or block owned
by one (1) person, which are contiguous or which can be consolidated
into one (1) tract or lot and which have been classified into the same
category (Class A or Class B), shall be valued as one (1) tract or lot. No
property of different classes shall be grouped into a single tract or lot
for valuation purposes. Each kind of property shall be assessed
separately in the manner provided by Statute for assessment for County
purposes.
66.State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §137.075, RSMo.
67.State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §137.170, RSMo.
Section
140.250
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
140.270
100:251
interests and costs chargeable thereon; and no error or omission in regard
to the name of any person, with reference to any tract of land or lot, shall in
anywise impair the validity of the assessment thereof for taxes.
Section 140.280. Power To Exempt From Taxation. [R.O. 2009
§39.71; CC 1981 §26-26; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986]
The Council shall have no power to relieve any person from the payment of
any lawful tax or exempt any person from any assessment or other burden
imposed upon him/her by law.
Section
140.270
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
140.280
100:252
ARTICLE VI
Sales Tax
Section 140.290. Sales Tax for Funding Local Parks and Stormwater
Control. [Ord. No. 16-104 §§1 — 2, 5-10-2016]
A. There is hereby imposed a sales tax in the amount of one-half of one
percent (1/2 of 1%) on the receipts from all retail sales and taxable
services at retail within the City upon all sellers within the City for the
privilege of engaging in the business of selling tangible personal
property or rendering taxable services at retail to the extent and in the
manner provided by Sections 144.010 to 144.525, inclusive, RSMo., as
amended, and the rules and regulations of the Director of Revenue of
the State of Missouri issued pursuant thereto. Such tax may be used for
the purpose of funding local parks and stormwater control. One-third of
said tax shall be used for funding outdoor park capital improvements
and two-thirds of said tax shall be used for stormwater control capital
improvements. No part of such tax shall be used to fund any operational
expenses. Further, no part of such tax shall be used for funding indoor
aquatic facilities.
B. The imposition of said sales tax shall become effective as provided by
law upon approval thereof by a majority of the votes cast on the
proposition by the qualified voters of the City voting thereon68 and shall
terminate automatically fifteen (15) years after the imposition thereof.
68.Editor's Note: This tax was passed by a majority of the qualified voters at an election held
8-2-2016.
Section
140.290
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
140.290
100:253
Chapter 145
PURCHASING, CONTRACTS AND SALES
Section
140.290
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
140.290
100:254
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 145.010. Contract Administrator — Duties. [R.O. 2009
§40.01; CC 1981 §2-458; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986]
Section 145.020. Bonds For Contractors Doing Public Work. [R.O.
2009 §40.02; CC 1981 §2-484; Ord. No. 86-2, 1-7-1986; Ord. No.
14-243 §1, 11-18-2014; Ord. No. 15-121 §1, 6-2-2015]
On all contracts for public work of any kind to be performed for the City,
the cost of which is estimated to exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00),
every contractor entering into contract with the City for any such public
work shall execute therewith and file in the office of the City Clerk a bond,
with good and sufficient sureties to be approved by the City Attorney, in an
amount equal to the contract price for such work and conditioned among
other things for the faithful performance of the contract, the payment
of any and all materials incorporated, consumed or used in connection
with the construction of such work and all insurance premiums, both for
compensation and for all other kinds of insurance, on the work and for all
labor performed in such work, whether by subcontractor or otherwise.
Section 145.030. Procedures For Convention Center Contracts.
[R.O. 2009 §40.03; Ord. No. 03-89, 4-23-2003; Ord. No. 08-136,
7-3-2008; Ord. No. 14-243 §1, 11-18-2014]
The City Council may enter into an agreement with the St. Charles County
Convention and Sports Facilities Authority to provide for bidding
procedures and contract approval procedures for goods and services
relating to the construction and operation of the Convention Center, which
procedures may differ from the requirements of this Chapter.
Section 145.040. Offender Registration With Police Department.
[R.O. 2009 §40.04; Ord. No. 06-250, 9-11-2006]
A. The Contract Administrator shall:
1. Be responsible for examining all proposed contracts to which the
City may be a party and which involve State and/or Federal revenue
sharing programs in order to ensure that the City is in compliance
with State and/or Federal rules and regulations required
thereunder.
2. Coordinate contracts to which the City may be a party by acting in
conjunction with the various City departments and the City
Attorney in preparing such contracts.
3. See to it that all terms of any contract to which the City is a party
are fully performed by all parties thereto.
Section
145.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
145.040
100:255
Section 145.050. Festivals. [R.O. 2009 §40.05; Ord. No. 06-218,
8-9-2006]
Any festival underwritten by City funds or conducted on City property shall
not discriminate against any political party with respect to participation in
the festival. Participation shall include operation of booths and concessions.
Each of the State recognized political parties shall have equal rights,
accessibility and opportunity to participate in or sell products or services at
festivals.
Section 145.055. Determination of Contractor Responsibility for
Construction Contracts. [Ord. No. 18-124, 5-15-2018]
A. Any party to a contract for the delivery of goods or services to the City
who has any person, employee, independent contractor, subcontractor
or otherwise, who that in performance of that contract has any contact
with a City employee or City resident or is physically present on City
property and that person is required to register with the Chief Law
Enforcement Official of the County in which such person resides
pursuant to Section 589.400, RSMo., then that person shall register
with the City Police Department prior to having any contact with a City
employee or City resident or being physically present on City property
or on City right-of-way.
B. Any registration pursuant to Subsection (A) above shall consist of
completion of an offender registration form developed by the Missouri
State Highway Patrol. This registration form is available at the City
Police Department.
C. Any person who violates any of the provisions of Subsection (A) above
shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Section 100.150.
D. Notice of this Section shall be placed in contracts, bid specifications,
requests for proposals and requests for qualifications.
E. Any company, employer, independent contractor, subcontractor whose
employee violates any Subsection of this Section may be subject to
termination of the contract.
A. Purpose. This Section establishes the procedures for determining
contractor responsibility and eligibility for City construction contracts.
B. Authority. The Mayor, Parks and Recreation Board and Board of Public
Works or their appointed designee shall have the authority to declare a
bidder not responsible and eligible for contract award. The
determination of non-responsibility shall be made in accordance with
the procedures set forth in this Section.
C. Definitions. For the purpose of this Section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
Section
145.040
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
145.055
100:256
AFFILIATE — Persons are affiliates of each other if, directly or
indirectly, either one (1) controls or has the power to control the other,
or a third person controls or has the power to control both. Indicia
of control, include, but are not limited to: interlocking management
or ownership, identity of interests among family members, shared
facilities and equipment, common use of employees or a business entity
organized following the determination of ineligibility of a person which
has the same or similar management, ownership or principal employees
as the ineligible person.
BIDDER — A bidder is a person who submits a proposal for a
construction contract in accordance with this Chapter, or one (1) who
offers to or subcontracts to a person who submits a proposal for a
construction contract.
CONTRACTING AUTHORITY — For purposes of this Section, the
Contracting Authority is the Mayor, Parks and Recreation Board or
Board of Public Works or their appointed designees, as the case may
be.
DEBARMENT — Debarment means the disqualification of a contractor
for a period of one (1) year or more and until reinstated. A disbarred
contractor will not be eligible to receive invitations for bids or requests
for proposals or the award of any City construction contract.
Disbarment is also applicable to selection of consultants by the City and
entry into a contract as a joint venture, contractor, subcontractor, or
consultant or subconsultant on City projects. Reinstatement will only
be permitted after having fully complied with the terms of the original
disbarment.
PERSON — A person is defined as an association, individual,
corporation, joint venture, limited liability company, limited
partnership, partnership, trust, or other legal entity.
PRINCIPAL — A principal is defined as an officer, director, owner,
partner, key employee, manager, member or other person within an
organizational structure having the authority to obligate the bidder in a
contractual relationship.
D. Determination Of Responsibility. The Contracting Authority shall make
a preliminary determination that a bidder is not responsible and is
ineligible to be awarded a contract in accordance with this Chapter.
1. A finding of non-responsibility shall be based on the contractor's
capability in all respects to fully perform the contract
requirements, possession of integrity and reliability which will
assure good faith performance, financial condition, ability to
prosecute the work as bid and the past quality of their work,
including project superintendence and management, on previous
projects for the City.
2. Notice of that finding shall be sent to the bidder by certified mail,
return receipt requested. The notice shall contain a statement as to
Section
145.055
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
145.055
100:257
the factual basis for the bidder's ineligibility, the length of the
ineligibility and an explanation of what the bidder must do to be
found eligible to again submit bids on contracts.
3. Upon receipt of notice of ineligibility, the bidder may request a
hearing in front of the Contracting Authority. The hearing shall be
informally conducted and shall provide the bidder or affiliates an
opportunity to present any facts which may tend to show that the
bidder is in fact responsible.
4. Any request for hearing must be postmarked within ten (10)
consecutive calendar days of the date of receipt of the notice of
ineligibility as evidenced by the return receipt.
5. The Contracting Authority shall render a determination within sixty
(60) consecutive calendar days of the hearing. The determination
shall be sent to all parties by certified mail, return receipt
requested. The determination shall set forth the basis for the
declaration of ineligibility, the length of ineligibility and the
showing required for the bidder to once again be determined
eligible to bid on contracts. The determination may affirm, reverse
or modify the preliminary determination.
E. Ineligibility. During the period of ineligibility a bidder may not
participate in any contract with the City. This restriction includes being
a subcontractor or supplier to any eligible bidder, as well as submitting
a bid in his/her own name.
1. If an ineligible bidder enters into any contract to perform work on a
City project during the period of ineligibility, the Contracting
Authority may issue a new determination of ineligibility, extend the
time of ineligibility, or amend the conditions the bidder must
comply with in order to be eligible to perform work on future
contracts.
2. Any eligible bidder who contracts with an ineligible bidder to
provide labor or materials on a contract with the City may be
declared not responsible and ineligible to bid on future contracts.
3. A determination of ineligibility may extend to any affiliate of the
bidder who had actual or constructive knowledge of the
preliminary determination of ineligibility.
4. After the period of ineligibility has expired, the bidder may apply to
the Contracting Authority to be declared eligible. The bidder must
make that showing which was set forth in the final determination of
ineligibility. If the bidder applies for reinstatement but is unable to
demonstrate business and financial competency to the Contracting
Authority, then the bidder shall continue to be ineligible until the
required information is provided.
Section
145.055
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
145.055
100:258
F. Appeal. Review of the Contracting Authority determination is pursuant
to Chapter 536, RSMo.
G. Debarment. If the Contracting Authority believes that cause exists to
suspend or debar a contractor, then the Contracting Authority shall
notify the contractor, in writing, of such basis or cause. The decision of
the Contracting Authority regarding debarment is not a "contested
case" as those words are defined in Chapter 536, RSMo.
1. Reasons For Debarment. The Contracting Authority may impose
debarment on a person, their named principals or an affiliate for
any or a combination of the following reasons:
a. Commission of a fraud or criminal offense related to obtaining
or performing a government contract;
b. Violation of antitrust statutes;
c. Commission of embezzlement, theft, forgery, making false
statements, or tax evasion;
d. Commission of any other offense indicating a lack of business
integrity or business honesty that seriously and directly affects
the present responsibility of the contractor;
e. Debarment of the contractor by the State of Missouri, another
State, the Federal government, or by a political subdivision of
the State of Missouri;
f. Violations of material contract provisions, which include but
are not limited to failure to perform or negligent performance
of any term or standard of one (1) or more contracts. The
failure to perform caused by acts beyond the control of the
contractor shall not be considered to be a basis for debarment;
or
g. An unsatisfactory score of less than sixty percent (60%) on the
Construction Contractor Performance Evaluation.
2. Period Of Debarment.
a. The period of debarment may be five (5) years or more for any
reason stated in Subsection (G)(1)(a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f) and
(g) or a score of less than fifty percent (50%) on the
Construction Contractor Performance Evaluation.
b. The period of debarment may be up to two (2) years for a score
of at least fifty percent (50%) but less than sixty percent (60%)
on the Construction Contractor Performance Evaluation.
c. A rating of unsatisfactory on any element of the Construction
Contractor Performance Evaluation will result in an overall
Section
145.055
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
145.055
100:259
unsatisfactory rating irrespective of the overall score. A
minimum one (1) year debarment may be recommended.
Section
145.055
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
145.055
100:260
ARTICLE II
Purchasing Procedures, Competitive Bidding Requirements
Section 145.060. General Authority. [R.O. 2009 §40.15; CC 1981
§2-485; Ord. No. 86-85, 4-18-1986; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
The general authority of the Purchasing Agent shall be pursuant to Section
7.5 of the City Charter. Pursuant to Section 120.130(B), the Mayor or his/
her appointee shall be the Purchasing Agent of the City. Unless otherwise
required by law or by ordinance, the purchasing regulations set forth in
this Article shall apply to the purchase of equipment, materials, supplies or
services.
Section 145.070. Requisitions Between Departments. [R.O. 2009
§40.16; CC 1981 §2-496; Ord. No. 86-85, 4-18-1986]
Whenever any department, division or any other branch or agency of the
City requires service, equipment, materials or supplies from another
department, division or other branch or agency of the City, requisitions
may be made for such purpose with the appropriate credits and debits to
appropriations. In such cases, no bids shall be required.
Section 145.080. Standard Specifications — U.S. Made Products.
[R.O. 2009 §40.17; CC 1981 §§2-487—2-487.1; Ord. No. 86-85,
4-18-1985; Ord. No. 87-205, 10-22-1987; Ord. No. 95-40, 2-16-1995]
Section 145.090. Purchasing Expenditures — Compliance With
Competitive Bidding Requirements.69 [R.O. 2009 §40.18; CC 1981
§§2-488—2-489, 2-491; Ord. No. 86-85, 4-18-1986; Ord. No. 95-40,
2-16-1995; Ord. No. 01-278, 11-30-2001; Ord. No. 04-16, 2-3-2004;
A. Standard Specifications. The Purchasing Agent shall have authority to
adopt standard specifications from time to time for each class or grade
of the various articles, commodities and supplies ordinarily required by
the City. The Purchasing Agent shall cause the same to be printed in
looseleaf or typewritten form for distribution. Standard specifications
shall be drafted so as to procure commodities and supplies of such
quality and design as will serve the purpose required and to facilitate
the making of bids therefrom. Whenever standard specifications have
been adopted, purchases for items covered by standard specifications
shall be made in accordance therewith unless a change is necessary.
Whenever a change is necessary, the reason shall be documented on the
requisition. In advertising for bids, it shall be sufficient to refer to the
appropriate item of the standard specifications. The Purchasing Agent
may require samples to be furnished with bids.
B. Products Made In The United States. The City encourages the purchase
of products assembled, manufactured or produced in the United States.
69.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
145.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
145.090
100:261
Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-280, 11-7-2007; Ord. No.
08-246, 11-25-2008]
A. Purchases Under Three Thousand Dollars ($3,000.00). For purchases
involving expenditures of less than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00),
the appropriation for which has been approved as part of the annual
budget, shall be made without formal bidding, subject to the rules and
regulations prescribed by the Mayor.
B. Purchases Between Three Thousand Dollars ($3,000.00) And Thirty
Thousand Dollars ($30,000.00). For purchases of at least three
thousand dollars ($3,000.00) but less than thirty thousand dollars
($30,000.00), the Purchasing Agent shall solicit at least three (3)
written bids which may be submitted via U.S. mail, electronic mail or
facsimile.
C. Purchases Of Thirty Thousand Dollars ($30,000.00) And Above. For
purchases in excess of thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00), the
Purchasing Agent shall comply with the following competitive bidding
requirements:
1. Notice. A notice inviting bids shall be published at least once in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City. The notice shall be
published at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the receipt
of the bids. The notice shall include a general description of the
items to be purchased or services performed and the time and
place for opening bids. A notice inviting bids may also be posted in
the City Clerk's office and may also be mailed to all responsible
prospective bidders. If notices can be mailed to all prospective
bidders who are qualified to bid, the Purchasing Agent may waive
publication and send the letters in lieu of publication.
2. Bid forms. Each bid shall be in writing on the form provided by the
Purchasing Agent. Each bid shall be signed by the bidder and shall
contain the full name of the person or company submitting the bid.
The bid form shall state that the City reserves the right to reject
any and all bids.
3. Opening of bids. At the time and place prescribed in the notice for
opening bids, the Purchasing Agent shall open all bids and publicly
read each bid. All bids submitted after the time specified in the
notice shall be void and shall be returned to the bidder.
4. Certification of bids. The Purchasing Agent shall tabulate all bids
properly submitted and certify them to the department director, to
the Mayor, to the City Council or to the board or commission, as
may be appropriate.
Section
145.090
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
145.100
100:262
Section 145.100. Awarding of Contracts.70 [R.O. 2009 §40.19; CC
1981 §2-492; Ord. No. 86-85, 4-18-1986; Ord. No. 94-257,
9-30-1994; Ord. No. 95-40, 2-16-1995; Ord. No. 96-341, 12-2-1996;
Ord. No. 99-133, 4-27-1999; Ord. No. 99-248, 7-22-1999; Ord. No.
01-278, 11-30-2001; Ord. No. 04-16, 2-3-2004; Ord. No. 07-162,
6-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-280, 11-7-2007; Ord. No. 11-114 §1,
6-22-2011; Ord. No. 11-184 §1, 9-8-2011]
A. The contract of purchase shall be awarded to the bidder who submits
the lowest and best bid. In determining the lowest and best bid, the
Purchasing Agent will consider price and other factors. These factors
shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Trade-in value of specific makes of equipment;
2. Life expectancy of the items to be purchased;
3. Maintenance costs of varying models of vehicles and equipment;
4. Experience and reputation of the bidder and manufacturer and any
previous business dealings which the bidder has had with the City;
and
5. Quality and adaptability of the supplies or equipment which are bid
to the particular use required.
B. Local Bidder Preference.
1. City bidder preference. A "City bidder" is one which has a business
office in the City. For projects or purchases which are funded
entirely from revenues of the City, if an evaluation of the bids
indicates that the lowest and best bid has been submitted by a non-
City bidder, then the following City bidder preference analysis shall
be conducted.
a. Amount of preference. City bidders shall have a three percent
(3%) preference based upon the non-City lowest and best bid,
but the preference shall not exceed five thousand dollars
($5,000.00).
b. Analysis.
(1) The amount of preference determined in Subsection
(B)(1)(a) above (amount of preference) shall be added to
the amount of the non-City lowest and best bid, the sum of
which shall become the "City preference guideline".
(2) If any bid submitted by a City bidder is equal to, or lower
than, the City preference guideline, then the lowest bid
submitted by a City bidder shall be reviewed to determine
whether it is the lowest and best bid. If it is not the lowest
70.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
145.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
145.100
100:263
and best bid, then the next City bid, which is equal to or
lower than the preference guideline, shall be reviewed and
the process shall be continued until either a City bid has
been selected as the lowest and best bid, or all City bids
equal to or lower than the preference guideline have been
eliminated.
2. County bidder preference. A "County bidder" is one which has a
business office in the County. If a City bidder has not been selected,
and if the lowest and best bid has been submitted by a non-County
bidder, then the preference analysis set forth in Subsection
(B)(2)(b) shall be conducted to give a preference to County bidders.
The process shall be continued until either a County bidder's bid
has been selected as the lowest and best bid or all County bidders
submitting bids equal to or lower than the County preference
guideline have been eliminated.
a. Amount of preference. County bidders shall have a two percent
(2%) preference based upon the non-County lowest and best
bid, but the preference shall not exceed five thousand dollars
($5,000.00).
b. Analysis.
(1) The amount of preference determined in Subsection
(B)(2)(a) above (amount of preference) shall be added to
the amount of the non-County lowest and best bid, the sum
of which shall become the "County preference guideline".
(2) If any bid submitted by a County bidder is equal to, or
lower than, the County preference guideline, then the
lowest bid submitted by a County bidder shall be reviewed
to determine whether it is the lowest and best bid. If it is
not the lowest and best bid, then the next County bid,
which is equal to or lower than the County preference
guideline, shall be reviewed, and the process shall be
continued until either a County bid has been selected as
the lowest and best bid, or all County bids equal to or
lower than the preference guideline have been eliminated.
3. Metropolitan area preference. A "metropolitan area bidder" is one
which has a business office in the St. Louis metropolitan area. If
neither a City bidder nor a County bidder has been selected and if
the lowest and best bid has been submitted by a non-Metropolitan
area bidder, then the preference analysis set forth in Subsection
(B)(3)(b) shall be conducted to give a preference to Metropolitan
area bidders. The process shall be continued until either a
Metropolitan area bidder's bid has been selected as the lowest and
best bid or all bids submitted by Metropolitan area bidders equal to
or lower than the Metropolitan area preference guideline have
been eliminated.
Section
145.100
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
145.100
100:264
a. Amount of preference. Metropolitan area bidders shall have a
two percent (2%) preference based upon the non-Metropolitan
area lowest and best bid, but the preference shall not exceed
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
b. Analysis.
(1) The amount of preference determined in Subsection
(B)(3)(a) above (amount of preference) shall be added to
the amount of the non-Metropolitan area lowest and best
bid, the sum of which shall become the "Metropolitan area
preference guideline".
(2) If any bid submitted by a Metropolitan area bidder is equal
to, or lower than, the Metropolitan area preference
guideline, then the lowest bid submitted by a Metropolitan
area bidder shall be reviewed to determine whether it is
the lowest and best bid. If it is not the lowest and best bid,
then the next Metropolitan area bid, which is equal to or
lower than the Metropolitan area preference guideline,
shall be reviewed, and the process shall be continued until
either a Metropolitan area bid has been selected as the
lowest and best bid, or all Metropolitan area bids equal to
or lower than the preference guideline have been
eliminated.
4. State bidder preference. A "State bidder" is one which has a
business office in the State. If there has been no selection of a City
bidder, a County bidder or a Metropolitan area bidder and if the
lowest and best bid has been submitted by a non-State bidder, then
the preference analysis set forth in Subsection (B)(4)(b) shall be
conducted to give a preference to State of Missouri bidders. The
process shall be continued until either a State of Missouri bidder's
bid has been selected as the lowest and best bid or all bids
submitted by State of Missouri bidder's equal to or lower than the
preference guideline have been eliminated.
a. Amount of preference. State bidders shall have a two percent
(2%) preference based upon the non-State of Missouri lowest
and best bid, but the preference shall not exceed five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00).
b. Analysis.
(1) The amount of preference determined in Subsection
(B)(4)(a) above (amount of preference) shall be added to
the amount of the non-State lowest and best bid, the sum
of which shall become the "State of Missouri preference
guideline".
(2) If any bid submitted by a State of Missouri bidder is equal
to or lower than, the State of Missouri preference
Section
145.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
145.100
100:265
guideline, then the lowest bid submitted by a State of
Missouri bidder shall be reviewed to determine whether
it is the lowest and best bid. If it is not the lowest and
best bid, then the next State of Missouri bid, which is
equal to or lower than the State of Missouri preference
guideline, shall be reviewed, and the process shall be
continued until either a State of Missouri bid has been
selected as the lowest and best bid, or all State of Missouri
bids equal to or lower than the preference guideline have
been eliminated.
5. United States preference. A "United States bidder" is one in which
has a business office in the United States. If there has been no
selection of a City bidder, a County bidder, a Metropolitan area
bidder or a State bidder and if the lowest and best bid has been
submitted by a non-United States bidder, then the preference
analysis set forth in Subsection (B)(5)(b) shall be conducted to give
a preference to United States bidders. The process shall be
continued until either a United States bidder's bid has been
selected as the lowest and best bid or all bids submitted by United
States bidders equal to or lower than the preference guideline have
been eliminated.
a. Amount of preference. United States bidders shall have a two
percent (2%) preference based upon the non-United States
lowest and best bid, but the preference shall not exceed five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
b. Analysis.
(1) The amount of preference determined in Subsection
(B)(5)(a) above (amount of preference) shall be added to
the amount of the non-United States lowest and best bid,
the sum of which shall become the "United States
preference guideline".
(2) If any bid submitted by a United States bidder is equal to
or lower than, the United States preference guideline,
then the lowest bid submitted by a United States bidder
shall be reviewed to determine whether it is the lowest and
best bid. If it is not the lowest and best bid, then the next
United States bid, which is equal to or lower than the
United States preference guideline, shall be reviewed, and
the process shall be continued until either a United States
bid has been selected as the lowest and best bid, or all
United States bids equal to or lower than the preference
guideline have been eliminated.
6. Award of the contract. If a bid receiving a local bidder preference is
selected as the lowest and best bid, then the bidder submitting that
bid shall be awarded the contract. If no bid receiving a local bidder
Section
145.100
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
145.100
100:266
preference is selected as the lowest and best bid, then the contract
shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder not receiving a local
bidder preference.
7. In addition to the foregoing requirements, State bidders and
United States bidders, as categorized above, will be awarded
contracts provided for under this Section only if the following
requirements are met:
a. All subcontractors of the State bidder or United States bidder
shall be a City subcontractor with a business office located in
the City or a County subcontractor with a business office
located in the County or a metropolitan subcontractor located
in the St. Louis metropolitan area; provided that the selected
City subcontractor, County subcontractor or metropolitan
subcontractor shall be qualified, capable and available to
perform the work in accordance with bid specifications and
requirements.
b. State bidders and United States bidders may be awarded
contracts utilizing State and United States subcontractors if
there are no City subcontractors, County subcontractors or
metropolitan subcontractors qualified, capable and available to
perform the work or that the cost of utilizing City
subcontractors, County subcontractors or metropolitan
subcontractors would exceed the cost of utilizing State or U.S.
subcontractors by two percent (2%) or more of the lowest and
best bid provided by a State or U.S. subcontractor to the State
or U.S. bidder; provided the State bidder or United States
bidder shall certify to the City that a City subcontractor,
County subcontractor or metropolitan subcontractor who is
qualified, capable and available to perform the work in
accordance with bid specifications and requirements cannot be
found or that the cost of utilizing City subcontractors, County
subcontractors or metropolitan subcontractors would exceed
the cost of utilizing State or U.S. subcontractors by two percent
(2%) or more of the lowest and best bid provided by a State or
U.S. subcontractor to the State or U.S. bidder.
C. The award of the contract of purchase shall be made by the Mayor for
amounts one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) or less and by the
City Council for amounts greater than one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00). Contracts for greater than one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) shall be listed on the consent agenda and if the
contract is approved by the Council through approval of the consent
agenda, then the Mayor may award the contract. If the contract is
removed from the consent agenda, then it shall be approved or
disapproved as directed by the City Council. The Mayor may delegate
the authority to award contracts of purchases for amounts one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) or less. The Park Board or any other
board or commission which is authorized to make purchases and
Section
145.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
145.100
100:267
Section 145.110. Sole-Source Purchases. [R.O. 2009 §40.20; CC
1981 §2-493; Ord. No. 86-85, 4-18-1986; Ord. No. 07-162,
6-11-2007; Ord. No. 14-243 §1, 11-18-2014]
Section 145.120. Budget Coordination.71 [R.O. 2009 §40.21; CC
1981 §2-494; Ord. No. 86-85, 4-18-1986]
contracts shall award its purchases and contracts over ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) in amount and it may appoint someone to award
contracts of purchase for amounts ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or
less or may retain that power for itself. [Ord. No. 19-100, 5-7-2019;
Ord. No. 19-231, 11-5-2019]
D. The Mayor may acquire on behalf of the City all easements and rightsof-
way appropriate in conjunction with a road or development project of
the City where the cost for the easement or right-of-way does not
exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). Easements or
rights-of-way involving consideration for greater than one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) shall be listed on the Council's consent
agenda and, if approved by the Council as a consent item, the Mayor
shall be authorized to acquire the easement or right-of-way without
further approval of the Council. If the easement or right-of-way item is
removed from the consent agenda, then it shall be approved or
disapproved as directed by the City Council. [Ord. No. 19-231,
11-5-2019]
A. When there is only one (1) vendor that meets or exceeds specifications
for furnishing a particular good or service, the Purchasing Agent may
negotiate a tentative contract without following the bidding
procedures.
B. A vendor is a sole-source supplier if the goods or services are not
available from any other competitive, qualified source in the normal
course of business.
C. The Purchasing Agent shall document the facts which make the good or
service a sole-source purchase and shall submit the documentation to
the Mayor, City Council or board or commission, as may be appropriate.
A. No purchase may exceed the amount budgeted for that purpose unless:
1. The Mayor transfers part or all of an unencumbered appropriation
balance from another program within the department, office or
agency;
2. The Council, upon request of the Mayor, transfers part or all of an
unencumbered appropriation balance from another department,
office or agency; or
71.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
145.100
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
145.120
100:268
Section 145.130. Emergencies — No Response To Bid Request —
Public Auction Sales. [R.O. 2009 §40.22; CC 1981 §2-495; Ord. No.
86-85, 4-18-1986; Ord. No. 95-40, 2-16-1995; Ord. No. 07-162,
6-11-2007; Ord. No. 14-243 §1, 11-18-2014]
Section 145.140. Contracts Exceeding One Year.72 [R.O. 2009
§40.23; CC 1981 §2-498; Ord. No. 86-85, 4-18-1986; Ord. No.
88-131, 7-7-1988; Ord. No. 98-1, 1-12-1998; Ord. No. 14-243 §1,
11-18-2014]
No contract for the provision of any goods or services shall be extended for
a period in excess of one (1) year without an opportunity for public bidding
or a request for proposals, unless the extension is approved by the Mayor
and City Council by ordinance.
Section 145.150. Lease of City Property. [R.O. 2009 §40.24; CC 1981
§2-499; Ord. No. 86-85, 4-18-1986; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007; Ord.
No. 14-243 §1, 11-18-2014]
3. The Council, upon certification by the Mayor that there are
available for appropriation revenues in excess of those estimated in
the budget, makes a supplemental appropriation for the excess.
A. In the case of an unexpected emergency wherein any delay in
purchasing would possibly result in the interruption of or detriment to
the public service, the requirements for competitive bidding and
awarding contracts may, upon consent of the Mayor, be waived.
However, the City Council or Board, as appropriate, shall be notified of
the situation at its next regular meeting.
B. If no bids are submitted by the deadline after requests for bids have
been properly made, then no further formal bidding is required.
C. The Purchasing Agent may authorize the purchase of goods at public
auction upon determination that a substantial savings may be realized
over the current market price.
A. The Mayor or his/her designee is authorized to call for bids or to
negotiate for the lease of City real property which is currently underutilized
in order to maximize the return of the property to the City until
such time as the property shall be required for public usage. All such
leases are subject to Council or board (as appropriate) authorization
and approval. Any tract of property susceptible of commercial or
agricultural use and not having a unique or enhanced value to any party
due to its use, size, configuration or location shall be leased only after
an opportunity for public bidding. Properties with a unique or enhanced
value as herein described may be negotiated for lease upon certification
of their unique or enhanced value by the Mayor or board (as
appropriate). This provision shall not be applicable to any lease entered
72.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
145.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
145.150
100:269
Section 145.160. Disqualification of Bidders.73 [R.O. 2009 §40.25;
CC 1981 §2-500; Ord. No. 86-85, 4-18-1986; Ord. No. 08-36,
2-6-2008]
Section 145.170. Certification By Finance Department.74 [R.O. 2009
§40.26; CC 1981 §2-501; Ord. No. 86-85, 4-18-1986; Ord. No. 14-243
§1, 11-18-2014]
Section 145.180. Exemptions From Competitive Bidding. [R.O. 2009
§40.27; CC 1981 §2-502; Ord. No. 86-85, 4-18-1986; Ord. No.
90-147, 6-6-1990; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007; Ord. No. 14-243 §1,
11-18-2014]
into appurtenant to a settlement or award of any condemnation
proceeding.
A. No bid shall be accepted from or contract awarded to any person who is
in arrears to the City upon any debt or contract or who has defaulted on
security or otherwise upon an obligation to the City or who shall in
other respects be disqualified according to the provisions of this Code
or the City Charter.
B. No bid shall be accepted from or contract awarded to any firm which
has provided consultant services on the work being bid or has prepared
the bidding specifications for such work. This Subsection may be
waived by the City Council.
A. No purchase order shall be issued until the Finance Department has
certified that the expenditure is within the purpose of the appropriation
and the work program contemplated thereby and that there is a
sufficient unencumbered balance in the appropriate account and in the
proper fund to pay the obligation.
B. Upon issuance of a purchase order, the Finance Department shall
encumber sufficient funds to pay the amount indicated on the purchase
order and reduce funds available for expenditures.
A. The following goods and services shall be exempt from competitive
bidding:
1. Purchases made cooperatively with other units of government.
2. Contracts for professional services as described in Sections
145.220 through 145.340, except as set forth in Section 145.250.
3. Purchases from Federal, State or other local governmental units.
4. Contracts for printing or engraving of bonds or other evidences of
indebtedness.
73.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
74.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
145.150
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
145.180
100:270
Section 145.190. Truth in Spending. [R.O. 2009 §40.28; Ord. No.
04-284, 12-13-2004; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
5. Magazines, books or periodicals.
6. Gasoline and other fuels.
7. Goods purchased for resale.
8. Purchase or sale of land.
9. Other goods or services exempted by regulation established by the
Mayor.
A. No ordinance for purchases or contracts for services or goods of any
kind or description, payment of which is to be made from funds of the
City, shall be considered for approval by the City Council except in the
manner hereafter set forth:
1. All ordinances for the approval of purchase orders or contracts
must be for goods or services covered by an identified category in
the budget for the current fiscal year as approved by the City
Council.
2. Each such ordinance shall specifically state the amount actually
appropriated for the identified category and the remaining amount
in the identified category, before any deduction for the services or
goods sought to be purchased as set forth in the proposed contract.
3. If the proposed ordinance requires the expenditure of funds in
excess of the amount budgeted in the identified category of the
budget as described above, then the ordinance shall specifically
identify the source(s) of funding for the excess fund expenditure.
4. If the proposed ordinance authorizes funds to be paid as a result of
a change order to the contract and the change order either directly
causes or may result in the contract amount to exceed the funds
budgeted in the identified category of the budget as described
above, then the ordinance shall specifically identify the source(s) of
funding for the full amount authorized by the change order
provision.
B. Emergency Procedures. In case of an emergency which requires
immediate purchase of supplies or services and time is of the essence,
the Mayor shall be empowered to authorize the purchase or to secure
the services needed without complying with the procedures as set forth
in this Article. This Section shall also apply to any natural disaster or
civil emergency requiring immediate response on the part of the City.
However, a full report in writing of the circumstances requiring
emergency purchases shall be filed by the Mayor within thirty (30) days
after emergency. The Mayor shall forward such report and information
to the City Council.
Section
145.180
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
145.190
100:271
Section 145.200. Lease of Real Property. [R.O. 2009 §40.29; Ord.
No. 06-36, 2-14-2006]
Section 145.210. Splitting or Dividing Contracts Prohibited. [R.O.
2009 §40.30; Ord. No. 06-187, 7-21-2006; Ord. No. 07-114,
4-24-2007; Ord. No. 07-280, 11-7-2007]
Splitting or dividing of contracts and purchases for the purpose of evading
the requirements of Chapter 145 shall not be permitted.
C. The City Council, upon majority vote, shall have the authority to waive
the requirements of this Section.
A. The lease of real property to the City or by the City shall only be
approved by ordinance except as described in Subsection (B).
B. Subsection (A) shall not apply to leases where the property is occupied
for the duration of one (1) day or less at one (1) time. Examples of
rentals to which this exclusion shall apply include short-term rental of
pavilions or shelters to the public by the Parks and Recreation
Department; the short-term rental of the Senior Center by citizen
groups; or rental of facilities for City-sponsored events such as the
annual employee awards banquet.
Section
145.190
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
145.210
100:272
ARTICLE III
Procurement of Professional Services
Section 145.220. Defined. [R.O. 2009 §40.40; CC 1981 §2-503; Ord.
No. 87-151, 7-23-1987]
For the purpose of procuring professional services, any department, board
or commission of the City requiring such services shall procure them in
accordance with the procedures specified in this Article. For the purposes of
this Article "professional services" shall be considered to be those services
which involve extended analysis, the exercise of discretion and independent
judgment in their performance and an advanced, specialized type of
knowledge, expertise or training customarily acquired either by a prolonged
course of study or equivalent experience in the field.
Section 145.230. Requests For Proposals. [R.O. 2009 §40.41; CC
1981 §2-504(a); Ord. No. 87-151, 7-23-1987; Ord. No. 88-4,
1-8-1988; Ord. No. 88-125, 8-2-1988; Ord. No. 90-186, 7-18-1990;
Ord. No. 95-40, 2-16-1995]
Whenever any department, board or commission requires professional
services to perform work on a project or series of related or similar projects
and the exact type or amount of work to be performed to complete such
work is not capable of ready determination, the head or director of such
department, board or commission, in cooperation with the City Purchasing
Agent, shall draft a request for proposals for the project or projects. The
request for proposals shall describe the services required, shall list the
types of information and data required of each offeror and shall state the
relative importance of particular qualifications and other factors.
Section 145.240. Selection Process.75 [R.O. 2009 §40.42; CC 1981
§2-504(b); Ord. No. 87-151, 7-23-1987; Ord. No. 88-4, 1-8-1988;
Ord. No. 88-125, 8-2-1988; Ord. No. 90-186, 7-18-1990; Ord. No.
95-40, 2-16-1995; Ord. No. 96-341, 12-2-1996; Ord. No. 01-278,
11-30-2001; Ord. No. 04-16, 2-3-2004; Ord. No. 05-47, 2-1-2005;
Ord. No. 07-159, 6-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007; Ord. No.
07-280, 11-7-2007; Ord. No. 08-09, 1-14-2008]
A. Architectural, Engineering And Land Surveying Services. If the services
to be performed are architectural, engineering or land surveying
services, then the following procedure shall be followed: [Ord. No.
15-024 §1, 2-3-2015]
1. Prequalification and prequalified roster. Each firm that desires to
perform services shall submit a prequalification packet to the
Department of Public Works or Purchasing Division that identifies
the disciplines for which prequalification is requested,
demonstrates the areas of professional expertise, and includes all
75.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
145.220
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
145.240
100:273
of the information listed in Subsection (A)(2) below. Each firm shall
update its prequalification packet at least once every two (2) years
or anytime the firm desires to update its qualifications or request
consideration for prequalification in a new discipline. Firms that
prequalify shall be placed on a prequalified roster.
2. Each firm shall submit the following documentation with its
prequalification packet:
a. Proof the firm is duly authorized to conduct business in the
State of Missouri in the applicable profession;
b. Proof that at least one member of the firm possesses
professional registration issued by the State of Missouri in the
applicable profession;
c. Provide a statement of intent to assign at least one (1) staff
professional to each project awarded; and
d. Supporting qualification information demonstrating expertise
in each discipline of desired prequalification through:
(1) The specialized experience and technical competence of
the firm and its employees with respect to various
disciplines;
(2) Quality of work previously performed by the firm for the
City;
(3) Record of the firm accomplishing work on other projects in
the required time;
(4) Recent experience showing accuracy of construction
project cost estimates;
(5) The firm's approach to project management to assure ontime,
on-budget, and properly scoped projects;
(6) The firm's approach to quality assurance and quality
control of projects;
(7) Community relations approach, including evidence of
sensitivity to citizen concerns; and
(8) Headquarters and main office location of the firm.
3. Thereafter, when a project requires architectural, engineering or
land surveying services, all firms on the prequalified roster shall be
contacted and requested to submit a written expression of interest
(EOI) in the project. A firm submitting an EOI is subject to selection
based on the firm's prequalification packet.
4. The Purchasing Agent, department director, board or commission
requiring the service shall select the three (3) most qualified firms
Section
145.240
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
145.240
100:274
that submitted an EOI based on the firm's prequalification packet
and shall issue a request for proposal (RFP) to each firm. Each
firm's proposal shall include a technical project approach, a work
breakdown structure with estimated hours, and a firm workload
report that demonstrates capability and capacity to perform the
requested services. After receiving the proposals, the Purchasing
Agent, department director, board or commission shall review and
rank the proposals. If all proposals are equally ranked, then
preference shall be given to the firm whose main office or
headquarters are located within the municipal boundaries of the
City. If a firm whose main office or headquarters are not located
in the City or the St. Louis metropolitan area is ranked as the
best response, then the Purchasing Agent and department director
shall, in writing, state the reason for not selecting a firm whose
main office or headquarters are located in the City or the St. Louis
metropolitan area.
5. Review. After the firms have been ranked, the highest ranked firm
shall be notified. A report shall be submitted to the City Council at
the next regular Council meeting identifying the highest ranked
firm and identifying all firms that submitted a proposal.
6. Negotiations
a. The Purchasing Agent, department director, board or
commission and the highest ranked and preferred firm shall
negotiate a professional services contract that includes a
detailed scope of services to be provided and the compensation
for those services.
b. If, after reasonable efforts, the City determines that it is unable
to negotiate a satisfactory professional services contract with
the highest ranked and preferred firm, then negotiations with
that firm shall be terminated. The City shall then undertake
negotiations with another of the qualified firms selected. If
there is a failing of accord with the second firm, then
negotiations with such firm shall be terminated. The City shall
then undertake negotiations with the third firm.
c. If the City is unable to negotiate a contract with any of the
selected firms, the City shall re-evaluate the necessary
architectural, engineering or land surveying services,
including the scope and reasonable fee requirements, again
compile a list of qualified firms and proceed in accordance with
the provisions of this Code Section.
d. Upon completion of negotiation of the contract, it shall be
submitted to the Mayor, Council, board or commission for
review and award of the contract.
B. For all other professional services, the following steps will be taken:
Section
145.240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
145.240
100:275
1. The Purchasing Agent shall solicit responses to the request for
proposals in whatever manner is deemed most likely to obtain the
greatest number of responses from qualified providers of the
required services.
2. Review—selection of offeror. After receiving all responses to the
request for proposals, the Purchasing Agent and the head or
director of the department, board or commission requiring the
service shall review each response and select the offeror best
qualified to provide or perform the service required. Selection of
the best qualified offeror shall be based upon the relative
importance of the qualifications for the project as stated in the
request for proposals.
3. Negotiations with offeror, compensation and the like. The
Purchasing Agent or the department director, board or commission
requiring the services shall engage in discussions and negotiations
shall be conducted so as to determine the sufficiency of the
offeror's qualifications and to establish an amount of compensation
which is fair and reasonable. If the sufficiency of the offeror's
qualifications cannot be determined or the amount of compensation
cannot be agreed upon, then discussions and negotiations will be
formally terminated with the selected offeror. Discussions and
negotiations shall then be conducted with the other offerors in the
same manner and for the same purposes as heretofore described in
the order of their respective qualification rankings until an
agreement is reached with the then best qualified offeror for a
compensation determined to be fair and reasonable.
C. If the cost of the services is estimated to be less than thirty thousand
dollars ($30,000.00), then the initial selection process, review process
and selection process shall not apply. The Purchasing Agent or the head
or director of the department, board or commission requiring the
service may negotiate with a qualified provider to establish an amount
that is fair and reasonable.
D. Award Of Contract. The final decision to award a contract for purchase
of professional services shall be made by the Mayor for amounts one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) or less and by the Council for
amounts greater than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00).
Contracts for greater than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00)
shall be listed on the consent agenda and if the contract is approved by
the Council through approval of the consent agenda, then the Mayor
may award the contract. If the contract is removed from the consent
agenda, then it shall be approved or disapproved as directed by the City
Council. The Mayor may delegate the authority to award contracts for
purchase of professional services for amounts one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) or less. The Park Board and any other board or
commission which is authorized to make purchases and contracts shall
make the final decision to award its contracts over ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) and it may appoint someone to award contracts for
Section
145.240
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
145.240
100:276
Section 145.250. Requests For Bids.76 [R.O. 2009 §40.43; CC 1981
§2-505; Ord. No. 87-151, 7-23-1987; Ord. No. 95-40, 2-16-1995; Ord.
No. 96-341, 12-2-1996; Ord. No. 01-278, 11-30-2001; Ord. No.
04-16, 2-3-2004; Ord. No. 05-48, 2-1-2005; Ord. No. 07-162,
6-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-280, 11-7-2007]
amounts ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or less or may retain that
power for itself. [Ord. No. 19-100, 5-7-2019; Ord. No. 19-231,
11-5-2019]
A. Whenever any department, board or commission requires professional
services to perform work on a project or series of related or similar
projects and the exact type and amount of work to be performed to
complete such project or projects is capable of ready determination, the
head or director of such department, board or commission shall, in
cooperation with the City Purchasing Agent, draft specifications for
bids for the project or projects. Specifications shall be drafted so as to
ensure that the qualifications of the offeror of the required service shall
be sufficient to satisfactorily perform the required service and to
facilitate the making of bids therefrom.
B. Purchases involving expenditures of less than fifteen thousand dollars
($15,000.00), the appropriation for which has been approved as part of
the annual budget, shall be made without formal bidding, subject to the
rules and regulations prescribed by the Mayor.
C. For purchases of at least fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) but less
than thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00), the Purchasing Agent in
cooperation with the appropriate department director shall solicit at
least five (5) written bids.
D. For purchases of thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) or more, the
Purchasing Agent in cooperation with the appropriate department
director shall comply with the following competitive bidding
requirements:
1. Notice. A notice inviting bids shall be published at least once in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City. The notice shall be
published at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the receipt
of the bids. The notice shall include a general description of the
services to be performed and the time and place for opening bids. A
notice inviting bids may also be posted in the City Clerk's office and
may also be mailed to all responsible prospective bidders. If notices
can be mailed to all prospective bidders who are qualified to bid,
the Purchasing Agent may waive publication and send the letters in
lieu of publication.
76.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
145.240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
145.250
100:277
Section 145.260. Sole-Source Provider. [R.O. 2009 §40.44; CC 1981
§2-506; Ord. No. 87-151, 7-23-1987; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
2. Bid forms. Each bid shall be in writing on the form provided by the
Purchasing Agent. Each bid shall be signed by the bidder and shall
contain the full name of the person or company submitting the bid.
3. Opening of bids. At the time and place prescribed in the notice for
opening bids, the Purchasing Agent shall open all bids and publicly
read each bid. All bids submitted after the time specified in the
notice shall be void and shall be returned to the bidder.
4. Certification of bids. The Purchasing Agent shall tabulate all bids
properly submitted and certify them to the department directors, to
the Mayor, to the City Council or to the board or commission, as
may be appropriate. All engineering service bids that are received
shall be placed on a spreadsheet by the Public Works Department.
E. The contract shall be awarded to the bidder who submits the lowest and
best bid. The lowest and best bid shall be determined by considering
the amount of the bid, the experience, qualifications and reputation of
the bidder and any previous dealing which the bidder has had with the
City. With respect to bids for engineering services, the proper
committee authorized to obtain said services shall review and award
the engineering contract. However, the award of all other contracts
shall be made by the Mayor for amounts one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) or less and by the City Council for amounts of greater
than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). Contracts for
greater than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) shall be
listed on the consent agenda and if the contract is approved by the
Council through approval of the consent agenda, then the Mayor may
award the contract. If the contract is removed from the consent agenda,
then it shall be approved or disapproved as directed by the City Council.
The Mayor may delegate the authority to award contracts for purchase
of professional services for amounts one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) or less. The Park Board or any other board or commission
which is authorized to make purchases and contracts shall award
contracts over ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in amount and it may
appoint someone to award contracts for amounts ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) or less or may retain that power for itself. [Ord. No.
19-231, 11-5-2019]
A. When there is only one (1) provider ("sole-source provider") of a
particular professional service, the purchasing agent may negotiate a
tentative contract without following the bidding procedures.
B. A provider is a sole-source provider if the service provided is not
available from any other qualified source in the normal course of
business.
Section
145.250
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
145.260
100:278
Section 145.270. Budget Coordination.77 [R.O. 2009 §40.45; CC
1981 §2-507; Ord. No. 87-151, 7-23-1987]
Section 145.280. Emergencies — No Response To Bid Requests.
[R.O. 2009 §40.46; CC 1981 §2-508; Ord. No. 87-151, 7-23-1987;
Ord. No. 95-40, 2-16-1995; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
Section 145.290. Circumstances Disqualifying A Bidder From Being
Awarded A City Contract.78 [R.O. 2009 §40.47; CC 1981 §2-509; Ord.
No. 87-151, 7-23-1987; Ord. No. 11-197 §§1—2, 10-6-2011]
C. The Purchasing Agent shall document the facts which make the service
a sole-source purchase and shall submit the documentation to the
Mayor, City Council or board or commission as may be appropriate.
A. No purchase may exceed the amount budgeted for that purpose unless:
1. The Mayor transfers part or all of an unencumbered appropriation
balance from another program within the department, office or
agency;
2. The City Council, upon request of the Mayor, transfers part or all of
an unencumbered appropriation balance from another department,
office or agency; or
3. The City Council, upon certification by the Mayor that there are
available for appropriation revenues in excess of those estimated in
the budget, makes a supplemental appropriation for the excess.
A. In the case of unexpected emergency wherein any delay in the
purchasing of a professional service would possibly result in the
interruption of or detriment to the public service, the requirements of
competitive bidding or of seeking proposals and awarding of contracts
may, upon consent of the Mayor, be waived. However, the City Council
or board or commission as may be appropriate shall be notified of the
situation at its next regular meeting.
B. If no bids or proposals are submitted by the deadline after requests
have been properly made, then no further formal bidding is required.
A. No contract shall be awarded to any person or firm or an affiliated
business entity of any person or firm that:
1. Is in arrears to the City on any taxes or debt;
2. Is in default of any contractual obligation to the City;
3. Is in default as security or otherwise of any obligation to the City;
or
77.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
78.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
145.260
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
145.290
100:279
Section 145.300. Exemptions From Procurement Requirements.
[R.O. 2009 §40.48; CC 1981 §2-510; Ord. No. 90-147, 6-5-1990; Ord.
No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
Section 145.310. Procurement of Design-Build Contract Services.
[R.O. 2009 §40.50; Ord. No. 04-121, 6-29-2004]
4. Has been issued a citation for a non-traffic related violation of the
City Code of Ordinances and the citation has not been adjudicated.
B. For purposes of this Section an affiliated business entity relationship
exists when:
1. One (1) business entity has a controlling ownership interest in the
other business entity,
2. A controlling owner in one entity is also a controlling owner in the
other entity, or
3. There is shared management or control between the business
entities.
Factors that may be considered in determining the existence of
an affiliated business entity relationship include that the same
person or substantially the same person owns or manages
the two (2) entities, there are common or commingled funds
or assets, the business entities share the use of the same
offices or employees, or otherwise share activities, resources
or personnel on a regular basis, or there is otherwise a close
working relationship between the entities.
A. The following services shall be exempt from the procurement
requirements for professional services:
1. Purchases of professional services made cooperatively with other
units of government.
2. Purchases of professional services from Federal, State or other
local government units.
3. Other purchases of professional services exempted by regulation
established by the Mayor.
A. As used in this Section, the following terms mean:
DESIGN-BUILD — A public works project for which the design and
construction services are furnished under one (1) contract.
DESIGN BUILDER — Any individual, partnership, joint venture,
corporation or other legal entity, including combinations of such
entities, that proposes to perform or performs a design-build contract.
DESIGN-BUILD CONTRACT — A contract between the City and a
design builder to furnish the architecture or engineering and related
Section
145.290
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
145.310
100:280
design services required for a given public works project and to furnish
the labor, materials and other construction services for the same public
works project.
DESIGN CRITERIA CONSULTANT — A person, corporation,
partnership or other legal entity duly registered and authorized to
practice architecture or professional engineering in the State pursuant
to Chapter 327, RSMo., and who is employed by contract with the
City to provide professional design and administrative services in
connection with the preparation of the design criteria package.
DESIGN CRITERIA PACKAGE — Performance-oriented specifications
for the public works project sufficient to permit a design builder to
prepare a response to the City's request for proposals for a design-build
project.
PROPOSAL — An offer to enter into a design-build contract.
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS — The document by which the City solicits
proposals for a design-build contract.
B. The following criteria may be used in determining whether a designbuild
contract is an appropriate method of procurement for the City:
1. Time constraints for delivery of the public works project; and
2. The suitability of the public works project for a design-build
process.
C. The City shall determine the scope and level of detail required to permit
qualified persons to submit proposals in accordance with the request
for proposals given the nature of the public works project and the level
of design to be provided.
D. A design criteria consultant may be employed or retained by the City to
prepare the design criteria package, perform periodic site visits,
prepare progress reports, review and approve progress and final pay
applications of the design builder, review shop drawings and
submittals, decide disputes, interpret the construction documents,
perform inspections upon substantial and final completion, assist in
warranty inspections and provide all other professional services where
the City deems it in the public interest to have an independent design
professional assisting with the project administration.
E. The City shall advertise a notice of a request for proposals at least once
in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. The notice shall be
published at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the receipt of
the proposals and shall include a description of the project, the
procedures for submittal, the selection criteria to be used and the time
and place for opening proposals. A notice may also be posted in the City
Clerk's office and may also be mailed to all responsible prospective
design builders. If notices can be mailed to all prospective, prequalified
Section
145.310
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
145.310
100:281
design builders, the Purchasing Agent may waive publication and send
the notices in lieu of publication.
F. Prequalification.
1. The City shall prequalify potential design builders for design-build
projects by requesting the submission of qualification information.
Under no circumstances shall price or fee be a part of the
prequalification criteria.
2. The City shall determine the relative ability of each design builder
to perform the services required for each project. Determination of
ability shall be based on staff training and experience, design
builder experience as a firm, location, past contracts with the City,
financial capacity, past performance and current and projected
work load. In making its determination the City shall interview no
less than three (3) design-builder firms to determine the firms'
ability to provide services and commitment to meet time and
budget requirements.
3. The City shall select no less than three (3) nor more than five (5)
design-builder firms to be most highly qualified to perform the
required services after considering the factors in Subsection (F)(2)
above.
G. A request for proposals shall be prepared for each design-build contract
containing at a minimum the following elements:
1. The procedures to be followed for submitting proposals, the
criteria for evaluation of proposals and the procedures for making
awards;
2. The proposed terms and conditions for the design-build contract;
3. The design criteria package;
4. A description of the drawings, specifications or other information to
be submitted with the proposal, with guidance as to the form and
level of completeness of the drawings, specifications or other
information that will be acceptable;
5. A schedule for planned commencement and completion of the
design-build contract;
6. Budget limits for the design-build contract;
7. Requirements for performance bonds, payment bonds and
insurance; and
8. Any other information that the City in its discretion chooses to
supply including, without limitation, surveys, soils reports,
drawings of existing structures, environmental studies,
photographs or references to public records.
Section
145.310
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
145.310
100:282
Section 145.320. (Reserved)
H. Proposals.
1. Design builders who have been previously qualified by the City
shall submit their proposals to the City in two (2) parts, a technical
proposal and a cost proposal, according to the requirements of the
request for proposals. The City shall open, review and evaluate the
technical proposals prior to opening of the cost proposals and shall
recommend selection of a design builder based on the combined
totals as stated in this Subsection. The qualifications of the design
builder and its subcontractors or consultants and any requested
drawings or technical information shall be submitted separate from
the cost proposal and clearly marked on the outside "Technical
Proposal". Each design builder's qualifications shall be ranked in
accordance with the criteria set forth in Subsection (G)(1). The cost
proposal of the design builder, including the cost of all design
services and construction work required to complete the project,
shall be submitted separate from the technical proposal in an
envelope clearly marked "Cost Proposal". Cost proposals shall be
evaluated and ranked in accordance with the request for proposals.
2. As an inducement to qualified design professionals, the City shall
pay a reasonable stipend to each prequalified, responsive design
builder who submits a qualified proposal but is not awarded the
design-build contract. Upon payment of the stipend to an
unsuccessful design-build proposer, the City shall acquire
ownership to the design submitted and the proposer shall have no
further rights thereto or liability for its use in any manner. If the
design-build proposer desires to retain all rights and interest in the
design proposed, the proposer shall forfeit the stipend.
3. The City shall have the right to reject any and all proposals. If all
proposals are rejected, the City may solicit new proposals using the
same or different design criteria, budget constraints and
qualifications.
I. A design builder that enters into a design-build contract shall comply
with the requirements of Chapter 327, RSMo., that the architectural
engineering or land surveying services to be performed under the
contract are performed by:
1. Persons who are duly licensed in this State and who are employees
of the design builder.
2. Persons who are duly licensed in this State and who are under
contract to the design builder; or
3. Corporations that hold current certificates of authority from the
State board for the appropriate professions which are under
contract to the design builder.
Section
145.310
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
145.320
100:283

ARTICLE IV
Disposition of City Property
Section 145.330. Sales of Excess or Surplus Real Property. [R.O.
2009 §40.60; CC 1981 §2-511; Ord. No. 82-58, 8-4-1982; Ord. No.
87-151, 7-23-1987; Ord. No. 97-420, 12-3-1997; Ord. No. 04-187,
8-4-2004; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
A. Except as otherwise provided by the City Council, the City Council shall
seek and consider proposals for the disposition of City-owned surplus
real property for public use pursuant to the following procedure:
1. A letter of intent to purchase or proposal may be filed with the
Mayor or City Clerk stating the property, its intended use and price,
if known, the purchaser would be willing to pay for the property.
2. The letter so filed shall be transmitted to the City Council along
with any surveys, drawings, appraisals or counter-proposals which
may be pertinent to the sale or disposal of the property.
3. The City Council shall set a time not less than thirty (30) days to
consider the sale and request reports from the City Planner, any
affected department, any public utility and any board or
commission whose function or duties would indicate to the Council
a concern in disposing of the real estate.
4. Not less than thirty (30) days before final determination of the sale
a notice shall be published announcing the City's intent to sell the
property by its address or street location and the proposed
purchaser. The Clerk shall offer for public inspection the file of all
non-confidential documents for public information.
5. During the thirty (30) day period other proposals pertinent to the
same real property may be filed and any written communications
advising the Council may be filed with the City Clerk.
6. Disclosure.
a. Except as otherwise provided in this Subsection, any person or
entity proposing to purchase real property from the City, prior
to approval by the City Council of a sale and purchase contract
therefor, shall make a public disclosure in writing, under oath
and, if materially false subject to the penalties prescribed in
Section 100.150, which shall state his/her name and address
and the name and address of every person having a beneficial
interest in the purchase of the real property, however small or
minimal. This written disclosure shall be made to the City
Clerk or to his/her officially designated representative. The
beneficial interest in any entity registered with the Federal
Securities Exchange Commission or registered pursuant to
Chapter 409, RSMo., whose interest is for sale to the general
public, is hereby exempt from the provisions of this
Section
145.330
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
145.330
100:285
Section 145.340. Procedure for Sale or Disposal of Surplus
Furniture, Equipment, Motor Vehicles and other Personal Property.
[Ord. No. 15-06079 §2, 4-7-2015]
Subsection. When disclosure of persons having beneficial
interests in non-public entities is required, the entity or person
shall not be required by the provisions of this Subsection to
disclose persons or entities holding less than five percent (5%)
of the beneficial interest in the disclosing entity.
b. Simultaneously with the disclosure required by Subsection
(6)(a), the person or entity proposing to purchase real property
from the City shall also provide to the City Clerk evidence, such
as a letter of intent from a financial institution, of the financial
ability of the person or entity to pay the purchase price for the
real property in a form acceptable to the City Attorney.
7. Prior to final determination upon such disposal of real property, the
City Council shall offer an opportunity for full disclosure of the
property, terms of sale, intended use and proposed contract of sale
and of such information as shall have been filed with the City Clerk
in accordance with this Section. The sale and purchase contract for
the property shall also contain a provision that the deed to be given
by the City shall convey a fee simple determinable with a possibility
of reverter to the City should the purchaser/grantee contract with a
third (3rd) party for the disposal of the property or convey the same
to a third (3rd) party within a period of six (6) months of the
conveyance by the City to the purchaser/grantee.
8. Nothing in this Section shall require or prohibit competitive bids in
the sale or disposition of such excess or surplus real estate or
prohibit the City Council from selecting another method for
disposition of real property.
9. The Mayor shall keep a list of any excess or surplus real estate and
the terms of sale thereof, if known or determinable.
A. Policy. It is the policy of the City that furniture, equipment, motor
vehicles and other personal property that is eligible for the declaration
as surplus property may be disposed of as set forth in this Section. The
disposal of surplus property shall be by the method that is in the best
interests of the City.
B. Procedure. The City Council shall by resolution declare property as
surplus property, authorize the disposal of the property and the method
of disposal. The resolution declaring property as surplus shall, as
specifically as possible, identify the property by make, model, year and
serial number, if available.
79.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Sections 145.340 and 145.350 as
Sections 145.350 and 145.355, respectively.
Section
145.330
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
145.340
100:286
Section 145.350. Destruction or Sale of Abandoned Property. [R.O.
2009 §40.61; CC 1981 §2-512; Ord. No. 81-22, 3-25-1981; Ord. No.
87-151, 7-23-1987]
C. Eligibility For Declaration As Surplus Property. Consistent with any
applicable asset replacement or disposal policy, property that possesses
at least one (1) of the following attributes is eligible to be declared
surplus property:
1. Property that has exceeded its useful life;
2. Property whose recommended life cycle has been exceeded;
3. Property that is broken or damaged and the cost of repair exceeds
the property's fair market value after repair; or
4. Property that is no longer needed for any public purpose.
D. Methods Of Disposal. Surplus property may be disposed of by any of the
following methods:
1. Competitive sealed bid;
2. Public auction;
3. Internet sale;
4. Internet auction;
5. Negotiated sale to an identified and City Council approved
purchaser;
6. Trade-in;
7. Donation to a governmental entity or not-for-profit entity for a
public purpose;
8. Recycling; or
9. Any method approved by the City Council.
A. When no other procedure for disposal is provided by the laws of the
State, any such property which has been in the possession of the Police
Department for a period of more than one (1) year without having been
claimed by any person entitled thereto shall be deemed to have been
abandoned and shall be forfeited to the City; and the Mayor and the
Purchasing and Contract Administrator are authorized to dispose of
such property in the following manner:
1. Property known and classified as weapons, including, but not
limited to, knives, pistols, shotguns, rifles, clubs and chains, shall
be destroyed, except those which, in the judgment of the Chief of
Police and the Mayor, have antique or unique value or are capable
of Police Department use. The firearms so converted become the
Section
145.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
145.350
100:287
Section 145.355. Purchase of Weapons Upon Retirement. [R.O.
2009 §40.62; Ord. No. 99-351, 10-7-1999]
A commissioned employee of the St. Charles City Police Department with
the approval of the Chief of Police may purchase upon retirement, by reason
of length of service or disability, or by the member's next of kin in case
of death, the service pistol carried by such member immediately prior to
retirement. The purchase price for the service pistol shall be equal to the
replacement cost thereof.
property of the City and may only be disposed of by proper
procedures as set by an ordinance of the City covering disposal of
such City property.
2. Property known and classified as intoxicating liquor shall be
destroyed.
3. All property commonly known as drugs of any type shall be
destroyed.
4. A listing of all other property shall be provided to all other City
departments and agencies. Any property that can be efficiently
used by any department upon the approval of the Purchasing and
Contract Administrator shall be transferred to such department.
5. All other property shall be sold at public auction advertised at least
one (1) time in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at
least one (1) week prior to such auction. The Purchasing and
Contract Administrator shall obtain from each person purchasing
any item at such auction a receipt for each item purchased,
containing a description of the item or items, the amount paid for
each item and the name and address of the purchaser. The
proceeds of such sale shall become part of the general fund of the
City.
Section
145.350
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
145.355
100:288
ARTICLE V
Rentals and Sales of City Commons
Section 145.360. Annual Rents — When and Where Payable. [R.O.
2009 §40.75; CC 1981 §2-525; Ord. No. 86-45, 2-27-1986]
It shall be the duty of all persons occupying or holding lands as tenants of
the City and of all persons having leased from the inhabitants of the City,
any City lots, outlots, common-field lots or commons belonging to such City,
whether such lots or parcels of ground are situated within the limits or
without the limits of the City, to pay yearly the rents to the City, at the office
of the Director of Finance of the City, on or before January first (1st) in each
and every year.
Section 145.370. Book of Common Rents — Preparation and
Delivery To Director of Finance. [R.O. 2009 §40.76; CC 1981
§§2-526—2-527; Ord. No. 86-45, 2-27-1986]
Section 145.380. Director of Finance To Give Receipts For Rents
Paid.80 [R.O. 2009 §40.77; CC 1981 §2-528; Ord. No. 86-45,
2-27-1986]
When the Director of Finance shall receive any commons rents, he/she shall
give a receipt therefor and designate the number of the square or block, the
number of the lot and such other facts as may be necessary to identify the
property.
Section 145.390. Delinquent List. [R.O. 2009 §40.78; CC 1981
§§2-529—2-530; Ord. No. 86-45, 2-27-1986]
A. Book Of Common Rents. The City Clerk shall make out a correct
alphabetical list of the names of all persons owning the leasehold of any
City lots, common-field lots or commons belonging to the City, which list
shall contain the name of the owner of each lot on May first (1st), the
number of the square or block, the number of the lot and the survey; if a
City lot, the number of feet front and deep and the amount of rent for
which each person is liable, all of which shall be placed in suitable
columns ruled for that purpose and such list shall be called the "Book of
Commons Rents".
B. Copy To Be Delivered To Director Of Finance. The City Clerk shall
deliver to the Director of Finance the "Book of Commons Rents" for
collection on or before the first (1st) day of May in each year and the
Clerk shall take the Director of Finance's receipt therefor and preserve
the same in his/her office and charge the Director of Finance with the
amount of the "Book of Commons Rents".
80.State Law References—Authority of city to receive and hold real estate, §77.010, RSMo.;
sale of commons, §71.100, RSMo.
Section
145.360
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
145.390
100:289
Section 145.400. Lessee Entitled To Fee Simple Estate Upon
Compliance With Certain Requirements. [R.O. 2009 §40.79; CC
1981 §2-542; Ord. No. 86-45, 2-27-1986]
Any lessee of the inhabitants of the City or any lessee of the City or any
person who may have acquired any interest of any such lessee in any legal
manner, in any part of the commons, attached to and belonging to the City,
may receive a deed in fee simple therefor by complying with the provisions
of this Article.
Section 145.410. Surrender of Lease. [R.O. 2009 §40.80; CC 1981
§2-543; Ord. No. 86-45, 2-27-1986]
Any person desiring to procure a deed in fee simple, as provided by the
preceding Section, shall make a surrender to the City of his/her interest, in
writing, executed and acknowledged as deeds for land are required to be
executed and acknowledged by the laws of the State, which surrender shall
be filed and carefully preserved in the Clerk's office.
Section 145.420. Petition Made To City. [R.O. 2009 §40.81; CC 1981
§2-544; Ord. No. 86-45, 2-27-1986]
Every applicant for a deed in fee simple under the provisions of this Section
shall make his/her petition in writing therefor to the City Council,
describing the property for which he/she desires such deed in fee simple,
verified by the affidavit of the applicant, his/her agent or attorney, which
petition shall be referred to the City Attorney and other appropriate City
departments. The City Attorney shall report to the City Council as to his/her
opinion of title of petitioners as to the leasehold interest, the ownership of
contiguous parcels and the possible effect upon any proposed annexations
pending in the area. If the City Council finds it in the best interest of the City
A. Preparation And Return Of Delinquent List. If after January first (1st) in
each year any commons rents shall not be paid by the person liable
therefor, the Director of Finance shall make a correct list thereof,
describing the property on account of which the rent is due, giving the
name of the delinquent lessee and the amount of rents due as set forth
in the "Book of Commons Rents", which list shall be called the
"Delinquent List of Commons Rents" and shall be returned by the
Director of Finance, under oath, to the City Council on or before April
first (1st) in each year.
B. Examination, Correction And Recordation Of Delinquent List. The City
Council shall examine and correct the list mentioned in the preceding
Subsection by the best means in their power and shall cause the list so
corrected to be recorded in the City Clerk's office, leaving sufficient
blank columns in the record of the same to enter proceedings in regard
to the further disposition of the property returned for delinquent
commons rents.
Section
145.390
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
145.420
100:290
to order the deed hereafter described, it may do so through the procedure
hereafter described.
Section 145.430. Price and Costs Paid By Applicant.81 [R.O. 2009
§40.82; CC 1981 §2-545; Ord. No. 86-45, 2-27-1986]
The applicant for a deed, under the provisions of this Article, shall pay the
value of the property for which he/she asks a deed in fee simple, estimated
according to the value thereof, as stated in the lease under which he/she
may claim, which payment he/she shall make to the City, taking duplicate
receipts therefor, one (1) of which he/she shall file with the City Clerk.
Such applicant shall also pay all arrearages of rents on such property, any
cost for title examination and advice to the Council in relation thereto, the
expense of executing the deed and the City Clerk's fees for recording all
papers connected therewith. No deed in fee simple shall be delivered until
the provisions of this Section are complied with.
Section 145.440. Delivery of Deed — Form. [R.O. 2009 §40.83; CC
1981 §2-546; Ord. No. 86-45, 2-27-1986]
Upon the granting of the petition mentioned in Section 145.420 and a
compliance by the applicant with the provisions of this Section, a deed
shall be delivered to the applicant and his/her heirs and assigns forever to
the property for which he/she may have asked a deed in fee simple or be
entitled to, which deed shall state the consideration upon which the same
is made and the substance of the order of the City Council made upon the
petition and shall be signed and acknowledged by the Mayor as required by
the laws of the State, attested by the Clerk and sealed with the Seal of the
City. Such deed shall contain no clause of warranty except against the City
and those claiming under the City.
Section 145.450. Requirements Where Mayor Is Applicant For
Deed. [R.O. 2009 §40.84; CC 1981 §2-547; Ord. No. 86-45,
2-27-1986]
If the Mayor should be the applicant for a deed in fee simple under this
Article or any other ordinance for the granting of deeds in fee simple, the
President of the Council shall perform the duties required of the Mayor by
the provisions of this Article or other such ordinances.
Section 145.460. Eminent Domain — Economic Development. [R.O.
2009 §40.85; Ord. No. 06-146, 6-14-2006]
A. The City shall not authorize the exercise of the power of eminent
domain for economic development purposes.
B. For purposes of this Section, "economic development purposes" shall
mean any activity to increase tax revenue, tax base, employment or
general economic health.
81.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
145.420
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
145.460
100:291
C. Subsection (A) above shall not apply to:
1. The transfer of a real property interest to public ownership for
public use such as for a road, park, sanitary sewer or water line,
water or sewer treatment facility, fire station, police station or
other public building;
2. The transfer of a real property interest to a private entity when
eminent domain will remove a harmful or unproductive use of land,
such as the removal of public nuisances as set forth in Section
220.020 of this Code, removal of structures that are beyond repair
or that are unfit for human habitation or use or acquisition of
abandoned property;
3. Any residential real property that is not owner occupied;
4. Any non-residential property that is vacant or has not had a
business license for a period of twelve (12) months; or
5. Any real property where the assessed valuation has decreased by
fifty percent (50%) or more in a two (2) year period.
Section
145.460
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
145.460
100:292
Chapter 200
POLICE DEPARTMENT
Cross References—As to traffic administration and enforcement §§315.010
et seq.; as to department, services, established, §§120.190—120.200.
Section
145.460
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
145.460
100:293

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 200.010. Powers in General. [R.O. 2009 §34.01; CC 1981
§23-24; Ord. No. 3626, 2-4-1969; Ord. No. 98-70, 2-9-1998]
Every member of the Department shall have power at all times to make or
order an arrest with proper process for any offense against the ordinances
of the City and the laws of the State and to keep an offender in any
City prison or jail or other proper place to prevent his/her escape until
trial, unless such offender shall give good and sufficient bond for his/her
appearance for trial, and shall also have power to make arrest without
process in all cases in which any offense against the ordinances of the City
and the laws of the State shall be committed in the officer's presence or
when the officer has reasonable grounds to believe any such offense has
been committed. Every member of the Department shall have the power to
serve and execute all warrants, subpoenas, writs or other process issued by
the Municipal Judge of the City at any place within the City.
Section 200.020. Qualifications of Members.82 [R.O. 2009 §34.02;
CC 1981 §23-25; Ord. No. 3626, 2-4-1969]
No member of the Police Department, as provided in this Chapter, shall
be permitted to serve as a member of such Department unless he/she is
at least twenty-one (21) years of age and shall, from time to time, pass a
satisfactory physical examination, and hold a commission as a Peace Officer
under Chapter 590, RSMo.
Section 200.030. Emergencies Outside City Limits. [R.O. 2009
§34.03; CC 1981 §23-26; Ord. No. 87-25, 2-7-1987; Ord. No. 87-189,
9-28-1987; Ord. No. 87-215, 11-6-1987; Ord. No. 88-87, 6-10-1988;
Ord. No. 95-81, 3-22-1995; Ord. No. 00-125, 5-3-2000; Ord. No.
07-162, 6-11-2007]
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
EMERGENCY SITUATION — Any situation in which the Police Officer
has a reasonable belief that a crime is about to be committed, is
being committed or has been committed involving injury or threat of
injury to any person, property or governmental interest and the officer's
response is reasonably necessary to prevent or end the emergency
situation or mitigate the likelihood of injury involved in the emergency
situation. The determination of the existence of any emergency
situation shall be in the discretion of the officer or governmental officer
of the political subdivision in which the emergency situation is alleged
to be occurring.
82.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
200.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
200.030
100:295
Section 200.040. Fee For Copying Records.83 [R.O. 2009 §34.05; CC
1981 §23-30; Ord. No. 92-101, 5-21-1992; Ord. No. 07-208,
7-20-2007]
Section 200.050. Restrictions On Use of Police Department
Dedicated Vehicles. [R.O. 2009 §34.06; Ord. No. 04-129, 7-2-2004;
Ord. No. 05-233, 9-7-2005; Ord. No. 12-144 §1, 8-9-2012; Ord. No.
14-154 §1, 7-15-2014]
RESPONSE OR RESPOND — To take any and all action which the
officer may lawfully take as if exercising his/her powers within his/her
own jurisdiction.
B. Under the authority granted by Sections 70.820 and 70.837, RSMo.,
any Police Officer of the City who has completed the basic training
program as established by Chapter 590, RSMo., shall have the authority
to respond to an emergency situation outside the boundaries of the
City; provided however, that such authorization to respond shall exist
only within those jurisdictions within this State or a bordering State
which by their governing bodies or officials have adopted an ordinance,
order or other ruling which authorizes the Law Enforcement Officers of
the respective jurisdictions to respond to emergencies outside the
boundaries of their jurisdictions.
C. Every response to an emergency situation outside the City limits of the
City shall be reported by the Chief of Police to the Mayor, with an
explanation of the reason for the response.
A. The fee for copying Police Department records shall be ten dollars
($10.00) per record.
B. The fee for fingerprinting shall be twelve dollars ($12.00) per person for
non-residents of the City and there shall be no charge for City residents.
A. "Dedicated vehicle" shall mean a St. Charles Police Department vehicle
assigned to a certain departmental position or positions.
B. A departmental position assigned a dedicated vehicle shall only be able
to use the assigned dedicated vehicle during off-duty status if the holder
of the position is a resident of the City or is a resident of an area of
unincorporated St. Charles County that is surrounded by land within
the municipal boundary of the City; except that this residency limitation
shall not apply to Police Majors, Police Captains, employees assigned to
positions as mounted patrol officers or canine officers, and those
employees that reside within thirty (30) miles of the municipal
boundary of the City and are assigned to the special response team or
are an on-call responding detective and their detective bureau
supervisors. Use shall be limited to the duties of the employee's
departmental position.
83.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
200.030
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
200.050
100:296
ARTICLE II
Reserve Police Force
Section 200.060. Establishment. [R.O. 2009 §34.20; CC 1981
§23-41; Ord. No. 78-27, 4-12-1978; Ord. No. 81-13, 2-25-1981]
A Reserve Police Force is hereby established, to serve at an annual salary
of one dollar ($1.00) and such other compensation as may be provided
from time to time by resolution of the Mayor and City Council, composed
of not more than the total number of uniformed personnel of the regular
Department, male or female, separate and distinct from the Police
Department of this City, but always to be under the general command,
control and supervision of the Chief of Police.
Section 200.070. Qualification of Members and Other
Requirements.84 [R.O. 2009 §34.21; CC 1981 §23-42; Ord. No. 3510,
8-23-1967; Ord. No. 78-27, 4-12-1978]
Every member of the Reserve Police Force shall possess the qualifications
required of regular Police Officers of the City. Each member shall be issued
a Reserve Police identification card which shall be carried by the member
while he/she is on duty with the Police Department of the City. No person
shall be deemed a member of the Reserve Police Force until he/she has been
registered as such in a roster to be kept by the Chief of Police and until he/
she has taken an oath that he/she will observe and obey the Constitution of
the United States, the Constitution of this State, the laws of this nation and
State and the ordinances of the City and that he/she will carry out the duties
as a member of the Reserve Police Force of this City to the best of his/her
ability.
Section 200.080. Duties in General. [R.O. 2009 §34.22; CC 1981
§23-43; Ord. No. 78-27, 4-12-1978]
The duties of the Reserve Police Force, subject at all times to the direction,
supervision and control of the Chief of Police, shall be to assist the members
of the regular Police Department of this City in the enforcement of law
and the maintenance of peace and order during an emergency of war,
great common peril or in a situation wherein the regular Police Department
is deemed by the Chief of Police to be inadequate for the occasion. The
Chief of Police may, by order, establish rules and regulations to govern
the Reserve Police Force, to fix the specific duties of its members and to
provide for the maintenance of discipline. He/she may change such orders
from time to time and he/she may command members of the Reserve Police
Force to obey the instructions of regular Police Officers in carrying out their
duties. The Chief of Police may prescribe other duties than those mentioned
herein to be performed by the Reserve Police Force, not inconsistent with
the provisions hereof.
84.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
200.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
200.090
100:297
Section 200.090. Powers of Members While On Duty. [R.O. 2009
§34.23; CC 1981 §23-45]
Members of the Reserve Police Force, while on duty, shall be conservators
of the peace and shall have the same powers and authority of regular
Police Officers of the Police Department of this City; provided however, that
membership in the Reserve Police Force shall not constitute membership
in the regularly constituted Police Department nor shall any member of the
Reserve Police Force be entitled to any right or privilege of compensation,
pension or any other similar right or privilege of members of the regularly
constituted Police Department nor to any other prerequisite or emolument
attaching to membership in said regularly constituted Police Department.
Section 200.100. Termination By Chief of Police — Resignation.
[R.O. 2009 §34.24; CC 1981 §23-44; Ord. No. 78-27, 4-12-1978]
The membership of any person in the Reserve Police Force may be
terminated by the Chief of Police at any time and any member may resign
from the Reserve Police Force at any time, but it shall be his/her duty to
notify the Chief of Police of his/her resignation.
Section 200.110. Causes For Summary Expulsion. [R.O. 2009
§34.25; CC 1981 §23-46; Ord. No 78-27, 4-12-78]
Any violation of law or ordinance under color of the performances of his/her
duties as a member of the Reserve Police Force and any breach of the rules
and regulations established by the Chief of Police shall subject any member
to summary expulsion and the fact thereof may be published at the order of
the Chief of Police.
Section 200.120. Impersonation Prohibited.85 [R.O. 2009 §34.26; CC
1981 §23-47; Ord. No. 78-27, 4-12-1978]
It shall be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display a Reserve Police
identification card or insignia or otherwise represent himself/herself to be a
member of or connected with the Reserve Police Force, unless he/she is in
fact a member thereof.
85.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
200.090
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
200.120
100:298
ARTICLE III
Major Case Squad
Section 200.130. Defined — Purpose. [R.O. 2009 §34.40; CC 1981
§23-50; Ord. No. 87-26, 2-7-1987]
For the purpose of this Article, the "major case squad" shall mean any
formation, operation, organization or cooperative action between any one
(1) or more County or municipality and the City, the purpose of which is
intensive professional investigation of certain individual crimes that may
occur in their general geographical area and which is operated and
activated on request of a County Sheriff, County Police Superintendent or
Police Chief of a municipality wherein a crime has occurred.
Section 200.140. Cooperation — Authority. [R.O. 2009 §34.41; CC
1981 §23-51; Ord. No. 87-26, 2-7-1987]
A. The Police Officers of the City are authorized to participate in and
cooperate with any Law Enforcement Officer of jurisdictions
participating in a major case squad operation or formation. The officers
designated to participate in the major case squad activities shall be so
designated by the Chief of Police.
B. When acting outside the City limits of the City as a member of the major
case squad, the Police Officer shall be considered to be on active duty
as if acting with the boundaries of the City.
Section
200.130
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
200.140
100:299
Chapter 205
FIRE PROTECTION AND FIRE PREVENTION
Cross References—As to fire department established, §120.150; as to fire
prevention code, §§205.060—205.070; as to authority to direct traffic,
§§305.040, 315.010.
Section
200.140
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
200.140
100:300
Article I
Fire Department
Section 205.010. Firefighters Responsibilities During Inactive
Hours. [R.O. 2009 §35.01; CC 1981 §11-29; Ord. No. 3572, 6-5-1968;
Ord. No. 3756, 7-7-1970; Ord. No. 3870, 9-21-1971; Ord. No. 73-52,
7-1-1973; Ord. No. 75-44, 8-20-1975]
Every member of the Fire Department shall be required to report for any
fire or emergency or for any fire drill, training or instruction when and as
directed or arranged by the Fire Chief during any period of inactive duty.
Section 205.020. Inspection of Hydrants. [R.O. 2009 §35.02; CC
1981 §11-30; Ord. No. 3778, 8-5-1970; Ord. No. 15-066 §1,
4-21-2015]
It shall be the responsibility of the Fire Department to inspect once per year,
from March 1 through September 30, all fire hydrants and to inspect any
fire hydrant at any time the Fire Department may deem it necessary, it being
understood that all other calls to duty as required by this Chapter shall be
performed first. A report of the condition of each fire hydrant inspected
shall be prepared and provided to the Chief of the Fire Department or his/
her designee.
Section 205.030. Tampering With Fire Hydrants.86 [R.O. 2009
§35.03; CC 1981 §11-31; Ord. No. 76-61, 7-21-1976]
A. Prohibition. No person shall tamper with any fire hydrant, fireplug or
other device available for connecting a fire hose to a water main
without obtaining written authority to do so from firefighting and Water
Department authorities having jurisdiction in the area within which
such device is located and from the owner of such device.
B. Definition. For the purpose of this Section, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
TAMPER — Includes, but shall not be limited to, the removal of the cap
or any other part of such device; the insertion of any object or material
into such device; the application of any wrench, tool, implement or
other object or material to such device; the attachment of a hose or any
other instrument to such device; and/or the use of such device in any
fashion so as to permit water to flow therefrom.
C. Exemption. This Section shall not apply to the owner of such device, the
agents and employees of such owner and any firefighting personnel
engaged in any activity related to firefighting or the maintenance and
operation of firefighting equipment.
86.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
205.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
205.040
100:301
Section 205.040. Interference With Fire Department. [R.O. 2009
§35.04; CC 1981 §11-32]
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and Police Officers present to aid
in preventing interference with the Fire Department in the suppression of
fires and it shall be unlawful for any person to interfere in any way with
any fire apparatus or the operation thereof or with any Firefighters in the
discharge of their duties in suppressing fire or to refuse or neglect to obey
the proper and legal order of the Chief of the Fire Department.
Section 205.050. Injuring Property of Fire Department.87 [R.O. 2009
§35.05; CC 1981 §11-33]
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, deface or destroy any fire truck,
hose, hose carriage, ladders, wagons or any other property appertaining or
belonging to the Fire Department of the City.
87.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
205.040
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
205.050
100:302
Article II
Fire Prevention88
DIVISION 1
General Provisions
Section 205.060. Adoption of Fire Prevention Code By Reference.89
[R.O. 2009 §95.01; CC 1981 §11-1; Ord. No. 79-8, 1-24-1979; Ord.
No. 88-113, 6-23-1988; Ord. No. 95-151, 6-7-1995; Ord. No. 97-150,
5-8-1997; Ord. No. 00-144, 6-9-2000; Ord. No. 05-214, 7-27-2005;
Ord. No. 05-303, 11-22-2005; Ord. No. 10-153 §1, 7-21-2010; Ord.
No. 15-103 §1, 5-19-2015]
The International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, including Appendix Chapters B,
C, and D, as published by the International Code Council, is adopted by
reference as the Fire Code of the City and made part of this Section as if
fully set forth herein.
Section 205.070. Amendments.90 [R.O. 2009 §95.02; CC 1981
§11-03; Ord. No. 88-113, 6-23-1988; Ord. No. 89-77, 5-4-1989; Ord.
No. 91-176, 9-6-1991; Ord. No. 91-208, 10-16-1991; Ord. No.
95-151, 6-7-1995; Ord. No. 97-150, 5-8-1997; Ord. No. 97-332,
9-18-1997; Ord. No. 98-45, 1-22-1998; Ord. No. 00-144, 6-9-2000;
Ord. No. 02-287, 12-13-2002; Ord. No. 05-214, 7-27-2005; Ord. No.
05-303, 11-22-2005; Ord. No. 09-114, 6-18-2009; Ord. No. 10-153
§2, 7-21-2010; Ord. No. 15-103 §2, 5-19-2015]
A. The code adopted by Section 205.060 is hereby amended in the
following respects:
1. Section 101.1, Title, is amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Fire Code of
the City of St. Charles, Missouri," hereinafter referred to as "this
code."
2. Section 103.2, Appointment, is amended to read as follows:
103.2 Appointment. The Fire Code Official shall be the Fire Chief
of the City of St. Charles, Missouri, or his designee.
88.Cross Reference—As To Sale Of Fireworks, §215.1100. State Law References—Authority Of
City With Purchasing Fire-fighting Equipment, Organization Of Fire Companies, §77.190,
RSMo.; Authority Of City With Fire Prevention Where Buildings Are Concerned, §77.500,
RSMo.
89.Cross References—As to building code adopted, §§500.040 et seq.; as to electrical code
adopted, §§500.190 et seq.; as to plumbing code adopted, §§500.240 et seq.; as to property
maintenance code, §§500.110 et seq.
90.Cross References—As to building regulations, ch. 500; as to electrical code, §§500.190 et
seq.; as to excavation, grading and storm water control, ch. 510; as to flood damage
prevention control, ch. 410; as to fair housing, ch. 240; as to plumbing code, §§500.240 et
seq.; as to solid waste management, ch. 245; as to subdivision regulations, ch. 405; as to
zoning code, ch. 400.
Section
205.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
205.070
100:303
3. Section 105.1.1.1, Fees, is added, which shall read as follows:
1. Operational permit fees. Operational permit fees are
established at twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
Exception: Sale/storage of fireworks, operational permit
fee is seventy-five dollars ($75.00).
2. Construction permit fees. Fire construction permit fees shall
be based on the proposed construction valuation. The
construction valuation shall be based upon the greater of the
following: the estimated construction valuation as listed on
the building permit application; or the most recent published
Square Foot Construction Costs Table as published by the
International Code Council. Once the building valuation or
estimated cost of construction is determined, the fire
construction permit fee is one dollar ($1.00) per one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) of construction cost or construction
valuation (whichever is greater). The minimum fee shall be
twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
3. Plan review fees. A plan review fee shall be charged for each
permit in addition to the permit fee. The plan review fee is
twenty-five dollars ($25.00). The fee for each plan review shall
be the actual cost borne by the City in the event that a private
firm is employed to review a plan. Failure to obtain the fire
construction permit will not allow a refund of plan review fees.
4. Section 105.1.2, Types of Permits, is amended to read as follows:
There shall be two types of permits as follows:
1. Operational permit. An operational permit allows the
applicant to conduct an operation or a business for which a
permit is required by Section 105.6 for either:
1.1. A prescribed period.
1.2. Until renewed or revoked.
2. Construction permit. A construction permit allows the
applicant to install or modify systems and equipment for which
a permit is required by Section 105.7. Also, a Fire
Construction permit shall be required in all new construction,
or in the case of any alterations which require a Building
permit.
Exceptions:
2.1. R-4 Use Group.
5. Section 105.6.14, Exhibits and Trade Shows, is amended to read as
follows:
An operational permit is required to hold an assembly event with
the capacity for over three hundred (300) occupants (exempting
religious assemblies).
Section
205.070
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
205.070
100:304
6. Section 105.6.17, Flammable and Combustible Liquids, is amended
by the addition of Paragraph 12 as follows:
12. Closure of Underground Tanks.
12.1. It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of an
underground storage tank to fail to properly close and
remove the same within twelve (12) months after cessation
of its active use.
12.2. A cash escrow payment to the City or performance bond
issued in the City's favor by a surety and in a form acceptable
to the City, in the amount of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) per underground storage tank, shall be
provided by the owner or operator of any underground
storage tank located within the City and which stores or
intended to store petroleum products. The escrow or bond
shall be provided during the entire time the underground
storage tank exists. Such bond shall contain the following
endorsement: "This bond may not be canceled or allowed
to lapse until sixty (60) days after receipt by the City, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice
from the issuer of the bond of its intent to cancel or not
to renew." The amount of the cash escrow payment or bond
required by this Subsection shall be adjusted annually in an
amount equal to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) multiplied
by a fraction, the numerator of which is the CPI (hereinafter
defined) most recently published prior to January 1 of the
current year and the denominator of which is the CPI
published as of the time this Subsection is originally enacted.
As used herein, "CPI" shall mean the Consumer Price Index
- All Urban Consumers (CPI-U), U.S. City Average, All Items
(1982-84=100) as published by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics of the United States Department of Labor, or such
successor index thereto as may be published by the U.S.
government (or if not published the most comparable index
thereto). In no event will there be a reduction in the bond
requirement because of any decrease in CPI from one year to
the next.
Section
205.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
205.070
100:305
12.3. The bond or cash escrow payment shall be returned to the
owner or operator who submitted the same upon verification
by the City Fire Chief or his designee that the underground
storage tank and all of its pumps, pipes and related
equipment have been removed from the ground and disposed
of pursuant to Missouri Department of Natural Resources
regulations and any other applicable State or federal law.
Evidence that the applicable State and federal laws have
been complied with during the removal of the underground
storage tanks may be demonstrated by obtaining a "No
Further Action Needed" letter from the Missouri Department
of Natural Resources or similar correspondence from the
Missouri Department of Natural Resources or United States
Environmental Protection Agency indicating that the
underground storage tanks have been properly removed,
any and all environmental hazards have been appropriately
resolved, and that the property on which it was located does
not pose an unacceptable risk to the environment.
12.4. If the owner or operator fails to properly remove an
underground storage tank and all of its pumps, pipes and
related equipment within twelve (12) months after cessation
of its active use, the City Engineer shall have full power
and authority to utilize the cash escrow payment or to draw
upon the bond in order to effectuate the proper removal and
disposal of the underground storage tanks and all pumps,
pipes and related equipment.
12.5. An owner or operator of an underground storage tank shall
at all times maintain insurance for such tank through the
Missouri Petroleum Storage Tank Fund or an insurance
carrier acceptable to the City which provides coverage for
the cost of all clean-up resulting from any contamination of
the soil due to underground storage tank leakage, or provide
a letter issued by the Missouri Department of Natural
Resources, Hazardous Waste Program, Tanks Section,
evidencing its review of declaration and certification
endorsement for financial responsibility filed by the owner or
operator with the Missouri Department of Natural Resources
pursuant to 10 Mo. CSR 20-11, and requiring no further
action regarding financial responsibility by the owner or
operator.
7. Exemptions from building permit fees. All governmental entities,
comprehensive colleges and universities (not including singlepurpose
institutions), schools offering basic education to any grade
(K through 12), and places of worship shall be exempt from permit
fees. This exemption from payment of fees does not provide an
exemption from the plan review fee or the obligation to obtain
permits and inspections, and if the City must contract for the
Section
205.070
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
205.070
100:306
expedited services, then the exempt entity shall pay the costs for
the expedited contractual services.
8. Nothing in this Section or in the Fire Code hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any court, or
any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of
action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby
amended by Sections 205.060 and 205.070. No just or legal right or
remedy of any character shall be lost, impaired or affected by
Sections 205.060 or 205.070.
9. Appendix D, Section D107.1, One- or two-family residential
developments, is amended to read as follows:
Developments of one- or two-family dwellings where the number of
dwelling units exceeds one hundred (100) shall be provided with
two (2) separate and approved fire apparatus access roads, and
shall meet the requirements of Section D 104.3.
Exceptions:
1. Where there are more than one hundred (100) dwelling units
on a single public or private fire apparatus access road and
all dwelling units are equipped throughout with an approved
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section
903.3.1.1, 903.3.1.2 or 903.3.1.3 of the International Fire
Code, access from two directions shall not be required.
2. The number of dwelling units on a single fire apparatus access
road shall not be increased unless fire apparatus access roads
will connect with future developments, as determined by the
Fire Code Official.
10. A violation of Section 1004, or successor section, establishing the
occupant load is exempt from the requirements of Section 109.3 or
successor section. Exceeding the occupant load requires no written
notice as a prerequisite to prosecution of an ordinance violation.
[Ord. No. 18-021, 2-6-2018]
11. 307.1.2 Prohibited open burning. [Ord. No. 19-181, 9-3-2019]
Open burning shall be prohibited.
Exceptions:
1. Open burning of yard waste from sites is allowed provided
it originates and is burned on the same premises and is
conducted in accordance with Sections 307.2 through 307.5.
Materials such as tires and used oil may not be used to start
fires or be burned in fires. Yard waste includes trees, tree
leaves, brush or other vegetation.
2. Bonfires and recreational fires conducted and approved in
accordance with Sections 307.2 through 307.5.
Section
205.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
205.070
100:307

DIVISION 2
Address Signs or Placards
Section 205.080. Display of Address Signs or Placards. [R.O. 2009
§95.10; Ord. No. 08-129, 6-18-2008]
A. Notwithstanding any subdivision or homeowner association's rules or
covenants to the contrary, a person may display a sign or placard clearly
identifying the property address in the front yard of the property
without obtaining a City sign permit, subject to the following
conditions:
1. The sign face is no larger than sixteen (16) inches by sixteen (16)
inches;
2. Individual letters and numerals on the sign do not exceed eight (8)
inches in height; and
3. The sign is not illuminated except by solar power.
Section
205.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
205.080
100:309

Article III
Life Support Vehicles
Section 205.090. Life Support Vehicle (Ambulance) Transportation
Fees and Mileage Charges — Resident and Non-Resident. [Ord. No.
12-21 §1, 2-23-2012]
A. Transportation fees and mileage charges for the transport of residents
and non-residents in Fire Department Life Support Vehicles
(ambulances) are established as follows: [Ord. No. 19-121, 6-4-2019]
Call Type Fee
Emergency Basic Life Support (BLS) Resident $803.00
Emergency Basic Life Support (BLS) Non-
Resident
$1,181.00
Emergency Advanced Life Support 1 (ALS 1)
Resident
$865.56
Emergency Advanced Life Support 1 (ALS 1)
Non-Resident
$1,181.00
Emergency Advanced Life Support 2 (ALS 2)
Resident
$1,008.00
Emergency Advanced Life Support 2 (ALS 2)
Non-Resident
$1,260.00
Non-Emergency BLS Resident $455.56.00
Non-Emergency BLS Non-Resident $813.00
Non-Emergency ALS Resident $546.66
Non-Emergency ALS Non-Resident $813.00
Mileage Charge:
Per loaded mile Resident $15.10
Per loaded mile Non-Resident $15.10
Other Rates:
Treat and
Release
(Diabetic)
Resident And Non-Resident $100.00
ALS Disposables Resident And Non-Resident $100.00
BLS Disposables Resident And Non-Resident $60.00
Oxygen Resident And Non-Resident $50.00
IV Supplies Resident And Non-Resident $50.00
Section
205.090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
205.090
100:311
Other Rates:
For purposes of this Section, "Basic Life Support", "Advanced Life
Support 1" and "Advanced Life Support 2" shall have those meanings
as set forth in Medicare guidelines at the time of patient transport.
B. The transportation fees and mileage charges set forth in Subsection (A)
shall be automatically increased or decreased and become effective on
the date that the payment rates are annually adjusted for Medicare Part
B ambulance service claims as published by the Department of Health
and Human Services, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
Administration is directed to provide the City Clerk a copy of the
annually adjusted fees and charges which shall be available for public
inspection in the City Clerk's office.
Section
205.090
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
205.090
100:312
Chapter 210
ANIMALS
Cross References—As to agricultural district zoning regulations, §400.140;
as to disposal of dead animals, §§215.1760—215.1770; as to health, safety
and sanitation, ch. 220; as to horse-drawn carriages, §§645.320 et seq.; as
to persons riding animals to obey traffic regulations, §305.020; as to zoning
regulation of domestic pets, fowl, cattle, swine, sheep and goats, §400.400.
State Law Reference—Authority to regulate and restrict running at large of
animals, §77.510, RSMo.
Section
205.090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
205.090
100:313

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 210.010. Policy. [R.O. 2009 §91.01; CC 1981 §4-1; Ord. No.
92-83, 5-5-1992]
The City Council finds that it is necessary to establish and implement a
program for the licensing and regulation of dogs, cats and other animals
and for facilities which house them, that animals require legal protection,
that the property rights of owners and non-owners of animals should be
protected and that the health, safety and welfare of the people residing in
the City would best be served by adoption of such regulations.
Section 210.020. Title. [R.O. 2009 §91.02; CC 1981 §4-2; Ord. No.
92-83, 5-5-1992]
The provisions of this Chapter shall be known and cited as the "Animal
Regulation Code".
Section 210.030. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §91.03; CC 1981 §4-3; Ord.
No. 92-83, 5-5-1992; Ord. No. 95-290, 10-18-1995]
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ANIMAL — Every living creature, domesticated or wild, but not including
Homo sapiens.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Any person designated by the City as
responsible for the impounding of animals.
AT LARGE — Unconfined, off or on the premises of the owner's real property
or property in his/her possession or not under restraint by some person
physically able to prevent escape; provided, cats shall not be considered
at large when unconfined or not under restraint while on the owner's real
property.
CAT — All domestic species or varieties of the genus Felis, male or female,
four (4) months of age or older.
CATTERY — Any place or tract of land, whether indoors or outdoors,
whether enclosed or not, in, at or upon which and whether for pleasure
or profit, cats are kept, housed, bred, raised, fed, displayed, exhibited or
sold. The owner of more than three (3) cats, whether owned for pleasure
or profit, breeding or exhibiting, shall be deemed to be the operator of a
cattery.
CERTIFICATE — The certificate issued under this Chapter at the time
of vaccination and bearing thereon the signature of the veterinarian, the
registration number, the name, color, breed and sex of the dog, cat or
animal, the name and address of the owner, the date of the vaccination and
the type of vaccine administered.
Section
210.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
210.030
100:315
COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any pet shop, grooming shop,
auction, riding school, stable, cattery, kennel, guard dog service, dog
trainer, business keeping animals in stock for retail or wholesale trade or
any establishment performing one (1) or more of the principal activities of
the aforementioned establishments.
COURT — The Municipal Court.
DOG — All domestic members of the Canis family, male or female, four (4)
months of age or older.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL AVOCATION — The care, breeding, showing or
keeping of dogs by an adult person who maintains a hobby kennel
containing more than two (2) but not more than four (4) dogs over the
age of six (6) months on the lot on which the person is a resident or on a
contiguous lot, which lot or lots are not zoned business.
EUTHANIZE — To put to death in a humane manner.
EXPOSED TO RABIES — When bitten by, or fought with, or has come in
close contact with a dog or other animal shown to be infected with the
rabies virus as determined by standard laboratory testing.
HOUSEHOLD MEMBERS — Those members of a family, including servants
and attendants, living in the same dwelling unit.
IMPOUND — The apprehending, catching, trapping, netting, tranquilizing,
confining or, if necessary, the destruction of any animal by the Animal
Control Officer, a veterinarian or by any employee or agent of the City.
IMPOUNDING FACILITIES — Any premises designated by resolution of the
City Council for the purpose of impounding and caring for all animals in
violation of this Chapter.
KENNEL — Any place or tract of land, whether indoors or outdoors,
whether enclosed or not, in, at or upon which and whether for pleasure or
profit, dogs are kept, housed, bred, raised, fed, displayed, exhibited or sold.
The owner of more than two (2) dogs, unless a domestic animal avocation
permit is held, shall be deemed to be the operator of a dog kennel.
KITTEN — All domestic species or varieties of the genus Felis, male or
female, under the age of four (4) months.
OWNER — Any person who owns, harbors, shelters, keeps, controls,
manages, possesses or has part interest in any dog, cat, animal, cattery or
kennel in the City. The occupant of any premises on which a dog or cat
remains for a period of seven (7) days or to which it customarily returns
for a period of seven (7) days is presumed to be harboring, sheltering
or keeping the aforementioned dog or cat within this definition. Under
no circumstances are the normal and ordinary accepted definitions of the
term "harboring, sheltering or keeping" to be limited to the words of the
aforementioned presumption. If a minor owns a dog, puppy or other animal
subject to the provisions of this Chapter, the head of the household of which
such minor owner is a member shall be deemed to be the owner of such
dog, puppy or animal for the purpose of this Chapter and under this Chapter
Section
210.030
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
210.030
100:316
shall be responsible as the owner, whether or not such household head is a
minor. If not a member of a household, such minor owner shall be directly
subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
PUP OR PUPPY — All domesticated members of the species Canis familiaris,
male or female, under four (4) months of age.
RESTRAINT — Either control by line or leash not more than twelve (12) feet
in length or within an enclosed vehicle.
UNCONFINED — Not within a structure, fence or building physically
capable of preventing escape by the dog, cat or animal.
VACCINATE — The injection by a veterinarian or an authorized agent
of a specified dose of anti-rabies vaccine into the body of a dog, cat or
susceptible animal, such vaccine having the U.S. Government license
number approval stamped on the label of the vaccine container. Vaccine
used for vaccination of the dogs and cats shall be stored and kept under
conditions proper for the vaccine and shall show no signs of spoilage or
otherwise be unfit for producing immunity against rabies.
VETERINARIAN — Any veterinarian holding a current veterinarian's
license.
WILD ANIMAL — Any non-human primate (monkey, ape, chimpanzee,
gorilla, orangutan and lemur), all felines (other than the domestic house
cat), alligator, crocodile, caiman, poisonous reptiles, all venomous snakes,
any constrictor snake of over eight (8) feet in length, all species of bears,
raccoon, fox, skunk, coyote, wolf or any crossbreeds of the above.
Section
210.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
210.030
100:317

ARTICLE II
Licensing and Registration Requirements — Fees
Section 210.040. Animal Registration Required.91 [R.O. 2009
§91.15; CC 1981 §4-12; Ord. No. 92-83, 5-5-1992]
Dogs, cats and other animals susceptible to rabies shall be registered within
thirty (30) days of obtaining the age of five (5) months or within thirty (30)
days of acquisition by the owner, whichever occurs later. Thereafter, every
person who owns a dog, cat or other animal susceptible to rabies that is
kept within the City shall wear a St. Charles County rabies registration tag.
No dog, cat or animal susceptible to rabies shall be registered unless the
applicant provides proof showing the breed, sex and color of the animal, the
name of the owner and the date of immunization.
Section 210.050. Vaccination Against Rabies.92 [R.O. 2009 §91.16;
CC 1981 §4-14; Ord. No. 92-83, 5-5-1992]
Every person who owns any dog, cat or other animal susceptible to rabies,
whether in a kennel or not, that is kept within the City or who permits a
dog, cat or other animal susceptible to rabies to come upon or in the City
or to remain in or about his/her home, place of business or other premises
in the City shall have such dog, cat or animal that is susceptible to rabies
vaccinated against rabies. Such dogs, cats or animals must be vaccinated
at least once each year or at the frequency recommended by a licensed
veterinarian and approved by the National Association of Public Health
Veterinarians. All puppies shall be confined to their owner's premises. It
shall be unlawful for any person to own any dog, cat or such animal unless
such dog, cat or animal has been vaccinated against rabies in accordance
with the provisions of this Chapter.
Section 210.060. Kennel Permit.93 [R.O. 2009 §91.17; CC 1981
§4-15; Ord. No. 92-83, 5-5-1992]
It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any commercial animal
establishment, domestic animal avocation or kennel without first obtaining
a valid and subsisting permit thereof, which permit shall not be contrary to
any zoning laws.
Section 210.070. Facility Licensing Procedure. [R.O. 2009 §91.18;
CC 1981 §4-16; Ord. No. 92-83, 5-5-1992; Ord. No. 07-162,
6-11-2007]
A. A permit shall be obtained annually from the office of the supervisor of
the Animal Control Services prior to January first (1st) of any year and
the paying of the fee provided in Section 210.090.
91.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §210.350.
92.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §210.350.
93.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §210.350.
Section
210.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
210.070
100:319
B. Any owner or lessee shall apply not later than thirty (30) days prior to
beginning such activity at the office of the supervisor of the Animal
Control Services for such facility license.
C. The supervisor of the Animal Control Services may issue such facility
license upon a finding that the establishment has met the following
requirements:
1. Zoning compliance. The applicant for an original commercial
animal establishment permit shall present to the supervisor of the
Animal Control Services proof that the operation of such
commercial animal establishment at the proposed site is not a
violation of any City zoning regulations, has a legal non-conforming
zoning status or a conditional use permit has been issued for the
intended use.
2. The applicant for a domestic animal avocation permit shall first
contact all residents of property within seventy-five (75) feet of the
applicant's property and petition for their approval. Unless
seventy-five percent (75%) or better of the applicant's neighbors
approve the issuance of a permit, such permit shall be denied.
3. Health inspection. Before a facility permit may be issued, a
certificate of inspection from the Animal Control Services must be
issued showing that said facility is in compliance with this code:
a. It shall be the duty of the supervisor of the Animal Control
Services to make or cause to be made such inspections as may
be necessary to insure compliance with this code.
b. The applicant for a domestic animal avocation or commercial
animal establishment permit shall admit to the premises for
the purpose of making an inspection, any officer, agent or
employee of the Animal Control Services at any reasonable
time that admission is requested.
4. Pending violations. The applicant for such facility license has no
pending violations of the provisions of this Code.
D. Any hobby kennel, hobby cattery or commercial animal establishment
that is unsanitary, nauseous, foul or offensive or in any way detrimental
to the public health and/or safety and not in compliance with this code
may be cause for denial or revocation of such permit.
E. Any denial by the supervisor of the Animal Control Services to issue the
license may be appealed to the Mayor, within ten (10) days of the
denial, who shall hear and determine the matter within ten (10) days
from appeal.
F. Any action by the Mayor may be appealed to the City Council within
thirty (30) days by any person, agency or body.
Section
210.070
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
210.080
100:320
Section 210.080. Condition of Facilities.94 [R.O. 2009 §91.19; CC
1981 §4-17; Ord. No. 92-83, 5-5-1992]
A. Hobby kennels, hobby catteries and commercial animal establishments
shall meet the following conditions:
1. Housing facilities shall be provided the animals and such shall be
structurally sound, shall be maintained in good repair and shall be
constructed to provide shelter from excessive sunlight, rain, snow,
wind or other elements. In addition, such facilities shall be
constructed to provide sufficient space for the proper exercise and
movement of each animal contained therein; to provide drainage to
prevent accumulation of water, mud, debris, excreta or other
materials and shall be designed to facilitate removal of animal and
food wastes. The housing facilities shall be designed so as to
protect the animals from injury, shall contain the animals and shall
restrict the entrance of other animals.
2. Suitable food and bedding shall be provided and stored in facilities
adequate to provide protection against infestation or
contamination by insects or rodents. Refrigeration shall be
provided for the protection of perishable foods.
3. Provisions shall be made for the removal and disposal of animal and
food wastes, bedding, dead animals and debris. Waste disposal
facilities shall be maintained in a sanitary condition, free from the
infestation or contamination of insects, rodents or disease and from
obnoxious or foul odors.
4. Water must be conveniently available for cleaning purposes.
5. Sick animals shall be separated from those appearing healthy and
normal. Sick animals shall be removed from display or sale and
kept in isolation quarters with adequate ventilation to keep from
contaminating well animals.
6. There shall be an employee or owner on duty at all times during
hours any store is open whose responsibility shall be the care and
welfare of the animals in that shop or department held for sale or
display.
7. An employee or owner shall come in to feed, water and do the
necessary cleaning of animals and birds on days the store or shop is
closed.
8. No person, persons, association, firm or corporation shall
knowingly sell a sick or injured dog, cat or other small animal.
94.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §210.350.
Section
210.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
210.080
100:321
Section 210.090. Display of Registration Tags — Fee Schedule.95
[R.O. 2009 §91.20; CC 1981 §4-35; Ord. No. 92-83, 5-5-1992; Ord.
No. 98-140, 3-23-1998]
9. No person, persons, association, firm or corporation shall
misrepresent a dog, cat or other small animal to a customer in any
way.
B. Grooming parlors shall meet the following requirements:
1. Provide such restraining straps for the dog, cat or other small
animal while it is being groomed so that such animal shall neither
fall or be hanged.
2. Not leave animals unattended before a dryer.
3. Not prescribe or administer treatment or medicine that is the
province of a licensed veterinarian.
4. Not put more than one (1) animal in each cage.
5. Provide for the removal and disposal of animal and food wastes,
bedding and debris. Disposal facilities shall be maintained in a
sanitary condition, free from infestation or contamination of insects
or rodents, disease and from obnoxious or foul odors.
A. Registration Tags And Fees. Upon compliance with the requirements of
Section 210.040, any dog, cat or other animal susceptible to rabies that
is kept within the City must wear a St. Charles County rabies
registration tag. Such tags shall be fastened to the animal's collar or
harness by the owner. The registration provided by this Section shall be
renewed annually in the same manner each year. The Animal Control
Officers shall have the power to canvass door-to-door to locate
recalcitrant pet owners and warn them to purchase licenses within ten
(10) days or be cited into court for violation of this Section.
B. City Shelter Rates. Any dog, cat or other animal captured or impounded
under the provisions of this Code of Ordinances, determined not to be
infected with rabies, may be redeemed by the owner or other person
having the right of possession of such animal upon the presentation of
proper vaccination certificate and upon the payment to the Finance
Director of:
1. An impoundment fee as follows:
Animal Status
First
Impound
Second
Impound
Third or
Subsequent
Impound
Unregistered,
unsterilized
$35.00 $50.00 $85.00
95.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §210.350.
Section
210.080
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
210.090
100:322
Section 210.100. Adoption of Animals — Adoption Fees. [R.O. 2009
§91.21; CC 1981 §4-37; Ord. No. 92-83, 5-5-1992]
2. Ten dollars ($10.00) per day board fee
3. All other expenses incurred by the City in impounding in the
manner provided herein.
C. Fees For Animal Facilities. The annual fees for animal facilities shall be:
Type Fee
Kennels $250.00
Commercial animal establishment (with the exception of
cattery or grooming)
$100.00
Domestic animal avocation (Payment of this fee does not
exempt the owner from purchasing an individual dog or cat
license for each animal.)
$20.00
Grooming establishment $60.00
Cattery $60.00
Protective custody fees will apply forty-eight (48) hours after the day
of impound.
D. Disposition Of Fees. All fees collected under this Section with the
exception of fines levied in court shall be used for the purpose of paying
the Animal Control Officer or veterinarian so designated by the City
Council and for payment of expenses incurred by the impounding
facilities.
A. If a captured animal has not been reclaimed within the time provided in
Section 210.280, the animal may be either adopted or disposed of by
euthanasia. The animal may be adopted upon having the animal
vaccinated, upon the payment of a fee of forty dollars ($40.00) and upon
obtaining a license for the animal. [Ord. No. 19-119, 5-21-2019]
B. Prior to release of an adopted dog, cat, puppy or kitten, the adopter
shall enter into a written agreement with the City guaranteeing that
sterilization will be performed on the animal by a licensed veterinarian.
The sterilization agreement shall contain the following information:
1. The date of the agreement;
2. The name, address and signature of the City and the adopter;
3. A description of the animal to be adopted;
4. A statement printed in conspicuous bold print that sterilization of
the animal is required pursuant to Sections 7 to 9 of Senate Bill 636
enacted by the 1992 Second Regular Session of the 86th General
Assembly;
Section
210.090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
210.100
100:323
5. A sterilization completion date which shall be either:
a. The thirtieth (30th) day after the date of adoption in the case of
an adult animal;
b. The thirtieth (30th) day after a specified date estimated to be
the date an adopted infant female or male puppy or kitten
becomes six (6) months of age; or
c. If the City has a written policy recommending sterilization of
certain infant animals at an earlier date, the thirtieth (30th)
day after the date contained in the written policy.
6. A statement that the title, possession and control of the animal is
given to the adopter so long as the adopter complies with the terms
and conditions of the agreement.
C. An adopter that signs a sterilization agreement shall have the adopted
animal sterilized on or before the sterilization date stated in the
agreement. If the sterilization completion date stated in the agreement
falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the deadline may be
extended to the first (1st) day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal
holiday. The City may extend the deadline for thirty (30) days on the
presentation of a letter or telephone report from a licensed veterinarian
stating that the life or health of the adopted animal may be jeopardized
by sterilization. There shall be no limit to the number of extensions that
be granted for this reason.
D. Exceptions to the sterilization requirements of this Section shall not
apply to a dog or cat that is claimed from the City by a person who
already owns the animal.
E. All costs of sterilization shall be paid by the prospective adopter, except
that a voucher will be issued by the City allowing twenty-five dollars
($25.00) to be paid to any licensed veterinarian upon submission of
proof of sterilization of an adopted animal.
F. The requirements of this Section shall not apply to canines of a breed
regularly used for lawful hunting or livestock production or
management, as specified by State rules, to be used in the practice of
livestock production or management or the practice of lawful hunting.
The adopter may sign a statement that the adopter is going to use the
canine for such purposes in lieu of the sterilization agreement.
Section
210.100
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
210.100
100:324
ARTICLE III
Regulations and Prohibitions
Section 210.110. Beekeeping.96 [R.O. 2009 §91.35; CC 1981
§4-18.1(a); Ord. No. 92-83, 5-5-1992]
It shall be unlawful for any person or combination of persons to keep,
maintain or permit upon any one (1) parcel of property within the City
more than five (5) hives of any common honeybee, Apis mellifera or other
bees kept for the production of honey or wax or to maintain an apiary. The
keeping of bees shall be limited to the parcel of property upon which the
owner of the bees resides.
Section 210.120. Confining Animals To Motor Vehicles Prohibited.97
[R.O. 2009 §91.36; CC 1981 §4-19; Ord. No. 92-83, 5-5-1992]
Section 210.130. Finders of Lost Dogs — Responsibility To Report.
[R.O. 2009 §91.37; CC 1981 §4-20; Ord. No. 92-83, 5-5-1992]
Section 210.140. Defecating On Streets, Sidewalks, Public Parks,
Alleys, Other Places Open To The Public or On Certain Private
Property Prohibited — Possession of Waste Removal Equipment
A. No animal shall be confined within or on a motor vehicle at any location
under such conditions as may endanger the health or well-being of the
animal including, but not limited to, extreme hot or cold temperature,
lack of food or water, unattended or confinement with a dangerous
animal.
B. Any Animal Control Officer is authorized to remove any animal from a
motor vehicle at any location when the officer reasonably believes it is
confined in violation of this Section. Any animal so removed shall be
delivered to the City Animal Control Shelter after the removing officer
leaves written notice in a conspicuous, secure location or within the
vehicle of such removal and delivery including the officer's name.
C. No Animal Control Officer shall be held criminally or civilly liable for
action pursuant to this Section provided the officer acts in good faith,
on probable cause and without malice.
A. Any person who finds and harbors a dog without knowing the dog
owner's identity shall notify the Animal Control Officer and furnish a
description of the dog. The finder may surrender the animal to the
Animal Control Officer or retain the animal in the finder's possession
subject to surrender upon demand of the Animal Control Officer.
B. Records of reported findings shall be retained by the Animal Control
Officer and made available for public inspection.
96.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §210.350.
97.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §210.350.
Section
210.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
210.140
100:325
Required — Prohibition of Nuisance. [R.O. 2009 §91.38; CC 1981
§4-21; Ord. No. 92-83, 5-5-1992; Ord. No. 06-277, 10-10-2006]
Section 210.150. Animal Neglect or Abandonment.
A. No owner, keeper or person having control of any animal or fowl shall
fail to immediately remove and dispose of in a sanitary manner any solid
waste deposited by such animal or fowl upon any street, sidewalk,
public park, alley, other place open to the public or from private
property before the owner leaves the immediate area where the solid
waste was deposited.
B. No owner, keeper or person having control of any animal or fowl shall
fail to have in his/her possession the equipment necessary to remove
his/her animal's solid waste when accompanied by said animal or fowl
on public property or public right-of-way or easement.
C. No owner, keeper or person having control of any animal or fowl shall
permit such animal or fowl to destroy or damage property of any kind or
to deposit solid waste or to commit a similar nuisance on the private
property of a person or the property of the City, including its parks and
playgrounds, or any property other than that of the owner of the animal
or fowl.
D. Penalties for violation of this Section are set forth in Section 100.150.
A. A person is guilty of animal neglect when he/she has custody or
ownership or both of an animal and fails to provide adequate care or
adequate control which results in substantial harm to the animal.
B. A person is guilty of animal abandonment when he/she has knowingly
abandoned an animal in any place without making provisions for its
adequate care.
C. Animal neglect or animal abandonment are ordinance violations. For a
first (1st) offense of either violation, a term of imprisonment not to
exceed fifteen (15) days, or a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00), or both such fine and imprisonment may be imposed. For a
second (2nd) or subsequent violation of either offense, a term of
imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days, or a fine not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00), or both such fine and imprisonment may be
imposed. All fines and penalties for a first (1st) conviction of animal
neglect or animal abandonment may be waived by the court provided
that the person found guilty of animal neglect or abandonment shows
that adequate, permanent remedies for the neglect or abandonment
have been made. Reasonable costs incurred for the care and
maintenance of neglected or abandoned animals may not be waived.
D. In addition to any other penalty imposed by this Section, the court may
order a person found guilty of animal neglect or animal abandonment to
pay all reasonable costs and expenses necessary for:
Section
210.140
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
210.150
100:326
Section 210.160. Animal Abuse.98
Section 210.170. Abandonment of Animals.99 [R.O. 2009 §91.41; CC
1981 §4-24; Ord. No. 92-83, 5-5-1992]
Section 210.180. Animals Running At Large — Confinement of Dogs
and Cats.100 [R.O. 2009 §91.42; CC 1981 §4-25; Ord. No. 92-83,
5-5-1992; Ord. No. 01-105, 5-21-2001; Ord. No. 05-73, 3-29-2005;
Ord. No. 05-79, 4-13-2005]
1. The care and maintenance of neglected or abandoned animals
within the person's custody or ownership;
2. The disposal of any dead or diseased animals within the person's
custody or ownership;
3. The reduction of resulting organic debris affecting the immediate
area of the neglect or abandonment; and
4. The avoidance or minimization of any public health risks created by
the neglect or abandonment of the animals.
A. A person is guilty of animal abuse when a person:
1. Intentionally or purposely kills an animal in any manner not
allowed by or expressly exempted from the provisions of Sections
578.005 to 578.023 and 273.030, RSMo.;
2. Purposely or intentionally causes injury or suffering to an animal;
or
3. Having ownership or custody of an animal knowingly fails to
provide adequate care or adequate control.
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper to abandon any animal.
B. Definition. For the purpose of this Section, to "abandon" means:
1. For the owner or keeper to leave an animal without demonstrated
or apparent intent to recover or to resume custody.
2. To leave an animal for more than twelve (12) hours without
providing adequate food, water and shelter for the duration of the
absence.
3. To turn out or release an animal for the purpose of causing it to be
impounded.
98.Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law. Cross
Reference—As to penalty, §210.350.
99.Cross Reference—As to penalty, §210.350.
100. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §210.350.
Section
210.150
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
210.180
100:327
Section 210.190. Vicious Dogs.101 [R.O. 2009 §91.43; CC 1981
§4-25.1; Ord. No. 92-83, 5-5-1992; Ord. No. 05-79, 4-13-2005]
A. All female dogs and cats shall be securely confined in an enclosed place
while in heat.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, controlling, possessing or
having the management or care, in whole or in part, of any dog, cat,
other animal or fowl, whether licensed or not, to fail to keep the dog,
cat, other animal or fowl on the premises of the owner or custodian
thereof. Dogs shall be retained by a fence or a chain of at least ten (10)
feet in length unless being off the premises they are securely restrained
in a reasonable manner or led by a line or leash of a length of no more
than six (6) feet.
C. Unlawful Activities.
1. It shall be unlawful for an owner to locate the kennel or shelter for
any dog kept outdoors closer than fifteen (15) feet to any property
line whenever this would cause distress, discomfort or injury to
reasonable persons of normal and ordinary sensibilities or
endanger the comfort, repose, health or peace of residents in the
area.
2. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for an owner who confines any
dog solely by means of an electronic fence to locate such fence
within twenty-five (25) feet of a public right-of-way, such as a street
or sidewalk, where such right-of-way abuts a front, rear or side
yard as defined in Section 400.050.
3. An owner who confines any dog solely by means of an electronic
fence shall not permit the dog to cross the electronic fence. An
owner whose dog is found to have violated this paragraph on more
than two (2) occurrences shall be deemed a dog of a vicious nature
and shall be subject to Section 210.190(B)(3).
D. The provisions or prohibitions of Subsection (B) of this Section shall not
apply to bloodhounds or other dogs used for tracking in conjunction
with Police activities or to dogs of the Canine Corps of Police force of
any municipality, any County law enforcement agency, Highway Patrol,
any Federal law enforcement agency or any branch of the Armed Forces
of the United States while being used to conduct official business or
while being used for official purposes.
E. The penalties for violation of this Section are set forth in Section
210.190(J).
A. No person shall allow a dog to chase, attack, bite, damage or injure any
person, dog or other animal.
101. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §210.350.
Section
210.180
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
210.190
100:328
B. Vicious Dogs—Generally.
1. A dog having a vicious nature or temperament is a dog which has
exhibited a tendency to chase, attack, bite, damage or injure any
person, dog or other animal.
2. Any dog having a vicious nature or temperament shall be confined
indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure
suitable to prevent the entry of children and designed to prevent
the dog from escaping. The pen or structure shall have secure sides
of sufficient height and a secure top attached to the sides to
prevent escape; shall have a secure bottom or floor attached to the
sides of the pen or the sides of the pen must be embedded in the
ground no less than four (4) feet. The pen shall be locked with a key
or combination lock when a dog is within the structure. Such pen
shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. Any
such pen must comply with all applicable zoning and building
regulations. A notice shall be posted in a manner conspicuously
visible to the public at each entrance to the premises where the
enclosure is located and on each side of the enclosure, reading in
letters not less than four (4) inches high: "Dangerous Dog —
Beware". In addition, each such notice shall conspicuously display
a warning symbol that informs children of the presence of the dog.
3. No dog having a vicious nature shall be confined by means of a
buried electric fence.
4. It is unlawful to permit or allow a vicious dog to be outside the
proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a
substantial chain or leash not longer than four (4) feet and under
the restraint of a person not less than seventeen (17) years of age.
The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to
the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration but shall prevent it
from biting any person or animal. Such dogs shall not be tethered
or leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts or buildings.
5. The owner or possessor of any dog having a vicious nature shall at
all times have proof of a surety bond or policy of liability insurance
in the amount and form set forth below:
a. A surety bond issued by a surety insurer qualified to do
business in the State of Missouri in a form acceptable to the
City in the sum of at least one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00), payable to any person injured by the dog; or
b. A policy of liability insurance, such as homeowner's insurance,
issued by an insurer qualified to do business in the State of
Missouri in the amount of at least one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00), insuring the owner for any personal
injuries inflicted by the dog. The surety bond or insurance
policy shall provide that no cancellation of the policy will be
made unless (10) ten days' written notice is first given to the
Section
210.190
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
210.190
100:329
City. The owner or possessor shall maintain an effective and
unexpired surety bond or insurance policy with the coverage
and in the amounts specified in this Section at all times.
6. The owner or possessor of any dog having a vicious nature shall
provide the City with the name and address of the owner or
possessor of the dog, the address of the location where the dog is
kept and color photograph of a size not less than three (3) inches by
four (4) inches of the dog.
C. If a dog having a vicious nature or temperament is found running at
large, it shall be seized and impounded for a determination by the
Municipal Judge as to its proper disposition.
D. If a dog having a vicious nature or temperament chases, attacks, bites,
damages or injures any person, dog or other animal, it may be seized
and impounded for a determination by the Municipal Judge as to its
proper disposition.
E. Warrant May Be Issued—When.
1. The Judge of the Municipal Court, upon application of the City
Attorney or Assistant City Attorney and upon a showing that there
is probable cause to believe that a violation of this Section exists
and that there is probable cause to believe that the dog involved in
that violation may be found at a specified location, may issue a
search and seizure warrant. The warrant shall specify the dog to be
seized and shall specify the location of the dog to be seized. The
warrant shall be served only between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and
5:00 P.M. and shall be served only by an Animal Control Officer in
the company of a uniformed Police Officer of the Police
Department.
2. The Judge of the Municipal Court shall upon issuance of a search
and seizure warrant under this Section order Animal Control
Officers to use reasonable care to care for and maintain the dog
seized pursuant to the authority granted by this Section until the
judge has ordered other disposition of the dog.
F. Upon at least fifteen (15) days' written notice to the owner, the judge of
the Municipal Court shall conduct a hearing to determine the proper
disposition of the dog. If both the City and the owner agree, the hearing
may be held on less than fifteen (15) days' notice.
G. After conducting the hearing, the judge of the Municipal Court may
determine the appropriate disposition of the dog which is necessary for
the public safety and welfare including, but not limited to, ordering its
destruction or removal from the City. If the judge orders the dog
destroyed, Animal Control Officers shall execute the order of the court
the next business day.
Section
210.190
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
210.190
100:330
Section 210.200. Habitually Barking or Threatening Dogs — Loud
Animal Noises Prohibited.102 [R.O. 2009 §91.44; CC 1981 §4-32; Ord.
No. 92-83, 5-5-1992]
H. The remedies in this Section are in addition to the fines and penalties
prescribed in Subsection (J) and do not preclude any other remedies
available to the City.
I. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to dogs of the Canine
Corps of the Police force of any municipality, any County law
enforcement agency, Highway Patrol, any Federal law enforcement
agency or any branch of the Armed Forces of the United States while
being used to conduct official business or while being used for official
purposes.
J. Violation And Penalty.
1. Each violation of the provisions of this Section shall constitute a
separate offense.
2. Any person who shall violate this Section shall be subject to:
a. For the first (1st) violation, imprisonment for not more than
ninety (90) days or a fine of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) or a combination of such fine and imprisonment or
both;
b. For a second (2nd) violation, imprisonment for not more than
ninety (90) days or a fine of not less than two hundred dollars
($200.00) or a combination of such fine and imprisonment or
both; and
c. For any third (3rd) or successive violation, imprisonment for
not more than ninety (90) days or a fine not less than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or a combination of such fine and
imprisonment or both.
3. In addition, the court may, as a condition of any probation granted
to a person found guilty of violation of this Section, order the
person to make restitution to any person who has been damaged by
the dog.
A. Habitually Barking Or Threatening Dogs. No owner shall own, keep or
harbor upon his/her premises any dog that by frequent and habitual
barking, yelping or howling or by immediate threat of attacking or
biting causes fear or annoyance to the person or persons living in the
immediate area or to persons passing upon the streets and sidewalks.
B. Loud Animal Noises Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise
102. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §210.350.
Section
210.190
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
210.200
100:331
Section 210.210. Limited Number of Animals Allowed At Residence
— Exceptions.103 [R.O. 2009 §91.45; CC 1981 §4-27; Ord. No. 92-83,
5-5-1992]
Section 210.220. Sale of Baby Fowl and Rabbits Restricted.104 [R.O.
2009 §91.46; CC 1981 §§4-28—4-29; Ord. No. 92-83, 5-5-1992]
by the keeping of any animal, bird or fowl, which by causing frequent or
long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person
in the vicinity.
A. It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person in charge of a
residence to keep or allow to be kept more than two (2) dogs or three
(3) cats, or any combination of such animals exceeding four (4) in
number, over the age of six (6) months at such residence unless the
residence or all of the dogs and cats kept there are within one (1) or
more of the following exceptions:
1. The residence is licensed as a commercial animal establishment.
2. The residence is zoned agricultural pursuant to the zoning
regulations of the City.
3. All of the dogs and cats kept at the residence are licensed as
required under the applicable provisions of this Code of Ordinances
of the City and the person in charge of the residence, upon request
of any Animal Control Officer or Police Officer, presents for
inspection certificates of registry for all such animals showing
continuous license for all animals existing from a date preceding
the passage of this Chapter.
4. Any individual having a current domestic animal avocation permit
shall not permit a total combination of dogs and cats in excess of six
(6) animals upon such premises.
B. When animals in excess of the limit established in this Section are found
at a residence, all of the animals found at the residence may be
removed to the City Dog Pound (i.e., Animal Shelter) and handled as
stray animals, except that the person in charge of the residence
present, may designate and retain up to four (4) licensed animals.
A. Sale Of Baby Fowl Restricted.
1. No person shall sell, give or award or offer for sale, gift or award
eleven (11) or less of any fowl under one (1) month of age.
2. The term "fowl", as used herein, shall include chickens, ducks and
geese.
103. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §210.350.
104. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §210.350.
Section
210.200
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
210.220
100:332
Section 210.230. Hog Pens — Cattle Pens.105 [R.O. 2009 §91.47; CC
1981 §§4-30—4-31; Ord. No. 92-83, 5-5-1992]
Section 210.240. Pigeons.106 [R.O. 2009 §91.48; CC 1981 §4-33; Ord.
No. 92-83, 5-5-1992]
Section 210.250. Killing or Disabling A Police Animal.107
A person commits the offense of killing or disabling a police animal when
such person knowingly causes the death of a police animal, or knowingly
disables a police animal to the extent it is unable to be utilized as a police
animal, when that animal is involved in a law enforcement investigation,
apprehension, tracking, or search and rescue, or the animal is in the
custody of or under the control of a Law Enforcement Officer, Department
of Corrections Officer, Municipal Police Department, Fire Department and a
rescue unit or agency.
B. Sale Of Baby Rabbits Restricted. No person shall sell, give or award or
offer for sale, gift or award any live rabbit less than six (6) weeks of age
unless such sale, gift or award shall include the sale, gift or award of
the dam (i.e., the female parent of the rabbit).
A. Hog Pens. Except where permitted by the zoning regulations of the City,
it shall be unlawful for any person to keep or use, within the City, any
pen, stall or enclosure in which hogs or swine are kept, except for the
purpose of immediate transportation.
B. Cattle Pens. Except where permitted by the zoning regulations of the
City, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep or use, within the City,
any pen, stall or enclosure in which cattle are kept, except for the
purpose of immediate transportation; provided however, that this
Section shall not apply to the keeping or using within the City of any
enclosure in which only one (1) milk cow is kept for the purpose of
supplying dairy products for family use and not for sale.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, being the owner of or having in his/
her possession or control any pigeon, except homing or racing pigeons
with registration bands, to allow, suffer or permit such pigeon to fly or
be at large within the City.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to feed any pigeon in any open or
unenclosed public or private place within the City or to place or expose
feed or food in any open or unenclosed public or private place within
the City so as to attract pigeons thereto.
105. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §210.350.
106. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §210.350.
107. Cross References—As to assaulting police officers, §215.600; as to cruelty to animals,
§210.160; as to penalty, §210.350.
Section
210.220
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
210.255
100:333
Section 210.255. Assault On A Police Animal.
A person commits the offense of assault on a police animal when such
person knowingly attempts to kill or disable or knowingly causes or
attempts to cause serious physical injury to a police animal when that
animal is involved in law enforcement investigation, apprehension, tracking,
or search, or the animal is in the custody of or under the control of a Law
Enforcement Officer, Department of Corrections Officer, Municipal Police
Department, Fire Department or a rescue unit or agency.
Section 210.260. Keeping of Wild Animals. [R.O. 2009 §91.50; Ord.
No. 95-290, 10-18-1995]
A. No person shall keep or permit to be kept on premises under that
person's control any wild or dangerous animal for sale, display or for
exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. This Section
shall not be construed to apply to zoological parks, performing animal
exhibitions or circuses.
B. No person shall keep or permit to be kept any wild animal as a pet.
Section
210.255
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
210.260
100:334
ARTICLE IV
Administration and Enforcement
Section 210.270. Right of Entry.108 [R.O. 2009 §91.60; CC 1981 §4-5;
Ord. No. 92-83, 5-5-1992]
It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal an animal or interfere with the
Animal Control Officer, the veterinarian or persons designated by the officer
or such other persons who may be designated by the City Council in the
performance of their legal duties as provided in this Chapter. The Animal
Control Officer or persons designated by the officer or such other persons
who may be designated by the City Council shall have the right to enter onto
any lots or lands for the purpose of collecting any dog, cat or other animal
which is on such lot or land in violation of this Chapter and whose presence
on such lot or land constitutes a violation of any of the provisions of this
Chapter. The Animal Control Officer or a duly appointed representative or
any other person or persons so designated by the City shall have the powers
of arrest necessary to enforce the provisions under this Chapter. The Animal
Control Officer or persons designated by the officer or such other persons
who may be designated by the City Council shall have the right to enter into
a dwelling or building for the purpose of collecting any dog, cat or other
animal which shows obvious signs of being rabid.
Section 210.280. Impoundment Procedures. [R.O. 2009 §91.61; CC
1981 §4-6; Ord. No. 92-83, 5-5-1992]
A. The Animal Control Officer or other persons designated by the officer or
such other persons who may be designated by the City Council shall
have the power to catch, confine and impound dogs, cats and other
animals as follows:
1. Dogs, cats and other animals wearing an expired or invalid St.
Charles County rabies registration tag;
2. Dogs, cats and other animals not wearing a St. Charles County
rabies registration tag;
3. All female dogs and cats not securely confined in an enclosed place
while in heat;
4. All dogs, puppies, cats, kittens or other animals which are at large;
5. All dogs, cats and other animals infected or suspected of being
infected with rabies and all dogs, cats and other animals exposed to
or suspected by the officer to be exposed to or infected with rabies,
including dogs, cats and other animals known to have been bitten
by a rabid animal, whether the dog, cat or other animal to be
impounded is running at large or on a leash or whether it is
confined to its owner's premises;
108. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §210.350.
Section
210.270
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
210.280
100:335
Section 210.290. Impounding Animals Suspected of or Exposed To
Rabies. [R.O. 2009 §91.62; CC 1981 §4-7; Ord. No. 92-83, 5-5-1992]
6. Dogs, cats and other animals susceptible to rabies not vaccinated
for rabies with a vaccine approved by the National Association of
State Public Health Veterinarians and used within the preceding
time period approved by the National Association of Public Health
Veterinarians as the duration of effective protection against rabies
which that vaccine gives;
7. Dogs, cats or other animals which have bitten a person or animal,
which have been bitten by a dog, cat or other animal suspected of
having rabies, which are suspected of having rabies or have been
exposed to rabies;
8. No dogs, cats or other animals shall be exempted from the
provisions of paragraphs (3), (4), (5) or (7) above by virtue of
vaccination, tags or a vaccination-registration certificate.
B. Dogs, cats or other animals impounded in accordance with this Chapter
shall be impounded in an impounding facility as designated by the City
Council.
C. Any animal bearing identification of ownership shall be held for five (5)
business days from time of impoundment; the Animal Control Officer
shall make reasonable effort within twenty-four (24) hours of
impoundment by telephone to give notice of the impoundment to the
owner and if unsuccessful, shall mail written notice by certified mail
within forty-eight (48) hours of impoundment. Information shall be
included in the written notice setting forth the date by which
redemption must be made and the fees payable prior to redemption
release. When written notice is sent, the impounded animal shall be
held an additional five (5) business days or until the certified mail
return receipt is received from the United States Postal Service.
A. Any dog, cat or other animal which exhibits objective symptoms
suggestive of rabies, after written certification to the owner by the
Animal Control Officer or veterinarian or such other person designated
by the City Council for the enforcement of this Chapter, shall be
impounded off the property of the owner. This animal shall be held for
ten (10) days at the impounding facilities designated by the City Council
for clinical observation and if alive at the termination of this period,
shall be returned to the owner after payment of the designated fee. As
an alternative procedure, the owner, at the owner's expense, may
designate any veterinary hospital in the County wherein such animal is
to be impounded and observed for a similar ten (10) day period. If such
animal shall die during the observation period, regardless of location,
the head shall be removed and submitted to a qualified laboratory for
examination.
Section
210.280
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
210.290
100:336
Section 210.300. Emergency Quarantine. [R.O. 2009 §91.63; CC
1981 §4-8; Ord. No. 92-83, 5-5-1992]
Whenever rabies becomes prevalent in the City, the Mayor shall, according
to the necessity of the case, issue a quarantine order requiring every
owner or person in charge of any dog, cat or other animal susceptible to
rabies whether vaccinated or not within the limits of the City to either kill
their dog, cat or animal or confine it in the home or some other secure
building. Whenever, during quarantine, it is necessary that a dog, cat or
animal susceptible to rabies leave the confines of a home or other secure
building, such dog, cat or animal shall be placed on a leash no more than
six (6) feet in length and under the direct physical control of a competent
person not less than fifteen (15) years of age. Such order shall be published
once in a paper publishing the businesses of the City or shall be posted
in at least twenty (20) conspicuous places about the City. The Mayor may,
by proclamation, terminate any such quarantine whenever, in the Mayor's
judgment, the necessity for it no longer exists.
Section 210.310. Procedure Following Animal Bite. [R.O. 2009
§91.64; CC 1981 §4-9; Ord. No. 92-83, 5-5-1992]
B. Any dog, cat or other animal which has been exposed to rabies shall be
immediately destroyed unless the owner, at the owner's expense,
chooses one (1) of the following alternative methods:
1. Strict isolation in a kennel or animal hospital for six (6) months.
2. If no previous vaccination has been given to a dog, cat or other
animal susceptible to rabies within a period of two (2) years with
chicken embryo (flurry strain) vaccine or within one (1) year using
vaccine of nerve tissue origin or another vaccine approved by the
veterinarian was used and if the effective protection limit of the last
such vaccination has passed, then such dog, cat or other animal
susceptible to rabies shall be impounded and placed on a schedule
of immunization approved by the Animal Control Officer or
veterinarian.
3. If a dog, cat or other animal susceptible to rabies has been
vaccinated previously with another vaccine approved by the
veterinarian within the duration of the vaccine's effective
protection as approved by the National Association of State Public
Health Veterinarians, the animal shall be revaccinated and
restrained by a leash and confined at home for thirty (30) days.
C. Prior to release of any dog, cat or other animal susceptible to rabies
under clinical observation for rabies, all conditions of this Chapter shall
be fulfilled.
A. The owner of any dog, cat or other animal which bites any person,
regardless of the circumstances or irrespective of whether such dog or
cat is vaccinated, shall be required to place such dog, cat or other
Section
210.290
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
210.310
100:337
Section 210.320. Claiming of Non-Rabid Animals. [R.O. 2009
§91.65; CC 1981 §4-10; Ord. No. 92-83, 5-5-1992]
Each impounded dog, cat and susceptible animal shall be licensed before
being released to the owner. A fee designated by the City Council to cover
the cost of vaccination and for the impounding service shall be collected for
each dog or cat so released. A separate money receipt will be issued for the
cost of vaccination. The owner shall take the animal to a veterinarian for
rabies immunization within two (2) weeks of its release and surrender the
vaccination receipt as payment. Dogs and cats that have been vaccinated
before becoming impounded shall be released to their owners within five
(5) days after capture upon payment of the impounding service fee as
animal in the custody of the Animal Control Officer or veterinarian for
confinement in a manner satisfactory to the Animal Control Officer,
veterinarian or Chief of Police and in a manner that will prevent contact
with people and other animals for a period of ten (10) days following
the evening of the day of the bite for the purpose of clinical observation.
All expenses shall be borne by the owner of the dog, cat or other
animal. If for any reason such dog, cat or other animal should die
while in confinement, its head shall be removed by the veterinarian and
submitted to a qualified laboratory. If at the end of such ten (10) day
period of observation such dog, cat or other animal is alive and healthy,
it may be released to its owner.
B. The Chief of Police or designee is authorized to allow confinement other
than described above providing such animal will be controlled and
observed in accordance with the owner's signed agreement.
Preconditions for quarantine at home would be that the animal must
have current rabies vaccination, be licensed, not have a recent history
of being at large; there shall be proof presented that the bite was
provoked, the animal is not displaying a sudden change in disposition
and the owner has both the ability and desire to keep the animal in a
secure building and separate from other animals.
C. All other conditions of this Chapter must be fulfilled prior to the release
of all animals under clinical observation as the result of biting a person.
D. It shall be the duty of any person bitten by any animal or the parent or
guardian of any minor bitten by an animal to report the same to the
Police Department immediately. Such report shall contain the name and
address of the owner and of the animal, the day and time bitten, the
location where bitten and a general description of the animal.
E. It shall be the duty of every physician to report immediately to the City
Police Department the full name, age and address of any person under
the physician's care or observation who has been bitten by an animal,
irrespective of whether infected with rabies or suspected; and every
veterinarian treating or having under observation any animal infected
with rabies shall report to the Police Department the owner's name and
address and if the animal is a dog, cat or other animal.
Section
210.310
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
210.320
100:338
specified herein; provided that the Animal Control Officer or veterinarian
is of the opinion that such release will not impair the safety of the public.
Every animal impounded under the provisions of this regulation, which is
found upon arrival at the pound to be diseased or injured and whose owner
is unknown or whose owner relinquished ownership in writing, shall be
immediately euthanized if so recommended by a veterinarian. The Animal
Control Officer may return any at large animal to its owner if within the
preceding one (1) year that animal has not been found running at large;
provided that a summons shall be issued to the owner for violation of this
Chapter.
Section 210.330. Disposal of Rabid Animals. [R.O. 2009 §91.66; CC
1981 §4-11; Ord. No. 92-83, 5-5-1992]
The Animal Control Officer or veterinarian or such other person as may
be designated by the City Council shall dispose of any dog, cat or other
animal infected with rabies and such person so designated shall have the
power to examine and impound any animal bitten by or exposed to any other
animal infected with rabies. The Animal Control Officer or veterinarian or
such other person as may be designated by the City Council shall have the
power to require the owners of such dogs, cats or other animals to take
such necessary measures to prevent further spread of rabies and to dispose
of any exposed animal, if such necessary measures are not taken by the
owners.
Section 210.340. Rat Control. [R.O. 2009 §91.67; CC 1981 §4-34;
Ord. No. 92-83, 5-5-1992]
In addition to the duties prescribed for the Animal Control Officer by this
Chapter, it shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer, whenever the
Animal Control Officer has knowledge or receives notice of the presence
of rats along any public property within the City, immediately to make
a thorough investigation and take whatever action may be necessary to
remove the attraction for the rats or set out a rat exterminating agent in a
manner that will not be injurious to humans or animals, other than rats. It
shall further be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to advise citizens of
the City in the matter of rat control when called upon to do so.
Section 210.350. Penalty. [R.O. 2009 §91.99; CC 1981 §4-36; Ord.
No. 92-83, 5-5-1992]
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter and found guilty shall be
punished as provided in Section 100.150.
Section
210.320
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
210.350
100:339

ARTICLE V
Trap-Neuter-Return Program
Section 210.400. Managed Care of Feral Cats. [Ord. No. 15-173 §1,
8-4-2015]
A. Purpose. To permit implementation of a Trap-Neuter-Return (TNR)
program for the purpose of reducing the population of feral cats,
benefiting public health, improving the quality of life for residents, and
ensuring the humane treatment of feral cats.
B. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words shall
have the meaning set forth in this Subsection.
ANIMAL CONTROL AGENCY — Any agency or person, including an
animal control officer, authorized by law to implement animal control
laws and provide animal care and control.
ANIMAL WELFARE ORGANIZATION — Any charitable organization
whose purpose includes promotion of animal welfare and that has been
granted Section 501(c)(3) not for profit status by the Internal Revenue
Service.
CARETAKER — Any person who regularly provides food and water to a
feral cat colony.
EARTIP — A mark identifying a feral or stray cat as having been
sterilized, specifically the removal of a quarter inch off the tip of the
cat's left ear in a straight line cut while the cat is anesthetized.
FERAL CAT — A cat that is not socialized to humans and is not an
owned cat.
FERAL CAT COLONY AND COLONY — A group of feral or stray cats
that congregate, more or less, together as a unit and share a common
food source.
FOSTER HOME — A household in which a cat or kitten is temporarily
placed for the purpose of providing indoor shelter, care and, if
necessary, socialization before permanent placement in an adoptive
home.
KITTEN — A member of the species felis catus under the age of eight
weeks.
NUISANCE — Conduct by feral or stray cats that disturbs the peace,
including:
OWNED CAT — A cat that is a companion to a person, is regularly
fed and sheltered in that same person's habitation and carries visible
indicia of ownership, including a collar or tag.
a. Habitually or continually howling or making loud noises, and
b. Habitually and significantly destroying property.
Section
210.400
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
210.400
100:341
SHELTER — A structure that provides feral and stray cats with
protection from cold, rain and other weather-related elements.
SPONSOR — Any Animal Welfare Organization that agrees to comply
with the requirements of sponsorship set forth in this Section; provides
written notice to the City that it desires to serve as a Sponsor; and is
approved by the City within its discretion.
STERILIZE — To spay or neuter.
STRAY CAT — A cat that is socialized to humans and is not an owned
cat.
TNR — The method of managing feral and stray cats known as Trap-
Neuter-Return.
TNR PROGRAM — A program pursuant to which feral and stray cats
are trapped, sterilized, vaccinated against rabies, ear-tipped, returned
to the location where they were captured and provided with long-term
care by a Caretaker in accordance with this Section.
C. Management of Feral Cat Colonies.
1. A TNR Program shall be permitted and Caretakers shall be entitled
to maintain feral cat colonies in accordance with the terms and
conditions of this Section.
2. Sponsorship of TNR Program. Any Animal Welfare Organization
that agrees and is able to comply with the requirements of this
Section shall be eligible to act as a Sponsor of the TNR Program
upon approval by the City within its discretion. Any Animal Welfare
Organization intending to undertake the responsibilities of
sponsorship shall provide to the City a written letter of intention
containing its address or location, telephone number and, if
applicable, electronic mailing address.
3. Sponsor Requirements. It shall be the duty of a Sponsor to:
a. Register all feral cat colonies managed by Caretakers pursuant
to the requirements of this Section;
b. Ensure the ongoing compliance of Caretakers of registered
colonies with the requirements of this Section;
c. Maintain records provided by Caretakers on the size and
location of registered colonies, as well as vaccination and
sterilization records of cats in the colonies;
d. Help to resolve any complaints over the conduct of Caretakers
of registered colonies or of cats belonging to registered
colonies;
e. Report annually to the City on the following:
Section
210.400
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
210.400
100:342
(1) Number of colonies in the City that are registered with the
Sponsor;
(2) Total number of cats in colonies in the City that are
registered with the Sponsor;
(3) Number of cats sterilized and vaccinated pursuant to the
TNR Program in the past year; and
(4) Number of cats and kittens removed for purposes of foster
or adoptive placement in the past year.
4. Caretaker Requirements. It shall be the responsibility of a
Caretaker to:
a. Submit all feral cat colonies managed by the Caretaker for
registration with a Sponsor pursuant to the requirements of
this Section;
b. Make reasonable efforts to trap all cats in a registered colony
and have all trapped cats sterilized, vaccinated against rabies
and eartipped by a licensed veterinarian;
c. Make reasonable efforts to recapture all cats to update rabies
vaccinations as required by law;
d. Keep and maintain vaccination, sterilization, and medical
records for all trapped cats and provide the Sponsor with
copies of vaccination and sterilization records for all trapped
cats;
e. Provide or arrange for the provision of adequate food and
water on a regular basis to colony cats and make reasonable
efforts to ensure adequate shelter for colony cats;
f. Make reasonable efforts to trap and obtain proper medical
attention for any colony cat that appears to require it;
g. Make reasonable efforts to remove and find permanent
adoptive homes or foster homes for kittens born to colony cats;
h. Make reasonable efforts to work with the Sponsor to resolve
any complaints over the conduct of the Caretaker or of colony
cats managed by the Caretaker;
i. Report annually in writing to the Sponsor on the status of the
Caretaker's colony, including:
(1) Total number of cats in the colony and total number of cats
in the colony that are sterilized;
(2) Number of cats in the colony sterilized and vaccinated
pursuant to the TNR Program in the past year;
Section
210.400
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
210.400
100:343
(3) Number of cats that have died or otherwise ceased to be a
part of the colony in the past year;
(4) Number of kittens born to colony cats in the past year and
their disposition; and
(5) Number of cats and kittens removed for purposes of foster
or adoptive placement in the past year.
5. Feral Cat Colony Registration. Upon registration of a feral cat
colony, the Caretaker shall provide his or her Sponsor with:
a. Address, telephone number and, if applicable, electronic
mailing address of the Caretaker;
b. Location of the colony;
c. Total number of cats in the colony;
d. Total number of cats in the colony that are sterilized, total
number of cats in the colony that are vaccinated against rabies,
and records of such vaccinations and sterilizations.
6. Withdrawal of Caretaker or Sponsor.
a. In the event that a Caretaker of a registered colony is unable or
unwilling to continue in that role, he or she shall notify his or
her Sponsor in writing and shall make reasonable efforts to
secure a replacement Caretaker.
b. In the event that a Sponsor is unable or unwilling to continue
to perform its role, it shall provide sixty (60) days' written
notice to the City and shall make reasonable efforts to secure a
replacement Sponsor.
7. Disposition of Colony Cats. An Animal Control Agency that has
trapped or received an ear-tipped cat from within the City shall
take reasonable steps to notify all Sponsors of the description and
sex of the cat and of the address or location where the cat was
captured. Sponsors shall have up to five (5) business days after
notification to arrange for the cat to be retrieved. If the cat is
retrieved by arrangement of a Sponsor and the Caretaker of the
colony from which the cat was removed can be located with
reasonable efforts, the cat shall be returned to the Caretaker.
D. Ordinance Enforcement.
1. Nothing in this Section shall interfere with the right of the City or
an Animal Control Agency to:
a. Investigate any nuisance complaint allegedly caused by a feral
or stray cat or feral cat colony;
Section
210.400
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
210.400
100:344
(1) If it is found that a feral or stray cat or feral cat colony is
causing a nuisance, the Animal Control Agency or the City
shall provide all Sponsors with written notice delineating
the nuisance and location of the cat or colony with
specificity; or
(2) If a cat or cats belonging to a registered feral cat colony is
causing a nuisance, then the Sponsor of the colony shall
have sixty (60) days from the date that written notice was
provided to cure the nuisance. If the Sponsor fails to cure
the nuisance within sixty (60) days, an Animal Control
Agency or the City shall have the right to remove the
offending cat or cats.
b. Seize and remove a registered feral cat colony if the Caretaker
regularly fails to comply with the requirements of Subsection
(C)(4) and the Sponsor does not correct the situation within
sixty (60) days of being given written notice by the City
delineating the Caretaker's failures with specificity; or
c. Reassign sponsorship of a Sponsor's registered feral cat
colonies if the Sponsor regularly fails to comply with the
requirements of sub-section C.3 and the Sponsor does not
correct the situation within sixty (60) days of being given
written notice by the City delineating its failures with
specificity.
2. A Caretaker in compliance with this Section shall be exempt from
all other ordinances of the City that impose requirements on cats
that are owned, kept, harbored, or in the custody of a person.
3. Grace Period.
a. If an Animal Control Agency or the City locates or otherwise
becomes knowledgeable about an unregistered feral cat
colony, reasonable efforts shall be made by the Animal Control
Agency or the City to provide written notice to the Caretaker of
the colony of the registration requirements of this Section.
b. Upon receipt of written notice, a Caretaker of an unregistered
feral cat colony shall have thirty (30) days to comply with this
Section. During the thirty-day period, no cat from the colony
shall be removed by an Animal Control Agency or the City for
reason of causing a nuisance.
c. Upon registration within the thirty-day period, a Caretaker in
receipt of written notice shall be entitled to the protections of
Subsection (C)(7), (D)(1)(a), and (D)(2). If the Caretaker fails to
register the colony within the thirty-day period, the Caretaker
shall not be entitled to any protections under this Section until
registration is complete.
Section
210.400
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
210.400
100:345
Chapter 215
OFFENSES
Section
210.400
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
210.400
100:346
Article I
Offenses Against Property109
Section 215.010. Destruction or Removal of Property. [R.O. 2009
§130.01; CC 1981 §20-92; Ord. No. 96-350, 12-4-1996]
Section 215.020. Library Theft — Penalty.
A. No person shall cut, remove, deface or in any manner injure, damage,
molest, destroy, disturb or interfere with real or personal property
owned or controlled by the City.
B. No person shall cut, destroy, remove, disturb or injure any plant, flower,
shrub, tree or bush growing upon any property owned or controlled by
the City.
C. No person shall willfully deface, injure, tamper with, break, disturb,
interfere with, damage or destroy any property, real or personal,
belonging to or under the control of another.
D. No person shall maliciously deface or damage the Historical Flood
Marker at the site of the old slope gauge along the Missouri River in the
vicinity of Monroe Street extended.
E. No person shall use the Historical Flood Marker at the site of the old
slope gauge along the Missouri River in the vicinity of Monroe Street
extended as a tie-down or anchoring device for any type of boat or
barge.
A. A person commits the offense of library theft if with the purpose to
deprive, such person:
1. Knowingly removes any library material from the premises of a
library without authorization; or
2. Borrows or attempts to borrow any library material from a library
by use of a library card:
a. Without the consent of the person to whom it was issued; or
b. Knowing that the library card is revoked, canceled or expired;
or
c. Knowing that the library card is falsely made, counterfeit or
materially altered; or
3. Borrows library material from any library pursuant to an
agreement or procedure established by the library which requires
the return of such library material and, with the purpose to deprive
109. Cross Reference—As To Penalty, §100.150; As To Disturbing Grave Or Burial Site,
§250.020.
Section
215.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.020
100:347
Section 215.030. Obstructing Sewers, Gutters and The Like. [R.O.
2009 §130.03; CC 1981 §§20-94, 29-120; Ord. No. 83-100,
11-2-1983]
Section 215.040. Stealing.110
the library of the library material, fails to return the library
material to the library; or
4. Knowingly writes on, injures, defaces, tears, cuts, mutilates, or
destroys a book, document, or other library material belonging to,
on loan to, or otherwise in the custody of a library.
B. It shall be prima facie evidence of the person's purpose to deprive the
library of the library materials if, within ten (10) days after notice in
writing deposited as certified mail from the library demanding the
return of such library material, such person without good cause shown
fails to return the library material. A person is presumed to have
received the notice required by this Subsection if the library mails such
notice to the last address provided to the library by such person.
Payment to the library, in an amount equal to the fair market value of an
item of no historical significance shall be considered returning the item
for purposes of this Subsection.
C. The offense of library theft is an ordinance violation if the value of the
library materials is less than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to fill or otherwise obstruct the free
passage of water through any sewer, gutter, trench or channel dug or
made or used for the purpose of carrying off water or draining any
street or other place within this City.
B. It shall be unlawful within the City for any person to place, dump or
cause to be placed or dumped within, about or near any stream, creek,
waterway or watercourse any debris, trees, branches, grass, dirt,
rubbish, vegetable matter or trash, whether upon public or private
property notwithstanding the permission of the owner of such location.
A. A person commits the offense of stealing if he/she appropriates
property or services of another with the purpose to deprive him/her
thereof, either without his/her consent or by means of deceit or
coercion.
B. Evidence of the following is admissible in any prosecution pursuant to
this Section on the issue of the requisite knowledge or belief of the
alleged stealer that:
1. He/she failed or refused to pay for property or services of a hotel,
restaurant, inn or boarding house; or
110. Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law. State Law
References—Similar provisions, §§570.030, 570.060, RSMo.
Section
215.020
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.040
100:348
Section 215.050. Trespass.111 [R.O. 2009 §130.05; CC 1981
§§20-96(a),(b), 20-97(a),(b), 20-98; Ord. No. 3432, 10-5-1966; Ord.
No. 75-22, 5-7-1975; Ord. No. 76-9, 1-21-1976; Ord. No. 79-52,
6-6-1979; Ord. No. 01-168, 7-19-2001]
2. He/she gave in payment for property or services of a hotel,
restaurant, inn or boarding house a check or negotiable paper on
which payment was refused; or
3. He/she left the hotel, restaurant, inn or boarding house with the
intent to not pay for property or services; or
4. He/she surreptitiously removed or attempted to remove his/her
baggage from a hotel, inn or boarding house; or
5. He/she, with intent to cheat or defraud a retailer, possesses, uses,
utters, transfers, makes, alters, counterfeits or reproduces a retail
sales receipt, price tag or universal price code label or possesses,
with intent to cheat or defraud, the device that manufactures
fraudulent receipts or universal price code labels.
A. First Degree.
1. A person commits the offense of trespass in the first degree if he/
she knowingly enters unlawfully or knowingly remains unlawfully
in a building or inhabitable structure or upon real property.
2. A person does not commit the offense of trespass by entering or
remaining upon real property unless the real property is fenced or
otherwise enclosed in a manner designed to exclude intruders or as
to which notice against trespass is given by:
a. Actual communication to the actor; or
b. Posting in a manner reasonably likely to come to the attention
of intruders.
B. Second Degree.
1. A person commits the offense of trespass in the second degree if
he/she enters unlawfully upon real property of another. This is an
offense of absolute liability.
2. A person commits the offense of trespass in the second degree if
he/she enters upon real property of another and remains thereon
without the written permission of the owner.
C. Public Property. Any person who enters in or on any public land and
interferes with or threatens the health or safety of any occupant of that
property or damages the property or interferes with the normal
function of that property or any part thereof or interferes with the
111. State Law References—Similar provisions, §§569.140—569.150, RSMo.
Section
215.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.050
100:349
Section 215.060. Taking or Depositing Turf, Loam, Gravel and The
Like. [R.O. 2009 §130.06; CC 1981 §20-99]
It shall be unlawful for any person to take from or deposit on any street,
alley, thoroughfare, sidewalk or other public place of this City or on any
property not owned or controlled by him/her, without having lawful
authority to do so, any turf, loam, gravel, rock or other material.
Section 215.070. Swimming or Wading in Public Fountains
Prohibited. [R.O. 2009 §130.07; CC 1981 §20-101; Ord. No. 87-182,
9-8-1987]
No person shall swim, wade or bathe in or ride or drive through any public
fountain. A "public fountain" shall mean any fountain of water, including
the pool of water surrounding the fountain of water, which is owned and
maintained by the City.
Section 215.080. Tampering.112
closing of such property or refuses to quit that property upon the
request of the persons lawfully in charge thereof shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation.
D. Trespass On Docking Facilities. No person shall use the City's docking
facility, ramps, barges, boats or dolphins located along the Missouri
River adjacent to the parking lot at the eastern end of Boone's Lick as a
tie-down, anchoring device or dock for any type of boat, barge or other
floating device without written permission from the City.
A. A person commits the offense of tampering if he/she:
1. Tampers with property of another for the purpose of causing
substantial inconvenience to that person or to another; or
2. Unlawfully rides in or upon another's automobile, airplane,
motorcycle, motorboat or other motor-propelled vehicle; or
3. Tampers or makes connection with property of a utility; or
4. Tampers with, or causes to be tampered with, any meter or other
property of an electric, gas, steam or water utility, the effect of
which tampering is either:
a. To prevent the proper measuring of electric, gas, steam or
water service; or
b. To permit the diversion of any electric, gas, steam or water
service.
B. In any prosecution under paragraph (4) of Subsection (A), proof that a
meter or any other property of a utility has been tampered with, and the
112. Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.080
100:350
Section 215.090. Graffiti. [R.O. 2009 §130.09; Ord. No. 98-161,
4-17-1998; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
person or persons accused received the use or direct benefit of the
electric, gas, steam or water service with one (1) or more of the effects
described in paragraph (4) of Subsection (A), shall be sufficient to
support an inference which the trial court may submit to the trier of
fact from which the trier of fact may conclude that there has been
a violation of such subdivision by the person or persons who use or
receive the direct benefit of the electric, gas, steam or water service.
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this Section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
GRAFFITI — The defacing, damaging or destroying by the spraying of
paint or marking of ink, chalk, dye or other similar substances in the
form of drawings, inscriptions, figures or marks on public and private
buildings, structures and places without the prior consent of the owner.
GRAFFITI ABATEMENT PROCEDURE — A procedure which identifies
graffiti, issues notice to the landowner to abate the graffiti and provides
remedies in the absence of a response.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to write, paint or draw any graffiti
upon any wall, rock, bridge, building, fence, gate or other structure,
tree or other real or personal property, whether publicly or privately
owned.
C. When appropriate and in addition to a fine and/or imprisonment, the
courts should require those who commit acts of defacement of public or
private property through the application of graffiti to restore the
property so defaced, damaged or destroyed. The public is hereby
encouraged to cooperate in the elimination of graffiti by reporting to
the St. Charles Police Department the incidents of the application of
graffiti which they observe. Any person who provides useful information
leading to the arrest and prosecution of any person(s) who applies
graffiti as outlined in this Section within the City limits shall be eligible
for a reward of up to fifty dollars ($50.00) as determined appropriate by
the Mayor.
D. Notice Of Removal And Hearing.
1. Whenever the Chief of Police, Director of Community Development
or their designees determine that graffiti exists on any public or
private buildings, structures or places which are visible to any
person utilizing any public right-of-way in the City, be it road,
parkway, alley or otherwise, and that seasonal temperatures permit
the painting of exterior surfaces, the City may cause a notice to be
issued to abate such nuisance. The property owner shall have ten
(10) days after the date of the notice to remove or paint over the
graffiti or request a hearing to be held by the Director of
Section
215.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.090
100:351
Community Development to determine if the graffiti constitutes a
nuisance or the graffiti will be subject to abatement by the City. If a
hearing is requested, it shall be held within thirty (30) days of the
request. If the Director of Community Development determines,
after hearing, that a nuisance does exist, the property owner shall
have ten (10) days from the date of the determination to remove or
paint over the graffiti.
2. The notice to abate graffiti pursuant to this Section will be a written
notice to be served upon the owner(s) of the affected premises, as
such owner's name and address appears on the last property tax
assessment rolls of the County. If there is no known address for the
owner, the notice shall be sent or posted in care of the property
address. The notice required by this Section may be served in any
of the following manners:
a. By personal service on the owner, occupant or person in charge
or control of the property.
b. By registered or certified mail addressed to the owner at the
owner's last known address. If this is unknown, the notice will
be sent to or be posted on the property address.
3. The notice shall be substantially in the following form:
NOTICE OF INTENT TO REMOVE GRAFFITI
Date: __________
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that you are required by law
at your expense to remove or paint over the graffiti located
on the property located at ____________________, St. Charles,
Missouri, which is visible to public view, within ten (10)
days after the date of this notice or within the ten (10)
days request a hearing thereon by contacting the Director
of Community Development. If the graffiti is not removed
or painted over or a hearing requested within the ten (10)
days, the City will enter upon your property and abate the
public nuisance by removal or painting over the graffiti.
The cost of the abatement by the City employees or its
private contracts will be assessed upon your property and
such costs, if not paid by you within ten (10) days of the
abatement, will constitute a lien upon the land until paid.
4. Upon failure of person(s) to comply with the notice by the
designated date or within ten (10) days after any hearing where a
nuisance is found, the City is authorized to cause the graffiti to be
abated by City employees or private contract and the City or its
private contractor is expressly authorized to enter upon the
premises for such purposes. All reasonable efforts to minimize
damage from such entry shall be taken by the City. If City
employees accomplish the removal of the graffiti or other inscribed
Section
215.090
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.090
100:352
Section 215.100. Spraying or Discharge of Pesticide On Property
Without Consent. [R.O. 2009 §96.12; Ord. No. 09-213, 12-3-2009]
Section 215.110. Unlawful Jumping From A Bridge. [Ord. No.
13-133 §1, 7-16-2013]
Section 215.120. through Section 215.150. (Reserved)
material, they shall not authorize nor undertake to provide for the
painting or repair of any more extensive area than that where the
graffiti or other inscribed material is located.
5. Any and all costs incurred by the City in the abatement of the
graffiti nuisance under the provisions of this Section, which
authorized assessment of the cost, may constitute a lien against the
property upon which such nuisance existed and shall be collected
in the same manner as is provided in this Code of Ordinances.
A. It shall be unlawful to spray or cause to be discharged pesticide on real
property without the consent of the owner. This Section shall not apply
to the spraying or discharging of pesticide by a political subdivision. For
purposes of this Section, a "pesticide" is any substance or mixture of
substances intended for preventing, destroying, repelling or mitigating
any insect, snail, rodent, nematode, fungus, weed or any other form of
terrestrial or aquatic plant or animal life or virus or bacterium or other
microorganism, except viruses, bacteria or other microorganisms on or
in a living human being or other living animals, which is normally
considered to be a pest.
B. Any person violating this Section shall be punished as provided in
Section 100.150.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to jump from any City-maintained
bridge.
B. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in
Section 100.150.
Section
215.090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.120
100:353

Article II
Offenses Against Public Peace113
DIVISION 1
General Provisions
Section 215.160. Assault.
Section 215.170. Peace Disturbance.114
A. A person commits the offense of assault if:
1. The person attempts to cause or recklessly causes physical injury
to another person; or
2. With criminal negligence the person causes physical injury to
another person by means of a deadly weapon; or
3. The person purposely places another person in apprehension of
immediate physical injury; or
4. The person recklessly engages in conduct which creates a grave
risk of death or serious physical injury to another person; or
5. The person knowingly causes physical contact with another person
knowing the other person will regard the contact as offensive or
provocative; or
6. The person knowingly causes physical contact with an
incapacitated person, as defined in Section 475.010, RSMo., which
a reasonable person, who is not incapacitated, would consider
offensive or provocative.
A. A person commits the offense of peace disturbance if:
1. He/she unreasonably and knowingly disturbs or alarms another
person or persons by:
a. Loud noise; or
b. Offensive language addressed in a face-to-face manner to a
specific individual and uttered under circumstances which are
likely to produce an immediate violent response from a
reasonable recipient; or
c. Threatening to commit a felonious act against any person
under circumstances which are likely to cause a reasonable
person to fear that such threat may be carried out; or
d. Fighting; or
113. Cross Reference—As To Penalty, §100.150.
114. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §574.010, RSMo.
Section
215.160
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.170
100:355
Section 215.180. Private Peace Disturbance.115 [R.O. 2009 §131.03;
CC 1981 §20-117; Ord. No. 80-103, 9-3-1980]
Section 215.190. Affrays. [R.O. 2009 §131.05; CC 1981 §20-120;
Ord. No. 83-60, 8-10-1983]
If two (2) or more persons shall, in any public place in the City, voluntarily
or by agreement engage in any fight or use any blows or violence toward
each other in an angry or quarrelsome manner or do each other any willful
mischief or if any person shall assault another and strike him/her in any
public place to the terror or disturbance of others, the person so offending
shall be deemed guilty of an ordinance violation of affray.
Section 215.200. Unlawful Assembly.116
A person commits the offense of unlawful assembly if he/she knowingly
assembles with six (6) or more other persons and agrees with such persons
to violate any of the criminal laws of this State or of the United States with
force or violence.
Section 215.210. Harassment.117 [R.O. 2009 §131.07; Ord. No.
07-321, 12-19-2007]
e. Creating a noxious and offensive odor.
2. He/she is in a public place or on private property of another without
consent and purposely causes inconvenience to another person or
persons by unreasonably and physically obstructing:
a. Vehicular or pedestrian traffic; or
b. The free ingress or egress to or from a public or private place.
A. A person commits the offense of private peace disturbance if he/she is
on private property and unreasonably and purposely causes alarm to
another person or persons on the same premises by:
1. Threatening to commit a crime against any person; or
2. Fighting.
B. It shall be unlawful and an ordinance violation for any person to commit
an act of private peace disturbance.
A. For purposes of this Section, the following words shall have the
following meanings unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
115. State Law References—Similar provisions, §§574.010—574.020, RSMo.
116. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §574.040, RSMo.
117. Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.170
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.210
100:356
COURSE OF CONDUCT — A pattern of conduct composed of repeated
acts over a period of time, however short, that serves no legitimate
purpose. Such conduct may include, but is not limited to, following the
other person or unwanted communication or unwanted contact.
ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION — The origination, emission,
dissemination, transmission or reception of data, images, signals,
sounds or other intelligence or equivalence of intelligence of any nature
over any communications system by any method including, but not
limited to, a fiber optic, electronic, magnetic, optical, digital or analog
method. By way of example, "electronic communication" includes, but
is not limited to: electronic mail, Internet-based communications, pager
service or electronic text messaging.
ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE — Any instrument,
equipment, machine or other device that facilitates telecommunication
including, but not limited to, a computer, computer network, computer
chip, computer circuit, scanner, telephone, cellular telephone, pager,
personal communications device, transponder, receiver, radio, modem
or device that enables the use of a modem.
HARASSMENT — Engaging in a purposeful or knowing course of
conduct involving more than one (1) incident that alarms or causes
distress to another adult and serves no legitimate purpose. The course
of conduct must be such as would cause a reasonable adult to suffer
substantial emotional distress and must actually cause substantial
emotional distress to the petitioner. Such conduct might include, but is
not limited to:
1. Following another about in a public place or places;
Peering in the window or lingering outside the residence of
another; but does not include constitutionally protected activity.
2.
B. Harassment.
1. A person commits the offense of harassment if he or she:
a. Knowingly communicates a threat to commit any felony to
another person and in so doing frightens, intimidates, or
causes emotional distress to such other person; or
b. When communicating with another person, knowingly uses
coarse language offensive to one of average sensibility and
thereby puts such person in reasonable apprehension of
offensive physical contact or harm; or
c. Knowingly frightens, intimidates, or causes emotional distress
to another person by anonymously making a telephone call or
any electronic communication; or
d. Knowingly communicates with another person who is, or who
purports to be, seventeen (17) years of age or younger and in
Section
215.210
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.210
100:357
so doing and without good cause recklessly frightens,
intimidates, or causes emotional distress to such other person;
or
e. Knowingly makes repeated unwanted communication to
another person; or
f. Without good cause engages in any other act with the purpose
to frighten, intimidate, or cause emotional distress to another
person, cause such person to be frightened, intimidated, or
emotionally distressed, and such person's response to the act
is one of a person of average sensibilities considering the age
of such person.
2. Harassment is an ordinance violation unless:
a. Committed by a person twenty-one (21) years of age or older
against a person seventeen (17) years of age or younger; or
b. The person has previously pleaded guilty to or been found
guilty of a violation of this Section, or of any offense committed
in violation of any County or Municipal ordinance in any State,
any State law, any Federal law, or any military law which, if
committed in this State, would be chargeable or indictable as a
violation of any offense listed in this Subsection.
3. This Section shall not apply to activities of Federal, State, County,
or Municipal Law Enforcement Officers conducting investigations
of violation of Federal, State, County, or Municipal law.
C. Cyber-Harassment. It shall be unlawful for a person to perform any act
which is cyber-harassment. A person commits the offense of cyberharassment
if he/she:
1. With intent to harass, alarm, annoy, abuse, threaten, intimidate,
torment or embarrass any other person and under circumstances
not constituting harassment as described in Subsection (B) of this
Section, transmits or causes the transmission of an electronic
communication or knowingly permits an electronic communication
to be transmitted from an electronic communication device under
the person's control to such other person or a third (3rd) party:
a. Using any lewd, lascivious, indecent or obscene words, images
or language or suggesting the commission of any lewd or
lascivious act; or
b. Anonymously or repeatedly whether or not conversation
occurs; or
c. Threatening to inflict injury on the person or property of the
person communicated with or any member of his/her family or
household; or
Section
215.210
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.210
100:358
Section 215.220. Disturbance of Funeral or Burial Service.118 [Ord.
No. 13-198 §1, 10-1-2013]
Section 215.230. through Section 215.250. (Reserved)
2. Makes or causes to be made an electronic communication or
permits an electronic communication to be made from a electronic
communications device under the person's control with the intent
to harass, alarm, annoy, abuse, threaten, intimidate, torment or
embarrass any other person either by the direct action of the
person initiating the communication or through the actions of a
third (3rd) party, which third (3rd) party actions are instigated,
initiated, prompted or brought about by the person's
communication.
D. Any offense committed under this Section may be deemed to have been
committed either at the place from which the communication was made
or at the place where the communication was received.
E. This Section shall not apply to constitutionally protected activities
which include, but are not limited to, picketing or activities regulated
by the National Labor Relations Act, as amended, the Railway Labor
Act, as amended, or the Federal Employment Labor Management Act,
as amended.
A. No person shall knowingly picket or engage in other protest activities,
nor shall any association or corporation knowingly cause picketing or
other protest activities to occur, within three hundred (300) feet of any
residence, cemetery, funeral home, church, synagogue, or other
establishment or location during or within one (1) hour before or one
(1) hour after any actual funeral or burial service at that place.
B. As used in this Section, "other protest activities" means any action that
is disruptive or undertaken to disrupt or disturb a funeral or burial
service.
C. As used in this Section, "funeral" and "burial" services mean the
ceremonies and memorial services held in conjunction with the burial
or cremation of the dead, but this Section does not apply to processions
while they are in transit beyond any three-hundred-foot zone that is
established under Subsection (A) above.
118. Editor’s Note: Former Section 215.220, Unlawful Picketing of A Funeral, adopted
1-18-2011 by Ord. No. 11-11 §1, was repealed 7-2-2013 by Ord. No. 13-126 §1.
Section
215.210
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.230
100:359

DIVISION 2
Residency, Loitering and Activity Limitations For Certain Offenders
Section 215.260. Certain Offenders Not To Reside Within One
Thousand Feet of A School or Child Care Facility.119 [R.O. 2009
§131.10; Ord. No. 09-190, 11-3-2009; Ord. No. 10-88 §1, 5-6-2010]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person who, since May 6, 2010, has been or
hereafter has pleaded guilty or nolo contendere to or been convicted of
or been found guilty of:
1. Violating any of the provisions of Chapter 566, RSMo., or the
provisions of Section 568.020(2), RSMo., incest; Section 568.045,
RSMo., endangering the welfare of a child in the first decree;
Section 568.080(2), RSMo., use of a child in a sexual performance;
Section 568.090, RSMo., promoting a sexual performance by a
child; Section 573.023, RSMo., sexual exploitation of a minor;
Section 573.025, RSMo., promoting child pornography in the first
degree; Section 573.035, RSMo., promoting child pornography in
the second degree; Section 573.037, RSMo., possession of child
pornography; or Section 573.040, RSMo., furnishing pornographic
material to minors; or
2. Any offense in any other State or foreign country or under Federal,
tribal or military jurisdiction which, if committed in this State,
would be a violation listed in this Section;
to reside within one thousand (1,000) feet of any public school
as defined in Section 160.011, RSMo., or any private school
giving instruction in a grade or grades not higher than the
twelfth (12th) grade or child care facility as defined in Section
210.201, RSMo., which is in existence at the time the individual
begins to reside at the location.
B. If such person has already established a residence and a public school,
a private school or child care facility is subsequently built or placed
within one thousand (1,000) feet of such person's residence, then such
person shall, within one (1) week of the opening of such public school,
private school or child care facility, notify the Chief of Police where such
public school, private school or child care facility is located that he/she
is now residing within one thousand (1,000) feet of such public school,
private school or child care facility and shall provide verifiable proof to
the Chief of Police that he/she resided there prior to the opening of such
public school, private school or child care facility.
C. For purposes of this Section, "resides" means sleeps in a residence,
which may include more than one (1) location and may be mobile or
transitory.
119. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §566.147, RSMo.
Section
215.260
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.260
100:361
Section 215.270. Certain Offenders Not To Be Present Within Five
Hundred Feet of Child Care Facilities.120 [R.O. 2009 §131.11; Ord.
No. 09-190, 11-3-2009; Ord. No. 10-88 §1, 5-6-2010]
Section 215.280. Certain Offenders Not To Be Present Within Five
Hundred Feet of School Property, Exception — Permission Required
For Parents or Guardians Who Are Offenders, Procedure —
Penalty.121 [R.O. 2009 §131.12; Ord. No. 09-190, 11-3-2009; Ord. No.
10-88 §1, 5-6-2010]
D. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall be
punished as provided in Section 100.150.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person who, since May 6, 2010, has pleaded
guilty or nolo contendere to or been convicted of or been found guilty
of:
1. Violating any of the provisions of Chapter 566, RSMo., or the
provisions of Section 568.020(2), RSMo., incest; Section 568.045,
RSMo., endangering the welfare of a child in the first degree;
Section 568.080(2), RSMo., use of a child in a sexual performance;
Section 568.090, RSMo., promoting a sexual performance by a
child; Section 573.023, RSMo., sexual exploitation of a minor;
Section 573.025, RSMo., promoting child pornography in the first
degree; Section 573.035, RSMo., promoting child pornography in
the second degree; Section 573.037, RSMo., possession of child
pornography; or Section 573.040, RSMo., furnishing pornographic
material to minors; or
2. Any offense in any other State or foreign country or under Federal,
tribal or military jurisdiction which, if committed in this State,
would be a violation listed in this Section;
to knowingly be physically present in or loiter within five
hundred (500) feet of or to approach, contact or communicate
with any child under eighteen (18) years of age in any child
care facility building, on the real property comprising any child
care facility when persons under the age of eighteen (18) are
present in the building, on the grounds or in the conveyance,
unless the offender is a parent, legal guardian or custodian of
a student present in the building or on the grounds.
B. For purposes of this Section, "child care facility" shall have the same
meaning as such term is defined in Section 210.201, RSMo.
C. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall be
punished as provided in Section 100.150.
120. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §566.148, RSMo.
121. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §566.149, RSMo.
Section
215.260
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.280
100:362
A. It shall be unlawful for any person who, since May 6, 2010, has pleaded
guilty or nolo contendere to or been convicted of or been found guilty
of:
1. Violating any of the provisions of Chapter 566, RSMo., or the
provisions of Section 568.020(2), RSMo., incest; Section 568.045,
RSMo., endangering the welfare of a child in the first degree;
Section 568.080(2), RSMo., use of a child in a sexual performance;
Section 568.090, RSMo., promoting a sexual performance by a
child; Section 573.023, RSMo., sexual exploitation of a minor;
Section 573.025, RSMo., promoting child pornography in the first
degree; Section 573.035, RSMo., promoting child pornography in
the second degree; Section 573.037, RSMo., possession of child
pornography; or Section 573.040, RSMo., furnishing pornographic
material to minors; or
2. Any offense in any other State or foreign country or under Federal,
tribal or military jurisdiction which, if committed in this State,
would be a violation listed in this Section;
to be present in or loiter within five hundred (500) feet of any
school building, on real property comprising any school or in
any conveyance owned, leased or contracted by a school to
transport students to or from school or a school-related activity
when persons under the age of eighteen (18) are present in
the building, on the grounds or in the conveyance, unless the
offender is a parent, legal guardian or custodian of a student
present in the building and has met the conditions set forth in
this Subsection.
B. No parent, legal guardian or custodian who has pleaded guilty or nolo
contendere to or been convicted of or been found guilty of violating any
of the offenses listed in Subsection (A)(1) shall be present in any school
building, on real property comprising any school or in any conveyance
owned, leased or contracted by a school to transport students to or
from school or a school-related activity when persons under the age of
eighteen (18) are present in the building, on the grounds or in the
conveyance unless the parent, legal guardian or custodian has
permission to be present from the superintendent or school board or in
the case of a private school from the principal. In the case of a public
school, if permission is granted, the superintendent or school board
president must inform the principal of the school where the sex
offender will be present. Permission may be granted by the
Superintendent, School Board or in the case of a private school from the
principal for more than one (1) event at a time, such as a series of
events, however, the parent, legal guardian or custodian must obtain
permission for any other event he/she wishes to attend for which he/she
has not yet had permission granted.
C. Regardless of the person's knowledge of his/her proximity to school
property or a school-related activity, any person violating any of the
Section
215.280
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.280
100:363
Section 215.290. Certain Offenders Not To Be Present Within Five
Hundred Feet of Public Parks or Swimming Pools.122 [R.O. 2009
§131.13; Ord. No. 09-190, 11-3-2009; Ord. No. 10-88 §1, 5-6-2010]
Section 215.300. Certain Offenders Not To Serve As Athletic Coach,
Manager or Trainer For Sports Team With Minor Member.123 [R.O.
2009 §131.14; Ord. No. 09-190, 11-3-2009; Ord. No. 10-88 §1,
5-6-2010]
provisions of this Section shall be punished as provided in Section
100.150.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person who, since May 6, 2010, has pleaded
guilty to or been convicted of or been found guilty of:
1. Violating any of the provisions of Chapter 566, RSMo., or the
provisions of Section 568.020(2), RSMo., incest; Section 568.045,
RSMo., endangering the welfare of a child in the first degree;
Section 568.080(2), RSMo., use of a child in a sexual performance;
Section 568.090, RSMo., promoting a sexual performance by a
child; Section 573.023, RSMo., sexual exploitation of a minor;
Section 573.025, RSMo., promoting child pornography; or Section
573.040, RSMo., furnishing pornographic material to minors; or
2. Any offense in any other State or foreign country or under Federal,
tribal or military jurisdiction which, if committed in this State,
would be a violation listed in this Section;
to be present in or loiter within five hundred (500) feet of
any real property comprising any public park with playground
equipment or a public swimming pool.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall be
punished as provided in Section 100.150.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person who, since May 6, 2010, has pleaded
guilty to or been convicted of or been found guilty of:
1. Violating any of the provisions of Chapter 566, RSMo., or the
provisions of Section 568.020(2), RSMo., incest; Section 568.045,
RSMo., endangering the welfare of a child in the first degree;
Section 568.080(2), RSMo., use of a child in a sexual performance;
Section 568.090, RSMo., promoting a sexual performance by a
child; Section 573.023, RSMo., sexual exploitation of a minor;
Section 573.025, RSMo., promoting child pornography; or Section
573.040, RSMo., furnishing pornographic material to minors; or
122. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §566.150, RSMo.
123. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §566.155, RSMo.
Section
215.280
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.300
100:364
Section 215.310. through Section 215.330. (Reserved)
2. Any offense in any other State or foreign country or under Federal,
tribal or military jurisdiction which, if committed in this State,
would be a violation listed in this Section;
to serve as an athletic coach, manager or athletic trainer for
any sports team in which a child less than seventeen (17) years
of age is a member.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall be
punished as provided in Section 100.150.
Section
215.300
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.310
100:365

DIVISION 3
Minors — Curfew
Section 215.340. Responsibility of Parents.124 [R.O. 2009 §131.20;
CC 1981 §20-17]
Whenever a minor shall have been arrested for the violation of any provision
of this Code of Ordinances or any other ordinance of the City, the parent or
guardian of such minor, if known, shall be summoned to appear and defend
such minor.
Section 215.350. Curfew Established. [R.O. 2009 §131.21; CC 1981
§20-29; Ord. No. 3500, 8-9-1967; Ord. No. 79-28, 3-28-1979; Ord.
No. 81-81, 9-2-1981]
No minor under the age of fifteen (15) years shall be in any automobile
within the City nor loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public
streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, other public grounds,
public places and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment,
vacant lots or other unsupervised places between the hours of 10:00 P.M.
and 4:00 A.M. nor any persons under the age of seventeen (17) years in
such places between the hours of 12:00 Midnight and 4:00 A.M.; provided
however, that the provisions of this Section shall not apply to such minor
accompanied by his/her parent, guardian or other adult person having the
care and custody of such minor.
Section 215.360. Parents Responsible For Minor Observing Curfew.
[R.O. 2009 §131.22; CC 1981 §20-30; Ord. No. 3500, 8-9-1967; Ord.
No. 79-28, 3-28-1979]
No parent, guardian or other adult having the care and custody of a minor
shall knowingly permit such minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or
upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, other
public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement
and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places between the
hours of 12:30 A.M. and 4:00 A.M immediately following; provided however,
that the provisions of this Section shall not apply to such minor
accompanied by his/her parent, guardian or other adult person having the
care and custody of such minor or a minor upon an emergency errand or
legitimate business or activity directed by such minor's parent, guardian or
other adult person having the care and custody of such minor.
Section 215.370. Procedure For Curfew Violation. [R.O. 2009
§131.23; CC 1981 §20-31; Ord. No. 3500, 8-9-1967; Ord. No. 79-28,
3-28-1979]
A. Any Police Officer, upon finding a minor in violation of Section 215.350,
shall ascertain the name and address of such minor and warn the minor
124. State Law Reference—When prosecution of children under general law authorized,
§211.071, RSMo.
Section
215.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.370
100:367
Section 215.380. Parental Responsibility. [R.O. 2009 §131.24; Ord.
No. 04-196, 8-13-2004]
Section 215.390. through Section 215.410. (Reserved)
that he/she is in violation of curfew and shall direct the minor to
proceed at once to his/her home or usual place of abode. The Police
Officer shall report such action to the desk officer of the Police
Department who in turn shall notify the parents, guardian or person
having the care and custody of such minor.
B. If such minor refuses to heed such warning or direction by any Police
Officer, refuses to give his/her correct name and address or if the minor
has been warned on a previous occasion that he/she is in violation of
curfew, he/she shall be taken to the Police Department and the parent,
guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of such
minor shall be notified to come and take charge of the minor. If the
parents, guardian or other adult person above cannot be located or fails
to come and take charge of the minor, the minor shall be released to the
juvenile authorities.
A. Whenever a minor shall be arrested or detained for the commission of
any criminal act within the City, the St. Charles Police Department
shall, as soon as possible thereafter, deliver written notice to the
minor's parent of the arrest or detention and such notice shall advise
the parent of his/her responsibility under this Section. The notice shall
be in such form as to be signed by the notified parent signifying receipt
thereof. If the parent refuses to sign said notice, the notifying Police
Officer shall indicate such refusal on the notice.
B. No parent shall fail to exercise customary and effective control over a
minor so as to contribute to, cause or tend to cause a minor to commit
any criminal act. Written parental notice as defined in Subsection (A) of
this Section shall be prima facie evidence of parental neglect if the
minor commits a second (2nd) or successive violation of any criminal
act.
C. Each violation of the provisions of this Section shall constitute a
separate offense. Any person who shall violate this Section shall be
subject to imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days and/or a fine
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first (1st)
violation, not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second
(2nd) violation and not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for any
successive violation. In addition, the court may, as a condition of any
probation granted to any parent found guilty of violation of Subsection
(B) of this Section, order the defendant to make restitution to any
person who has been damaged by the misconduct of the minor in an
amount not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
Section
215.370
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.390
100:368
DIVISION 4
Congregating On Business and Commercial Establishments
Section 215.420. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §131.35; CC 1981 §20-122;
Ord. No. 88-141, 7-13-1988]
For the purposes of this Division, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
BUSINESS — A place where service or items are offered for sale or orders
taken, which has parking facilities for vehicles. It shall be comprised of the
entire premises, including parking lots and areas for ingress and egress.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any building and the grounds used
therewith or any tract of land where services are offered to the public for a
consideration or things are sold or are offered for sale or orders are taken
for the sale thereof to the public.
TRANSACTING BUSINESS — Engaging in a transaction with the proprietor,
agents or employees of the business, which transaction is normally
incidental to the business for which the public is invited and for which the
premises are licensed.
Section 215.430. Congregating At Commercial Establishments.
[R.O. 2009 §131.36; CC 1981 §20-123; Ord. No. 88-141, 7-13-1988]
Section 215.440. Remaining On Closed Parking Lots. [R.O. 2009
§131.37; CC 1981 §20-124; Ord. No. 88-141, 7-13-1988]
A. Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for persons to intentionally congregate
upon the grounds or within the buildings of a commercial establishment
or upon public ways immediately adjacent thereto so as to block the
aisles, doorways or other passageways into, out of or through the
grounds or buildings of such commercial establishment. No persons
shall congregate in crowds of three (3) or more outside vehicles on
business premises when such persons are not transacting business on
the premises.
B. Presumption Of Intent To Congregate Unlawfully. If any persons shall
be congregated so as to block the aisles, doorways or other
passageways into, out of or through such grounds or buildings and they
shall be ordered by the manager or other person in charge of such
commercial establishment to leave and they shall fail or refuse to do so,
it shall be prima facie proof of their intent to unlawfully congregate
under the provisions of this Section.
A. Prohibited. No person, except the owner, tenant or other person in
possession or their invitees, shall be upon any public or private parking
lot, nor upon any parking lot provided for the customers, business
invitees or employees of any commercial or industrial establishment at
any time any such public or private parking lot shall be closed to use by
Section
215.420
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.440
100:369
Section 215.450. Consumption or Possession of Alcoholic
Beverages. [R.O. 2009 §131.38; CC 1981 §20-125; Ord. No. 88-141,
7-13-1988]
Section 215.460. Regulating Motor Vehicles On Premises. [R.O.
2009 §131.39; CC 1981 §20-126; Ord. No. 88-141, 7-13-1988; Ord.
No. 98-254, 6-17-1998]
the public or any such commercial or industrial lot shall be closed to
use by customers, business invitees and employees.
B. Presumption Of Violation. Any such person found upon any such lot or
facility at any time that signs have been previously erected giving
notice that the lot is closed to use shall be presumptively upon the lot in
violation of this Section, which presumption shall be rebuttable.
A. No patron or other person on a parking lot and areas for ingress and
egress of a business, whether in or out of an automobile, shall drink
from or possess any open bottle, can or other receptacle containing an
alcoholic beverage.
B. Alcoholic beverages shall include "intoxicating liquor" as defined in
Section 600.010.
A. Blocking Entrances Or Exits To Premises. No person shall stop, stand or
park a motor vehicle in a street at or near the entrance to or exit from a
business, except in an authorized parking space adjacent to the curb of
such street and in such manner as not to interfere with other vehicles
upon such street.
B. Parking On Grounds Or In Garages. It shall be unlawful for any person
to park a motor vehicle upon the grounds or within any garage of any
commercial establishment other than in the designated parking areas.
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to move a motor
vehicle over which that person has control when that vehicle shall be
interfering with the movement of other motor vehicles on the drives or
other usual passageways upon the grounds or within the garage of a
commercial establishment.
C. Congregating And Obstructing Public Parking Lots.
1. Definition. For purposes of this Subsection, "public parking lot"
shall mean any parking lot located within the City of which is
owned and/or maintained by the City or any other agency or
political subdivision of the State of Missouri.
2. It shall be unlawful for persons to intentionally congregate upon
the grounds of a public parking lot or upon any public ways
immediately adjacent thereto, so as to block the aisles or other
passageways into, out of or through the grounds of such public
parking lot in a manner which obstructs the free flow of traffic upon
the parking lot.
Section
215.440
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.460
100:370
Section 215.470. Signs Prerequisite To Enforcement. [R.O. 2009
§131.40; CC 1981 §20-127; Ord. No. 88-141, 7-13-1988]
Before Section 215.430 may be enforced by the City, a business shall post
on the premises in conspicuous locations, clearly visible signs, reasonably
likely to come to the attention of a person entering upon the premises,
bearing the following statement:
"This lot for customers only. No congregating or lingering on this lot."
Section 215.480. Cruising Prohibited. [R.O. 2009 §131.41; CC 1981
§20-128(a—c); Ord. No. 91-98, 5-22-1991; Ord. No. 92-207,
9-3-1992]
Section 215.490. Penalty. [R.O. 2009 §131.99; CC 1981 §§20-32,
20-128(d); Ord. No. 91-98, 5-22-1991; Ord. No. 92-207, 9-3-1992]
3. No persons shall congregate in crowds of three (3) or more outside
vehicles on public parking lots, except for parking or retrieving
vehicles pursuant to the purpose of the public parking lot.
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
CONGESTED TRAFFIC — Traffic on any street or driving aisle within
a parking lot serving commercial establishments where a motor vehicle
cannot readily move forward because traffic speed is slowed to less
than ten (10) miles per hour and the delay in movement is due to the
position of other motor vehicles.
CRUISING — The repetitive driving of any motor vehicle past a certain
location which has congested traffic.
B. No person shall engage in cruising, as herein defined, on any street or
any driving aisle of a parking lot serving commercial establishments,
which has been posted as a "no cruising" zone.
C. Before Subsection (B) of this Section may be enforced by the City,
clearly visible signs shall be posted on the street or driving aisle in
conspicuous locations, reasonably likely to come to the attention of a
person entering upon the premises, bearing the words "Cruising
Prohibited" and further reciting the number of this Section.
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter for which
no other penalty is set forth shall be subject to the penalty set forth in
Section 100.150 of this Code of Ordinances.
B. Any minor violating the applicable provisions of Division 3 set forth in
Sections 215.340 et seq., shall be dealt with in accordance with the
Juvenile Court Law and Procedure. Any parent, guardian or other adult
person having the care and custody of such minor violating this Chapter
Section
215.460
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.490
100:371
Section 215.500. through Section 215.550. (Reserved)
shall, after having been previously notified under Section 215.370, be
punished as provided by Section 100.150.
C. Any person convicted of violating Section 215.480 as a first (1st) offense
shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00);
for a second (2nd) conviction within six (6) months, the fine shall be not
less than two hundred dollars ($200.00); and for a third (3rd) or further
conviction within one (1) year, the fine shall be not less than three
hundred dollars ($300.00).
Section
215.490
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.500
100:372
Article III
Offenses Against Justice And Administration125
Section 215.560. Attempt.126 [R.O. 2009 §132.01; CC 1981 §20-1;
Ord. No. 75-21, 5-7-1975]
Section 215.570. Conspiracy.127 [R.O. 2009 §132.02; CC 1981 §20-2;
Ord. No. 75-21, 5-7-1975]
A. A person is guilty of an attempt to commit an offense, ordinance
violation or unlawful act when, with the purpose of committing the
offense, ordinance violation or unlawful act, he/she does any act which
is a substantial step towards the commission of the offense. A
"substantial step" is conduct which is strongly corroborative of the
firmness of the actor's purpose to complete the commission of the
offense.
B. It is no defense to a prosecution under this Section that the offense,
ordinance violation or unlawful act attempted was, under the actual
attendant circumstances, factually or legally impossible of commission,
if such offense could have been committed had the attendant
circumstances been as the actor believed them to be.
C. It shall be unlawful for a person to attempt to commit an offense,
ordinance violation or unlawful act.
A. A person is guilty of conspiracy with another person or persons to
commit an offense, ordinance violation or unlawful act if, with the
purpose of promoting or facilitating its commission, he/she agrees with
such other person or persons that they or one (1) or more of them will
engage in conduct which constitutes such offense, ordinance violation
or unlawful act.
B. If a person guilty of conspiracy knows that a person with whom he/she
conspires to commit an offense, ordinance violation or unlawful act has
conspired with another person or persons to commit the same offense,
ordinance violation or unlawful act, he/she is guilty of conspiring with
such other person or persons to commit such offense, ordinance
violation or unlawful act, whether or not he/she knows their identity.
C. If a person conspires to commit a number of offenses, ordinance
violations or unlawful acts, he/she is guilty of only one (1) conspiracy so
long as such multiple offenses, ordinance violations or unlawful acts are
the object of the same agreement.
D. No person may be convicted of conspiracy to commit an offense,
ordinance violation or unlawful act unless an overt act in pursuance of
125. Cross Reference—As To Penalty, §100.150.
126. State Law Reference—Similar state law, §564.011, RSMo.
127. State Law Reference—Similar state law, §564.016, RSMo.
Section
215.560
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.570
100:373
Section 215.580. False Impersonation.128
such conspiracy is alleged and proved to have been done by him/her or
by a person with whom he/she conspired.
E. No one shall be convicted of conspiracy if, after conspiring to commit
the offense, ordinance violation or unlawful act, he/she prevented the
accomplishment of the objectives of the conspiracy under
circumstances manifesting a renunciation of his/her criminal purpose.
F. The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of
renunciation of criminal purpose under Subsection (E) of this Section.
G. For the purpose of time limitations on prosecutions:
1. "Conspiracy" is a continuing course of conduct which terminates
when the offense, ordinance violation or unlawful act which is its
object is committed or the agreement that it be committed is
abandoned by the defendant and by those with whom he/she
conspired.
2. If an individual abandons the agreement, the conspiracy is
terminated as to him/her only if he/she advises those with whom he/
she has conspired of his/her abandonment or he/she informs the
law enforcement authorities of the existence of the conspiracy and
of his/her participation in it.
H. A person may not be charged, convicted or sentenced on the basis of
the same course of conduct of both the actual commission of an offense,
ordinance violation or unlawful act and a conspiracy to commit that
offense, ordinance violation or unlawful act.
I. It shall be unlawful for a person to conspire with another person to
commit an offense, ordinance violation or unlawful act.
A. A person commits the offense of false impersonation if such person:
1. Falsely represents himself/herself to be a public servant with
purpose to induce another to submit to his/her pretended official
authority or to rely upon his/her pretended official acts, and
a. Performs an act in that pretended capacity; or
b. Causes another to act in reliance upon his/her pretended
official authority.
2. Falsely represents himself/herself to be a person licensed to
practice or engage in any profession for which a license is required
by the laws of this State with purpose to induce another to rely
upon such representation, and
128. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §575.120, RSMo.
Section
215.570
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.580
100:374
Section 215.590. Aiding Escape of A Prisoner.
a. Performs an act in that pretended capacity; or
b. Causes another to act in reliance upon such representation; or
3. Upon being arrested, falsely represents himself/herself, to a Law
Enforcement Officer, with the first and last name, date of birth or
Social Security number, or a substantial number of identifying
factors or characteristics as that of another person that results in
the filing of a report or record of arrest or conviction for an
infraction, ordinance violation, misdemeanor or felony that
contains the first and last name, date of birth and Social Security
number, or a substantial number of identifying factors or
characteristics to that of such other person as to cause such other
person to be identified as the actual person arrested or convicted.
B. If a violation of Subsection (A)(3) hereof is discovered prior to any
conviction of the person actually arrested for an underlying charge,
then the prosecuting attorney, bringing any action on the underlying
charge shall notify the court thereof, and the court shall order the falseidentifying
factors ascribed to the person actually arrested as are
contained in the arrest and court records amended to correctly and
accurately identify the defendant and shall expunge the incorrect and
inaccurate identifying factors from the arrest and court records.
C. Any person who is the victim of a false impersonation and whose
identity has been falsely reported in arrest or conviction records may
move for expungement and correction of said records under the
procedures set forth in Section 610.123, RSMo. Upon a showing that a
substantial number of identifying factors of the victim was falsely
ascribed to the person actually arrested or convicted, the court shall
order the false identifying factors ascribed to the person actually
arrested as are contained in the arrest and court records amended to
correctly and accurately identify the defendant and shall expunge the
incorrect and inaccurate factors from the arrest and court records.
A. A person commits the offense of aiding escape of a prisoner if the
person:
1. Introduces into any place of confinement any deadly weapon or
dangerous instrument, or other thing adapted or designed for use
in making an escape, with the purpose of facilitating the escape of
any prisoner confined therein, or of facilitating the commission of
any other crime; or
2. Assists or attempts to assist any prisoner who is being held in
custody or confinement for the purpose of effecting the prisoner's
escape from custody or confinement.
Section
215.580
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.600
100:375
Section 215.600. Assault of A Law Enforcement Officer, Police
Services Officer, Emergency Personnel, Highway Worker or
Probation and Parole Officer.129
Section 215.610. False Reports.130
A. A person commits the offense of assault of a Law Enforcement Officer,
Police Services Officer, Emergency Personnel, highway worker in a
construction zone or work zone, or Probation and Parole Officer if:
1. Such person recklessly causes physical injury to a Law
Enforcement Officer, Police Services Officer, Emergency Personnel,
highway worker in a construction zone or work zone or Probation
and Parole Officer; or
2. Such person purposely places a Law Enforcement Officer, Police
Services Officer, Emergency Personnel, highway worker in a
construction zone or work zone, or Probation and Parole Officer in
apprehension of immediate physical injury; or
3. Such person knowingly causes or attempts to cause physical
contact with a Law Enforcement Officer, Police Services Officer,
Emergency Personnel, highway worker in a construction zone or
work zone, or Probation and Parole Officer without the consent of
the Law Enforcement Officer, Police Services Officer, Emergency
Personnel, highway worker in a construction zone or work zone, or
Probation and Parole Officer.
B. As used in this Section, "emergency personnel" means any paid or
volunteer firefighter, emergency room or trauma center personnel, or
emergency medical technician as defined in Subdivisions (15), (16),
(17) and (18) of Section 190.100, RSMo.
C. As used in this Section, the term "Police Services Officer" includes any
jailor or Police Services Officer of the State or any political subdivision
of the State.
D. As used in this Section, the term "highway worker", "construction zone"
or "work zone" shall have the same meaning as such terms are defined
in Section 304.580, RSMo.
E. Assault of a Law Enforcement Officer, Police Services Officer,
Emergency Personnel, highway worker in a construction zone or work
zone, or Probation and Parole Officer is an ordinance violation.
A. A person commits the offense of making a false report if he/she
knowingly:
129. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
130. State Law Reference—Similar state law, §575.080, RSMo.
Section
215.600
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.610
100:376
Section 215.620. False Bomb Report.131 [R.O. 2009 §132.07; CC
1981 §20-53]
Section 215.630. Resisting or Interfering With Arrest, Detention or
Stop.132
1. Gives false information to any person for the purpose of implicating
another person in a crime or offense; or
2. Makes a false report to a Law Enforcement Officer that a crime or
offense has occurred or is about to occur; or
3. Makes a false report or causes a false report to be made to a Law
Enforcement Officer, security officer, Fire Department or other
organization, official or volunteer which deals with emergencies
involving danger to life or property that a fire or other incident
calling for an emergency response has occurred or is about to
occur.
B. It is a defense to a prosecution under Subsection (A) of this Section that
the actor retracted the false statement or report before the Law
Enforcement Officer or any other person took substantial action in
reliance thereon.
C. The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue of retraction
under Subsection (B) of this Section.
A. A person commits the ordinance violation of making a false bomb report
if he/she knowingly makes a false report or causes a false report to be
made to any person that a bomb or other explosive has been placed in
any public or private place or vehicle.
B. It shall be unlawful and an ordinance violation for any person to make a
false bomb report.
A. A person commits the offense of resisting or interfering with arrest,
detention or stop if, knowing that a Law Enforcement Officer is making
an arrest or attempting to lawfully detain or stop an individual or
vehicle, or the person reasonably should know that a Law Enforcement
Officer is making an arrest or attempting to lawfully detain or lawfully
stop an individual or vehicle, for the purpose of preventing the officer
from effecting the arrest, stop or detention, the person:
1. Resists the arrest, stop or detention of such person by using or
threatening the use of violence or physical force or by fleeing from
such officer; or
131. State Law Reference—Similar state law, §575.090, RSMo.
132. Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.610
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.630
100:377
Section 215.635. Interfering With Law Enforcement Officers. [Ord.
No. 12-131 §1, 7-25-2012]
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly hinder, obstruct, willfully
fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of, or otherwise
interfere with any Law Enforcement Officer in the discharge of the officer's
official duties, or to attempt to rescue from such officer any person in the
officer's custody, or to aid in the escape of, or set at liberty, any person
while in the officer's custody. For purposes of this Section, the words "Law
Enforcement Officer" shall include a police service technician.
Section 215.640. Possession of A Simulated Police Vehicle
Prohibited. [R.O. 2009 §132.09; Ord. No. 07-18, 1-19-2007; Ord. No.
07-54, 3-12-2007]
2. Interferes with the arrest, stop or detention of another person by
using or threatening the use of violence, physical force or physical
interference.
B. This Section applies to:
1. Arrests, stops or detentions with or without warrants;
2. Arrests, stops or detentions for any crime, infraction or ordinance
violation; and
3. Arrests for warrants issued by a court or a probation and parole
officer.
C. A person is presumed to be fleeing a vehicle stop if that person
continues to operate a motor vehicle after that person has seen or
should have seen clearly visible emergency lights or has heard or
should have heard an audible signal emanating from the law
enforcement vehicle pursuing that person.
D. It is no defense to a prosecution under Subsection (A) of this Section
that the Law Enforcement Officer was acting unlawfully in making the
arrest. However, nothing in this Section shall be construed to bar civil
suits for unlawful arrest.
A. A person commits the ordinance violation of possession of a simulated
police vehicle if he/she possesses a simulated police vehicle.
B. Definitions. For purposes of this Section, "simulated police vehicle"
shall mean a motor vehicle which has:
1. The text or similar marking "Police", "dial 911" or "City of St.
Charles" painted or affixed thereto; or
2. An emergency light affixed thereto and which is not a motor vehicle
used as an emergency vehicle pursuant to Section 304.022.4,
RSMo.
Section
215.630
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.640
100:378
Section 215.650. through Section 215.690. (Reserved)
C. It shall be a defense to prosecution under Subsection (A) of this Section
if the model year of the simulated Police vehicle is before the year 1960.
D. The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue under
Subsection (C) of this Section.
E. It shall be unlawful and an ordinance violation for any person to possess
a simulated police vehicle in the City.
Section
215.640
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.650
100:379

Article IV
Offenses Against Morals133
DIVISION 1
General Provisions
Section 215.700. Bathhouses and Massage Parlors.134 [R.O. 2009
§133.01; CC 1981 §20-157; Ord. No. 74-24, 6-5-1974]
The operation of a bathhouse, massage parlor or masseur wherein
employees, agents or servants engage in acts stimulating sexual organs of
a customer is prohibited within the corporate limits of the City.
Section 215.710. Bathing While Insufficiently Clothed.135 [R.O. 2009
§133.02; CC 1981 §20-158]
It shall be unlawful for any person to bathe, wash or swim when nude or
insufficiently clothed in the Missouri River or other watercourse, pond, lake
or pool of water within the City.
Section 215.720. Indecent Exposure (Sexual Misconduct).136
Section 215.730. Lewd Dancing.137 [R.O. 2009 §133.04; CC 1981
§§20-172—20-175; Ord. No. 81-90, 11-3-1981]
A. A person commits the offense of indecent exposure (sexual misconduct)
if such person:
1. Exposes his/her genitals under circumstances in which he/she
knows that his/her conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm;
2. Has sexual contact in the presence of a third (3rd) person or
persons under circumstances in which he/she knows that such
conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm; or
3. Has sexual intercourse or deviate sexual intercourse in a public
place in the presence of a third (3rd) person.
A. Lewd Dancing Or Performance Prohibited. No person shall produce,
promote, permit or perform any pornographic or lewd dancing or
exhibition before any audience for pecuniary gain.
B. Violation. If any person, persons or corporation holding an alcoholic
beverage license is believed by the Chief of Police to condone, promote,
allow or sponsor any persons violating Subsection (A) of this Section,
133. Cross Reference—As To Penalty, §100.150.
134. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
135. Cross References—As to bathing and swimming in city parks, §255.090; as to penalty,
§100.150.
136. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
137. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
215.700
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.730
100:381
Section 215.740. Prostitution and Related Offenses.138 [R.O. 2009
§133.05; CC 1981 §§20-162—20-165; Ord. No. 80-28, 2-13-1980]
the Chief of Police may give notice to any person, persons or
corporation's representative to appear before the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the City Council to show cause why the alcoholic
beverage license of the establishment in which the violation took place
should not be suspended or revoked.
C. Suspension Or Revocation Of License.
1. The City Clerk and Mayor shall be immediately notified of any such
notice by the Chief of Police; and the City Clerk shall cause such to
be placed on the Council agenda and notices to be given to each
Council member.
2. The Council may suspend or revoke such license at the meeting or
suspend such license and set a date for hearing within ten (10) days
to determine if such license shall be revoked.
D. Arrest And Removal. Any person found in violation of Subsection (A) of
this Section shall be subject to arrest and removal from the premises.
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this Section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
PATRONIZING PROSTITUTION — A person patronizes prostitution if:
PROSTITUTION — A person commits prostitution if he/she engages or
offers or agrees to engage in sexual conduct with another person in
return for something of value to be received by the person or by a third
(3rd) person.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Sexual conduct occurs when there is:
Pursuant to a prior understanding, he/she gives something of value
to another person as compensation for that person or a third (3rd)
person having engaged in sexual conduct with him/her or with
another; or
1.
He/she gives or agrees to give something of value to another
person on an understanding that, in return therefor, that person or
a third (3rd) person will engage in sexual conduct with him/her or
with another; or
2.
He/she solicits or requests another person to engage in sexual
conduct with him/her or with another, or to secure a third (3rd)
person to engage in sexual conduct with him/her or with another,
in return for something of value.
3.
138. Cross References—As to nuisances, §§220.020 et seq.; as to penalty, §100.150.
Section
215.730
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.740
100:382
Section 215.750. Entering Upon An Excursion Gambling Boat.139
[R.O. 2009 §133.06; Ord. No. 94-219, 9-7-1994]
SOMETHING OF VALUE — Any money or property or any token, object
or article exchangeable for money or property.
Sexual intercourse which means any penetration, however slight,
of the female sex organ by the male sex organ, whether or not an
emission results; or
1.
Deviate sexual intercourse which means any sexual act involving
the genitals of one person and the mouth, hand, tongue or anus of
another person; or
2.
Sexual contact which means any touching, manual or otherwise, of
the anus or genitals of one person by another, done for the purpose
of arousing or gratifying sexual desire of either party.
3.
B. Offenses.
1. It shall be unlawful for a person to perform an act of prostitution.
2. It shall be unlawful for a person to patronize prostitution.
C. Defenses. In any prosecution for prostitution or patronizing a
prostitute, the sex of the two (2) parties or prospective parties to the
sexual conduct engaged in, contemplated or solicited is immaterial and
it is no defense that:
1. Both persons were of the same sex; or
2. The person who received, agreed to receive or solicited something
of value was a male and the person who agreed or offered to give
something of value was a female.
D. Prostitution Houses Deemed Public Nuisances. Any room, building or
other structure regularly used for sexual conduct for pay, as defined in
this Section, or any unlawful prostitution activity prohibited by this
Division 1 is a public nuisance.
A. For the purpose of this Section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
EXCURSION GAMBLING BOAT — A boat, ferry or other floating facility
licensed by the Missouri Gambling Commission on which gambling
games are allowed.
B. No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall enter upon or into
those portions of an excursion gambling boat where gambling is
conducted or where alcoholic beverages are located.
139. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
215.740
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.750
100:383
Section 215.760. Urinating/Defecating in Public Prohibited. [R.O.
2009 §133.07; Ord. No. 97-30, 1-21-1997]
Section 215.770. through Section 215.790. (Reserved)
C. This provision shall not apply to an employee of the licensed operator of
the excursion gambling boat who is at least eighteen (18) years of age
and who is performing job duties prescribed for that employee.
A. No person shall urinate or defecate in, upon or from any public street,
sidewalk, alley, parking lot or parking facility, public building, structure
or publicly maintained facility or in any place open to the public and
exposed to public view or on private property and exposed to public
view. This Section shall not apply to urination or defecation in any
restroom or other facility designed for the sanitary disposal of human
waste.
B. Any person violating the provisions of Subsection (A) of this Section
shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or by
imprisonment in jail not exceeding three (3) months, or by both fine and
imprisonment.
Section
215.750
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.770
100:384
DIVISION 2
Pornography and Related Offenses
Section 215.800. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §133.20; CC 1981 §20-168;
Ord. No. 90-153, 6-21-1990]
For the purpose of this Division, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CHILD PORNOGRAPHY —
DISPLAYS PUBLICLY — Exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting or in any
fashion displaying in any location, whether public or private, an item in
such a manner that it may be readily seen and its content or character
distinguished by normal unaided vision viewing it from the street, highway
or public sidewalk or from the property of others or from any portion of the
person's store or the exhibitor's store or property when items and material
other than this material are offered for sale or rent to the public.
EXPLICIT SEXUAL MATERIAL — Any pictorial or three-dimensional
material depicting human masturbation, deviate sexual intercourse, sexual
intercourse, direct physical stimulation or unclothed genitals,
sadomasochistic abuse, or emphasizing the depiction of postpubertal
human genitals; provided however, that works of art or of anthropological
significance shall not be deemed to be within the foregoing definition.
FURNISH — To issue, sell, give, provide, lend, mail, deliver, transfer,
circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit or otherwise provide.
MATERIAL — Anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing,
photograph, motion picture film, videotape or videotape production, or
pictorial representation, or any recording or transcription, or any
Any obscene material or performance depicting sexual conduct, sexual
contact, or a sexual performance, as these terms are defined in Section
556.061, RSMo., and which has as one of its participants or portrays
as an observer of such conduct, contact, or performance a minor under
the age of eighteen (18); or
1.
Any visual depiction, including any photograph, film, video, picture, or
computer or computer-generated image or picture, whether made or
produced by electronic, mechanical, or other means, of sexually explicit
conduct where:
The production of such visual depiction involves the use of a minor
engaging in sexually explicit conduct;
a.
Such visual depiction is a digital image, computer image, or
computer-generated image that is, or is indistinguishable from,
that of a minor engaging in sexually explicit conduct; or
b.
Such visual depiction has been created, adapted, or modified to
show that an identifiable minor is engaging in sexually explicit
conduct.
c.
2.
Section
215.800
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.800
100:385
mechanical, chemical, or electrical reproduction, or stored computer data,
or anything which is or may be used as a means of communication. Material
includes undeveloped photographs, molds, printing plates, stored computer
data and other latent representational objects.
MINOR — Any person under the age of eighteen (18).
NUDITY — The showing of postpubertal human genitals or pubic area, with
less than a fully opaque covering.
OBSCENE — Any material or performance if:
PERFORMANCE — Any play, motion picture film, videotape, dance or
exhibition performed before an audience of one (1) or more.
PORNOGRAPHIC FOR MINORS — Any material or performance if:
PROMOTE — To manufacture, issue, sell, provide, mail, deliver, transfer,
transmute, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit, or
advertise, or to offer or agree to do the same, by any means including a
computer.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE — Flagellation or torture by or upon a person
as an act of sexual stimulation or gratification.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Actual or simulated, normal or perverted acts of
human masturbation; deviate sexual intercourse, sexual intercourse or
physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area,
buttocks or the breast of a female in an act of apparent sexual stimulation
or gratification or any sadomasochistic abuse or acts including animals or
any latent objects in an act of apparent stimulation or gratification.
Taken as a whole and applying contemporary community standards, its
predominant appeal is prurient interest in sex;
1.
The average person, applying contemporary community standards,
would find the material depicts or describes sexual conduct in a
patently offensive way; and
2.
Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific
value.
3.
The average person, applying contemporary community standards,
would find that the material or performance, taken as a whole, has a
tendency to cater or appeal to a prurient interest of minors; and
1.
The material or performance depicts or describes nudity, sexual
conduct, sexual excitement, sadomasochistic abuse or any explicit
sexual material in a way which is patently offensive to the average
person applying contemporary adult community standards with respect
to what is suitable for minors; and
2.
The material or performance, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary,
artistic, political or scientific value for minors.
3.
Section
215.800
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.800
100:386
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT — The condition of the human male or female
genitals when in the state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
WHOLESALE PROMOTE — To manufacture, issue, sell, provide, mail,
deliver, transfer, transmute, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate or to
offer or agree to do the same for purposes of resale or redistribution.
Section 215.810. Obscenity.140 [R.O. 2009 §133.21; CC 1981
§§20-168.1—20-168.2; Ord. No. 90-153, 6-21-1990]
Section 215.820. Furnishing Pornographic Materials To Minors.141
A. Preparation. A person commits the offense of preparation of obscenity
when he/she knowingly:
1. Records himself/herself or any other person on or with any material
for the purpose of producing any obscene material for promotion to
another; or
2. Records himself/herself or any other person on or with any material
for the purpose of producing material pornographic for minors for
promotion to a minor; or
3. Models, poses, acts or otherwise aids or assists in the preparation
of any obscene material for the purpose of promotion to another; or
4. Models, poses, acts or otherwise aids or assists in the preparation
of any material pornographic for minors for promotion or
furnishing to a minor.
B. Promoting. A person commits the offense of promoting pornography for
minors or obscenity if he/she:
1. Promotes or possesses with the purpose to promote any obscene
materials for pecuniary gain; or
2. Produces, presents, directs or participates in any obscene
performance for pecuniary gain; or
3. Promotes or possesses with the purpose to promote any material
pornographic for minors for pecuniary gain; or
4. Produces, presents, directs or participates in any performance
pornographic for minors for pecuniary gain; or
5. Promotes, possesses with the purpose to promote, produces,
presents, directs or participates in any performance that is
pornographic for minors via computer, electronic transfer, Internet
or computer network if the person made the matter available to a
specific individual known by the defendant to be a minor.
140. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150. Note—Under certain circumstances this offense
can be a felony under state law.
141. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
215.800
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.820
100:387
Section 215.830. Promoting Child Pornography in The First Degree.
A person commits the offense of promoting child pornography in the first
degree if such person possesses with the intent to promote or promotes
child pornography of a child less than fourteen (14) years of age or obscene
material portraying what appears to be a child less than fourteen (14) years
of age.
Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section 215.840. Public Display of Explicit Sexual Material.142
Section 215.850. Coercing Acceptance of Obscene Material.143
A. A person commits the offense of furnishing pornographic material to
minors if he/she:
1. Furnishes any material pornographic for minors knowing that the
person to whom it is furnished is a minor or acting in reckless
disregard of the likelihood that such person is a minor; or
2. Produces, presents, directs or participates in any performance
pornographic for minors that is furnished to a minor knowing that
any person viewing such performance is a minor or acting in
reckless disregard of the likelihood that a minor is viewing the
performance; or
3. Furnishes, produces, presents, directs, participates in any
performance or otherwise makes available material that is
pornographic for minors via computer, electronic transfer, Internet
or computer network if the person made the matter available to a
specific individual known by the defendant to be a minor.
B. It is not an affirmative defense to a prosecution for a violation of this
Section that the person being furnished the pornographic material is a
Peace Officer masquerading as a minor.
C. Furnishing pornographic material to minors or attempting to furnish
pornographic material to minors is an ordinance violation.
A. A person commits the offense of public display of explicit sexual
material if he or she knowingly or recklessly:
1. Displays publicly explicit sexual material; or
2. Fails to take prompt action to remove such a display from property
in his or her possession after learning of its existence.
B. For purposes of this Section, each day there is a violation of this Section
shall constitute a separate offense.
142. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
143. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
215.820
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.850
100:388
Section 215.860. Evidence in Obscenity and Child Pornography
Cases.144
A. A person commits the offense of coercing acceptance of obscene
material if:
1. He/she requires acceptance of obscene material as a condition to
any sale, allocation, consignment or delivery of any other material;
or
2. He/she denies any franchise or imposes any penalty, financial or
otherwise, by reason of the failure or refusal of any person to
accept any material obscene or pornographic for minors.
A. In any prosecution under this Division, evidence shall be admissible to
show:
1. What the predominant appeal of the material or performance would
be for ordinary adults or minors;
2. The literary, artistic, political or scientific value of the material or
performance;
3. The degree of public acceptance in this State and in the local
community;
4. The appeal to prurient interest in advertising or other promotion of
the material or performance;
5. The purpose of the author, creator, promoter, furnisher or publisher
of the material or performance.
B. Testimony of the author, creator, promoter, furnisher, publisher, or
expert testimony, relating to factors entering into the determination of
the issues of obscenity or child pornography, shall be admissible.
C. In any prosecution for possession of child pornography or promoting
child pornography in the first or second degree, the determination that
the person who participated in the child pornography was younger than
eighteen (18) years of age may be made as set forth in Section 568.100,
RSMo., or reasonable inferences drawn by a judge or jury after viewing
the alleged pornographic material shall constitute sufficient evidence of
the child's age to support a conviction.
D. In any prosecution for promoting child pornography in the first or
second degree, no showing is required that the performance or material
involved appeals to prurient interest, that it lacks serious literary,
artistic, political or scientific value, or that it is patently offensive to
prevailing standards in the community as a whole.
144. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
215.850
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.870
100:389
Section 215.870. Wholesale Promotion. [R.O. 2009 §133.27; CC
1981 §20-168.9; Ord. No. 90-153, 6-21-1990]
The general assembly has pre-empted Cities from regulating the wholesale
promotion of obscenity and materials pornographic for minors. Therefore,
nothing contained in this Division shall be interpreted to prohibit the
wholesale promotion of obscene material, to prohibit the wholesale
promotion for minors of any material pornographic for minors or to prohibit
the possession of any material pornographic for minors with the purpose to
wholesale promote for minors.
Section 215.880. through Section 215.930. (Reserved)
Section
215.870
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.880
100:390
Article V
Weapons, Explosives And Fireworks145
DIVISION 1
Firearms and Weapons
Section 215.940. Bows and Arrows.146 [R.O. 2009 §134.02; CC 1981
§20-50]
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or promiscuously discharge
or project an arrow, except arrows constructed with rubber tips, from a bow
or crossbow or by any other means within the City, except at or upon an
archery range approved by the Chief of Police.
Section 215.950. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings set
out herein:
ANTIQUE, CURIO OR RELIC FIREARM — Any firearm so defined by the
National Gun Control Act, 18 U.S.C. Title 26, Section 5845, and the United
States Treasury/Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, 27 CFR Section
178.11:
BLACKJACK — Any instrument that is designed or adapted for the purpose
of stunning or inflicting physical injury by striking a person, and which is
readily capable of lethal use.
BLASTING AGENT — Any material or mixture, consisting of fuel and
oxidizer that is intended for blasting, but not otherwise defined as an
explosive under this Section, provided that the finished product, as mixed
for use of shipment, cannot be detonated by means of a numbered 8 test
blasting cap when unconfined.
CONCEALABLE FIREARM — Any firearm with a barrel less than sixteen
(16) inches in length, measured from the face of the bolt or standing breech.
Antique firearm is any firearm not designed or redesigned for using
rim fire or conventional center fire ignition with fixed ammunition
and manufactured in or before 1898, said ammunition not being
manufactured any longer; this includes any matchlock, wheel lock,
flintlock, percussion cap or similar type ignition system, or replica
thereof;
1.
Curio or relic firearm is any firearm deriving value as a collectible
weapon due to its unique design, ignition system, operation or at least
fifty (50) years old, associated with a historical event, renown
personage or major war.
2.
145. Cross Reference—As To Penalty, §100.150.
146. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
215.940
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.950
100:391
DEFACE — To alter or destroy the manufacturer's or importer's serial
number or any other distinguishing number or identification mark.
DETONATOR — Any device containing a detonating charge that is used for
initiating detonation in an explosive, including but not limited to, electric
blasting caps of instantaneous and delay types, non-electric blasting caps
for use with safety fuse or shock tube and detonating cord delay connectors.
EXPLOSIVE WEAPON — Any explosive, incendiary, or poison gas bomb
or similar device designed or adapted for the purpose of inflicting death,
serious physical injury or substantial property damage; or any device
designed or adapted for delivering or shooting such a weapon. For the
purposes of this Article, the term "explosive" shall mean any chemical
compound mixture or device, the primary or common purpose of which is to
function by explosion, including but not limited to, dynamite and other high
explosives, pellet powder, initiating explosives, detonators, safety fuses,
squibs, detonating cords, igniter cords, and igniters or blasting agents.
FIREARM — Any weapon that is designed or adapted to expel a projectile
by the action of an explosive.
FIREARM SILENCER — Any instrument, attachment or appliance that is
designed or adapted to muffle the noise made by the firing of any firearm.
GAS GUN — Any gas ejection device, weapon, cartridge, container or
contrivance, other than a gas bomb, that is designed or adapted for the
purpose of ejecting any poison gas that will cause death or serious physical
injury, but not any device that ejects a repellant or temporary incapacitating
substance.
INTOXICATED — Substantially impaired mental or physical capacity
resulting from introduction of any substance into the body.
KNIFE — Any dagger, dirk, stiletto, or bladed hand instrument that is
readily capable of inflicting serious physical injury or death by cutting or
stabbing a person. For purposes of this Article, "knife" does not include any
ordinary pocketknife with no blade more than four (4) inches in length.
KNUCKLES — Any instrument that consists of finger rings or guards made
of a hard substance that is designed or adapted for the purpose of inflicting
serious physical injury or death by striking a person with a fist enclosed in
the knuckles.
MACHINE GUN — Any firearm that is capable of firing more than one (1)
shot automatically, without manual reloading, by a single function of the
trigger.
PROJECTILE WEAPON — Any bow, crossbow, pellet gun, slingshot or other
weapon that is not a firearm, which is capable of expelling a projectile that
could inflict serious physical injury or death by striking or piercing a person.
RIFLE — Any firearm designed or adapted to be fired from the shoulder
and to use the energy of the explosive in a fixed metallic cartridge to fire a
projectile through a rifled bore by a single function of the trigger.
Section
215.950
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.950
100:392
SHORT BARREL — A barrel length of less than sixteen (16) inches for a rifle
and eighteen (18) inches for a shotgun, both measured from the face of the
bolt or standing breech, or an overall rifle or shotgun length of less than
twenty-six (26) inches.
SHOTGUN — Any firearm designed or adapted to be fired from the shoulder
and to use the energy of the explosive in a fixed shotgun shell to fire a
number of shot or a single projectile through a smooth bore barrel by a
single function of the trigger.
SPRING GUN — Any fused, timed or non-manually controlled trap or device
designed or adapted to set off an explosion for the purpose of inflicting
serious physical injury or death.
SWITCHBLADE KNIFE — Any knife which has a blade that folds or closes
into the handle or sheath, and
Section 215.960. Weapons — Carrying Concealed — Other Unlawful
Use.147 [Ord. No. 13-069 §1, 4-3-2013]
That opens automatically by pressure applied to a button or other
device located on the handle; or
1.
That opens or releases from the handle or sheath by the force of gravity
or by the application of centrifugal force.
2.
A. A person commits the offense of unlawful use of weapons if he/she
knowingly:
1. Carries concealed upon or about his/her person a knife, a firearm, a
blackjack or any other weapon readily capable of lethal use; or
2. Sets a spring gun; or
3. Discharges or shoots a firearm within the City limits;* or
4. Exhibits, in the presence of one (1) or more persons, any weapon
readily capable of lethal use in an angry or threatening manner; or
5. Has a firearm or projectile weapon readily capable of lethal use on
his/her person, while he/she is intoxicated, and handles or
otherwise uses such firearm or projectile weapon in either a
negligent or unlawful manner or discharges such firearm or
projectile weapon unless acting in self-defense; or
6. Carries a firearm or any other weapon readily capable of lethal use
into any church or place where people have assembled for worship,
or into any election precinct on any election day, or into any
building owned or occupied by any agency of the Federal
Government, State Government, or political subdivision thereof; or
147. Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law. *State
Law Reference—Section 252.243.3, RSMo., limits the discharge of firearms in certain
areas known as Hunting Heritage Protection Areas, which are defined therein. Cross
Reference—As to exceptions, §215.1020.
Section
215.950
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.960
100:393
7. Carries a firearm, whether loaded or unloaded, or any other
weapon readily capable of lethal use into any school, onto any
school bus, or onto the premises of any function or activity
sponsored or sanctioned by school officials or the district school
board.
8. Possesses a firearm while also knowingly in possession of a
controlled substance that is sufficient for a felony violation of
Section 195.202 RSMo. [Ord. No. 15-121 §2, 6-2-2015]
B. Subparagraphs (1), (3), (4), (6) and (7) of Subsection (A) of this Section
shall not apply to or affect any of the following when such uses are
reasonably associated with or are necessary to the fulfillment of such
person's official duties:
1. All State, County and Municipal Peace Officers who have completed
the training required by the Police Officer Standards and Training
Commission pursuant to Sections 590.030 to 590.050, RSMo., and
who possess the duty and power of arrest for violation of the
general criminal laws of the State or for violation of ordinances of
Counties or Municipalities of the State, whether such officers are
on or off duty, and whether such officers are within or outside of the
Law Enforcement Agency's jurisdiction, or all qualified retired
Peace Officers, as defined in Subsection (10) of Section 571.030,
RSMo., and who carry the identification defined in Subsection (11)
of Section 571.030, RSMo., or any person summoned by such
officers to assist in making arrests or preserving the peace while
actually engaged in assisting such officer;
2. Wardens, superintendents and keepers of prisons, penitentiaries,
jails and other institutions for the detention of persons accused or
convicted of crime;
3. Members of the Armed Forces or National Guard while performing
their official duty;
4. Those persons vested by Article V, Section 1 of the Constitution of
Missouri with the judicial power of the State and those persons
vested by Article III of the Constitution of the United States with
the judicial power of the United States, the members of the Federal
judiciary;
5. Any person whose bona fide duty is to execute process, civil or
criminal;
6. Any Federal Probation Officer or Federal Flight Deck Officer as
defined under the Federal Flight Deck Officer Program, 49 U.S.C.
Section 44921;
7. Any State Probation or Parole Officer, including supervisors and
members of the Board of Probation and Parole;
Section
215.960
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.960
100:394
8. Any corporate security advisor meeting the definition and fulfilling
the requirements of the regulations established by the Department
of Public Safety under Section 590.750, RSMo.; [Ord. No. 15-121
§2, 6-2-2015]
9. Any coroner, deputy coroner, medical examiner or assistant
medical examiner; [Ord. No. 15-121 §2, 6-2-2015]
10. Any prosecuting attorney or assistant prosecuting attorney or any
circuit attorney or assistant circuit attorney or any person
appointed by a court to be a special prosecutor who has completed
the firearms safety training course required under Subsection (2)
of Section 571.111, RSMo.; [Ord. No. 15-121§2, 6-2-2015]
11. Any member of a fire department or fire protection district who is
employed on a full-time basis as a fire investigator and who has a
valid concealed carry endorsement issued prior to August 28, 2013,
or a valid concealed carry permit under Section 571.111, RSMo.,
when such uses are reasonably associated with or are necessary to
the fulfillment of such person's official duties; and [Ord. No.
15-121§2, 6-2-2015]
12. Upon written approval by the governing body of a fire department
or fire protection district, any paid fire department or fire
protection district chief who is employed on a full-time basis and
who has a valid concealed carry endorsement issued prior to
August 28, 2013, or a valid concealed carry permit, when such uses
are reasonably associated with or are necessary to the fulfillment of
such person's official duties. [Ord. No. 15-121§2, 6-2-2015]
C. Subparagraphs (1), (5), (6) and (7) of Subsection (A) of this Section do
not apply when the actor is transporting such weapons in a nonfunctioning
state or in an unloaded state when ammunition is not
readily accessible or when such weapons are not readily accessible.
Subparagraph (1) of Subsection (A) of this Section does not apply to any
person twenty-one (21) years of age or older or eighteen (18) years of
age or older and a member of the United States Armed Forces, or
honorably discharged from the United States Armed Forces,
transporting a concealable firearm in the passenger compartment of a
motor vehicle, so long as such concealable firearm is otherwise lawfully
possessed, nor when the actor is also in possession of an exposed
firearm or projectile weapon for the lawful pursuit of game, or is in his/
her dwelling unit or upon premises over which the actor has possession,
authority or control, or is traveling in a continuous journey peaceably
through this State. Subparagraph (7) of Subsection (A) of this Section
does not apply if the firearm is otherwise lawfully possessed by a person
while traversing school premises for the purposes of transporting a
student to or from school, or possessed by an adult for the purposes of
facilitation of a school-sanctioned firearm-related event.
Section
215.960
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.960
100:395
Section 215.970. Possession, Manufacture, Transport, Repair, Sale
of Certain Weapons.148
D. Subparagraphs (1), (6) and (7) of Subsection (A) of this Section shall not
apply to any person who has a valid concealed carry endorsement
issued pursuant to Sections 571.101 to 571.121, RSMo., or a valid
permit or endorsement to carry concealed firearms issued by another
State or political subdivision of another State.
E. Subparagraphs (3), (4), (5), (6) and (7) of Subsection (A) of this Section
shall not apply to persons who are engaged in a lawful act of defense
pursuant to Section 563.031, RSMo.
F. Nothing in this Section shall make it unlawful for a student to actually
participate in school-sanctioned gun safety courses, student military or
ROTC courses, or other school-sponsored firearm-related events,
provided the student does not carry a firearm or other weapon readily
capable of lethal use into any school, onto any school bus, or onto the
premises of any other function or activity sponsored or sanctioned by
school officials or the district school board.
A. A person commits an offense if such person knowingly possesses,
manufactures, transports, repairs, or sells:
1. An explosive weapon; or
2. An explosive, incendiary or poison substance or material with the
purpose to possess, manufacture or sell an explosive weapon; or
3. A machine gun; or
4. A gas gun; or
5. A short-barreled rifle or shotgun; or
6. A firearm silencer; or
7. A switchblade knife; or
8. A bullet or projectile which explodes or detonates upon impact
because of an independent explosive charge after having been shot
from a firearm; or
9. Knuckles.
B. A person does not commit an offense under this Section if his/her
conduct:
1. Was incident to the performance of official duty by the Armed
Forces, National Guard, a governmental law enforcement agency
or a penal institution; or
148. Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.960
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.970
100:396
Section 215.980. Defacing Firearm.
A person commits the offense of defacing a firearm if he/she knowingly
defaces any firearm.
Section 215.990. Unlawful Transfer of Weapons.149
2. Was incident to engaging in a lawful commercial or business
transaction with an organization enumerated in Paragraph (1) of
this Subsection; or
3. Was incident to using an explosive weapon in a manner reasonably
related to a lawful industrial or commercial enterprise; or
4. Was incident to displaying the weapon in a public museum or
exhibition; or
5. Was incident to dealing with the weapon solely as a curio,
ornament, or keepsake, or to using it in a manner reasonably
related to a lawful dramatic performance; but if the weapon is the
type described in Paragraphs (1) or (4) of Subsection (A) of this
Section it must be in such a non-functioning condition that it cannot
readily be made operable. No barreled rifle, short-barreled
shotgun, machine gun, or firearm silencer may be possessed,
manufactured, transported, repaired or sold as a curio, ornament,
or keepsake unless such person is an importer, manufacturer,
dealer, or collector licensed by the Secretary of the Treasury
pursuant to the Gun Control Act of 1968, U.S.C. Title 18, or unless
such firearm is an "antique firearm" as defined in Subsection (3) of
Section 571.080, RSMo., or unless such firearm has been
designated a "collectors item" by the Secretary of the Treasury
pursuant to the U.S.C. Title 26, Section 5845(a).
A. A person commits the offense of unlawful transfer of weapons if he/she:
1. Knowingly sells, leases, loans, gives away or delivers a blackjack to
a person less than eighteen (18) years old without the consent of
the child's custodial parent or guardian or recklessly, as defined in
Section 562.016, RSMo., sells, leases, loans, gives away or delivers
any firearm to a person less than eighteen (18) years old without
the consent of the child's custodial parent or guardian; provided
that this does not prohibit the delivery of such weapons to any
Peace Officer or member of the Armed Forces or National Guard
while performing his/her official duty; or
2. Recklessly, as defined in Section 562.016, RSMo., sells, leases,
loans, gives away or delivers a firearm or ammunition for a firearm
to a person who is intoxicated.
149. Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.970
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.1000
100:397
Section 215.1000. Possession of Firearm Unlawful For Certain
Persons.150
Section 215.1010. Carrying Concealed Firearms Prohibited —
Penalty For Violation.
A. A person commits the offense of unlawful possession of a firearm if such
person knowingly has any firearm in his or her possession and:
1. Such person has been convicted of a felony under the laws of this
State, or of a crime under the laws of any State or of the United
States which, if committed within this State, would be a felony; or
2. Such person is a fugitive from justice, is habitually in an intoxicated
or drugged condition, or is currently adjudged mentally
incompetent.
B. The provisions of Subsection (A)(1) of this Section shall not apply to the
possession of an antique firearm.
A. It shall be a violation of this Section, punishable as hereinafter
provided, for any person to carry any concealed firearm into:
1. Any Police, Sheriff or Highway Patrol office or station without the
consent of the Chief Law Enforcement Officer in charge of that
office or station. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the
premises of the office or station shall not be a criminal offense so
long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished
while the vehicle is on the premises;
2. Within twenty-five (25) feet of any polling place on any election day.
Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises of the polling
place shall not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is not
removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the
premises;
3. The facility of any adult or juvenile detention or correctional
institution, prison or jail. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the
premises of any adult, juvenile detention or correctional institution,
prison or jail shall not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is
not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on
the premises;
4. Any courthouse solely occupied by the Circuit, Appellate or
Supreme Court, or any courtrooms, administrative offices, libraries
or other rooms of any such court whether or not such court solely
occupies the building in question. This Subdivision shall also
include, but not be limited to, any juvenile, family, drug or other
court offices, any room or office wherein any of the courts or offices
listed in this Subdivision are temporarily conducting any business
150. Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.1000
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.1010
100:398
within the jurisdiction of such courts or offices, and such other
locations in such manner as may be specified by Supreme Court
Rule pursuant to Subdivision (6) of this Subsection. Nothing in this
Subdivision shall preclude those persons listed in Subsection (B)(1)
of Section 215.960 while within their jurisdiction and on duty,
those persons listed in Subsections (B)(2), (4) and (10) of Section
215.960, or such other persons who serve in a law enforcement
capacity for a court as may be specified by Supreme Court Rule
pursuant to Subdivision (6) of this Subsection from carrying a
concealed firearm within any of the areas described in this
Subdivision. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises of
any of the areas listed in this Subdivision shall not be a criminal
offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or
brandished while the vehicle is on the premises;
5. Any meeting of the City Council. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle
on the premises shall not be a criminal offense so long as the
firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the
vehicle is on the premises;
6. Any building owned, leased or controlled by the City of St. Charles
identified by signs posted at the entrance to the building. This
Subsection shall not apply to any building used for public housing
by private persons, highways or rest areas, firing ranges, and
private dwellings owned, leased, or controlled by the City of St.
Charles. Persons violating this Subsection may be denied entrance
to the building, ordered to leave the building and, if employees of
the City, be subjected to disciplinary measures for violation;
7. Any establishment licensed to dispense intoxicating liquor for
consumption on the premises, which portion is primarily devoted to
that purpose, without the consent of the owner or manager. The
provisions of this Subdivision shall not apply to the licensee of said
establishment. The provisions of this Subdivision shall not apply to
any bona fide restaurant open to the general public having dining
facilities for not less than fifty (50) persons and that receives at
least fifty-one percent (51%) of its gross annual income from the
dining facilities by the sale of food. This Subdivision does not
prohibit the possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises of
the establishment and shall not be a criminal offense so long as the
firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the
vehicle is on the premises. Nothing in this Subdivision authorizes
any individual who has been issued a concealed carry endorsement
to possess any firearm while intoxicated;
8. Any area of an airport to which access is controlled by the
inspection of persons and property. Possession of a firearm in a
vehicle on the premises of the airport shall not be a violation so
long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or brandished
while the vehicle is on the premises;
Section
215.1010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.1010
100:399
9. Any place where the carrying of a firearm is prohibited by Federal
law;
10. Any higher education institution or elementary or secondary school
facility without the consent of the governing body of the higher
education institution or a school official or the district school board
unless the person with the concealed carry endorsement or permit
is a teacher or administrator of an elementary or secondary school
who has been designated by his or her school district as a school
protection officer and is carrying a firearm in a school within that
district, in which case no consent is required. Possession of a
firearm in a vehicle on the premises of any higher education
institution or elementary or secondary school facility shall not be a
criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the
vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises; [Ord.
No. 15-121§2, 6-2-2015]
11. Any portion of a building used as a child care facility without the
consent of the manager. Nothing in this Subdivision shall prevent
the operator of a child care facility in a family home from owning or
possessing a firearm or a driver's license or non-driver's license
containing a concealed carry endorsement;
12. Any riverboat gambling operation accessible by the public without
the consent of the owner or manager pursuant to rules
promulgated by the Gaming Commission. Possession of a firearm in
a vehicle on the premises of a riverboat gambling operation shall
not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from
the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises;
13. Any gated area of an amusement park. Possession of a firearm in a
vehicle on the premises of the amusement park shall not be a
criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from the
vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises;
14. Any church or other place of religious worship without the consent
of the minister or person or persons representing the religious
organization that exercises control over the place of religious
worship. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises shall
not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from
the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises;
15. Any private property whose owner has posted the premises as
being off-limits to concealed firearms by means of one (1) or more
signs displayed in a conspicuous place of a minimum size of eleven
(11) inches by fourteen (14) inches with the writing thereon in
letters of not less than one (1) inch. The owner, business or
commercial lessee, manager of a private business enterprise, or
any other organization, entity or person may prohibit persons
holding a concealed carry endorsement from carrying concealed
firearms on the premises and may prohibit employees, not
Section
215.1010
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.1010
100:400
authorized by the employer, holding a concealed carry
endorsement from carrying concealed firearms on the property
of the employer. If the building or the premises are open to the
public, the employer of the business enterprise shall post signs on
or about the premises if carrying a concealed firearm is prohibited.
Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on the premises shall not be
a criminal offense so long as the firearm is not removed from
the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on the premises.
An employer may prohibit employees or other persons holding a
concealed carry endorsement from carrying a concealed firearm in
vehicles owned by the employer;
16. Any sports arena or stadium with a seating capacity of five
thousand (5,000) or more. Possession of a firearm in a vehicle on
the premises shall not be a criminal offense so long as the firearm is
not removed from the vehicle or brandished while the vehicle is on
the premises;
17. Any hospital accessible by the public. Possession of a firearm in a
vehicle on the premises of a hospital shall not be a criminal offense
so long as the firearm is not removed from the vehicle or
brandished while the vehicle is on the premises.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of Subsection (A) of this
Section shall be punished as follows:
1. If the violator holds a concealed carry endorsement issued
pursuant to State law, the violator may be subject to denial to the
premises or removal from the premises. If such person refuses to
leave the premises and a Peace Officer is summoned, such person
may be issued a citation for an amount not to exceed one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for the first (1st) offense. If a second (2nd)
citation for a similar violation occurs within a six (6) month period,
such person shall be fined an amount not to exceed two hundred
dollars ($200.00). If a third (3rd) citation for a similar violation is
issued within one (1) year of the first (1st) citation such person
shall be fined an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00). Upon conviction of charges arising from a citation
issued pursuant to this Section, the court shall notify the Sheriff of
the County which issued the certificate of qualification for a
concealed carry endorsement and the Department of Revenue.
2. If the violator does not hold a current valid concealed carry
endorsement issued pursuant to State law, upon conviction of a
charge of violating this Section the defendant shall be punished as
provided in Section 100.150 of this Code of Ordinances.
3. Employees of the City of St. Charles may, in addition to any other
punishment hereby, be subject to disciplinary action.
C. It shall be a violation of this Section, punishable by a citation for an
amount not to exceed thirty-five dollars ($35.00), for any person issued
Section
215.1010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.1010
100:401
Section 215.1020. Discharging Firearms — Exceptions.151 [R.O.
2009 §134.04; CC 1981 §20-75; Ord. No. 77-9, 3-16-1977; Ord. No.
09-47, 3-20-2009]
Section 215.1030. Selling Handguns, Rifles and Shotguns.152 [R.O.
2009 §134.05; CC 1981 §20-76; Ord. No. 84-97, 8-23-1984; Ord. No.
04-272, 12-10-2004]
a concealed carry endorsement pursuant to State law to fail to carry
the concealed carry endorsement at all times the person is carrying a
concealed firearm, or to fail to display the concealed carry endorsement
upon the request of any Peace Officer.
A. Any civic, fraternal, benevolent or other organization may make
application to the Mayor for a one (1) day permit to discharge firearms
within the City. Such application shall specify the types of firearms
used, the time and place of such use and the purpose for which such
permit is sought. The Mayor, after consultation with the Chief of Police,
may issue such permit if, in his/her opinion, such discharge or use of
firearms will not endanger the public peace or public safety.
B. Any veterans' organization which, as part of its service or functions,
provides an honor guard or similar group for public celebration or
military or quasi-military funerals may make application to the Mayor
for an annual permit for the discharge of blank ammunition. Such
application shall state the name of the organization and the types of
weapons which shall be used to fire such blank ammunition. Such
permit shall be limited to the discharge of blank ammunition. The
Mayor, after consultation with the Chief of Police, may issue such
permit if, in his/her opinion, such discharge or use of firearms will not
endanger the public peace or public safety.
C. Subsection (A)(3) of Section 215.960 shall not apply to the discharge of
firearms at an indoor firearm range that has a valid conditional use
permit pursuant to Section 400.220(C)(1)(j).
A. Except for gun shows conducted at the St. Charles Convention Center,
it shall be unlawful for any person to display for sale at retail within the
City any handguns, rifles or shotguns unless the same be locked within
a display case or rack preventing their removal. The display case or
rack shall be locked with a secure lock operated by a key kept apart
from the lock. The premises or building shall at all times be protected
when closed by either:
1. A burglar alarm system.
2. Protected by a security guard or watchman.
151. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
152. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
215.1010
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.1030
100:402
Section 215.1035. Selling, Loaning or Bartering Certain Weapons
To A Minor. [Ord. No. 11-112 §1, 6-9-2011]
It shall be unlawful for any person to directly or indirectly, sell or deliver,
loan or barter to any minor any kind of firearm, knife, knuckles, projectile
weapon or other similar deadly weapons, without the consent of the parent
or guardian of such minor.
Section 215.1040. Sale and Purchase of "Throwing Stars"
Prohibited.153 [R.O. 2009 §134.06; CC 1981 §20-77; Ord. No. 86-26,
2-11-1986]
Section 215.1050. through Section 215.1080. (Reserved)
3. Iron protective bars upon all doors and windows.
A. No person shall sell or purchase an object known as a throwing star.
B. For the purposes of this Section, throwing star shall have the following
definition:
THROWING STAR — Any instrument without handles consisting of a
metal plate having three (3) or more radiating points with one (1) or
more sharp edges and designed in the shape of a polygon, trefoil, cross
star, diamond or other geometric shape that can be used as a weapon
for throwing.
153. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
215.1030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.1050
100:403

DIVISION 2
Fireworks
Section 215.1090. Discharging Prohibited — Exception.154 [R.O.
2009 §134.20; CC 1981 §20-54; Ord. No. 05-142, 5-17-2005; Ord.
No. 05-223, 8-24-2005; Ord. No. 05-239, 9-16-2005; Ord. No.
07-237, 9-26-2007]
A. Except as provided in Subsection (B), it shall be unlawful for any person
to willfully set off, use, burn, explode or fire off any firecrackers,
fireworks, torpedoes, bombs, rockets, pin wheels, fire balloons, Roman
candles, toy cannons, toy pistols, rocket, missile or aerial firework
containing a stick or fin or other fireworks of a like kind within the
municipal boundaries of the City; provided however, that this Section
shall not apply to parks or other public places when in the charge of
competent persons and under a permit issued by the Mayor.
B. It shall be lawful for any person to set off, use, burn, explode or fire off
non-rocket, non-missile or aerial fireworks that do not contain a stick or
fin, firecrackers, fireworks, torpedoes, bombs, rockets, pin wheels, fire
balloons, Roman candles, toy cannons, toy pistols or other fireworks of
a like kind within the municipal boundaries of the City between the
hours of 12:00 P.M. and 11:00 P.M. on July third (3rd) and fourth (4th) of
each and every calendar year.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) to
purchase, possess, set off, use, burn, explode or fire off any fireworks
including, but in no way limited to, non-rocket, non-missile or aerial
fireworks that do not contain a stick or fin within the municipal
boundaries of the City without adult supervision.
D. Section 215.380, regarding responsibility of parents and other adults
for the criminal acts of children, shall apply to this Section.
E. Police Officers are to enforce this strictly and without the use of
warnings. Summons are to be issued regardless of circumstances. Any
person under the age of eighteen (18) found to be in possession of,
setting off, using, burning, exploding or firing off, without adult
supervision, any fireworks, including, but in no way limited to, nonrocket,
non-missile or aerial fireworks that do not contain a stick or fin,
shall have such items confiscated by Police Officers.
F. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, it shall be unlawful
for any person to willfully set off, use, burn, explode or fire off any
fireworks, including, but in no way limited to, non-rocket, non-missile or
aerial fireworks that do not contain a stick or fin, on any property
owned by the City or any park within the City at any time, including the
hours of 12:00 P.M. and 11:00 P.M. on July third (3rd) and fourth (4th),
without a valid permit issued by the Mayor.
154. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
215.1090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.1100
100:405
Section 215.1100. Sale of Fireworks — Licenses.155 [R.O. 2009
§134.21; CC 1981 §20-55; Ord. No. 83-38, 6-8-1983; Ord. No. 86-51,
3-7-1986; Ord. No. 86-88, 4-18-1986; Ord. No. 86-143, 6-12-1986;
Ord. No. 89-133, 6-30-1989; Ord. No. 92-170, 7-21-1992; Ord. No.
92-171, 7-22-1992, approved by voters 11-3-92; Ord. No. 96-148,
5-22-1996; Ord. No. 98-234, 5-20-1998; Ord. No. 98-256, 6-17-1998;
Ord. No. 03-105, 5-13-2003; Ord. No. 05-143, 5-17-2005; Ord. No.
05-223, 8-24-2005; Ord. No. 05-240, 9-16-2005; Ord. No. 07-162,
6-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-237, 9-26-2007]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell or expose for sale
any fireworks of any type whatsoever within the City without first
having obtained a "fireworks stand" license for each location at which
fireworks are sold or offered for sale from the Director of Finance;
provided however, that this Section shall not apply to the sale of
fireworks in wholesale lots by any person holding a wholesale license to
do business within the City for use or sale outside the City or for use
within the City in the manner permitted by Section 215.1090.
B. The Director of Finance is authorized to issue to any person a
"fireworks stand" license to permit sales of fireworks now or hereafter
classified as "1.4G Class C Common Fireworks" by the United States
Department of Transportation. Licenses shall be issued for fireworks
stands located only in "C-2", "C-3", "I-1" or "I-2" zoning districts as
defined in Chapter 400 of this Code of Ordinances or other similar
zoning of the County on property which has been annexed but has not
received a zoning designation by the City.
C. An application for a "fireworks stand" license shall be submitted to the
Department of Community Development by June first (1st) and shall
include the following:
1. A permit fee of six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) for each proposed
location for fireworks sales.
2. A statement that the applicant agrees to comply strictly with the
terms of this Chapter, the laws of the State of Missouri, St. Charles
County and the City of St. Charles, Missouri.
3. A cash deposit, irrevocable letter of credit or a surety bond made
payable to the City of St. Charles, Missouri, in the amount of three
thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for each location to be operated by
the applicant shall be submitted. Such deposit, letter or bond shall
ensure compliance with the provisions of this Section, including,
but not limited to, the removal of the stand, provisions for
temporary electrical service and the cleaning and restoration of the
site upon which it was located in accordance with the provisions of
this Section. In the event the licensee does not comply with the
provisions of this Section or does not remove the stand or restore
155. Cross References—As to general business licensing and taxation provisions, ch. 605.
Section
215.1100
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.1100
100:406
the site as required, the City may do so or cause the same to be
done and the reasonable cost thereof shall be charged against the
licensee and the deposit, letter of credit or surety bond.
4. A site plan showing the following:
a. Address or site location;
b. Property owner and operator names, addresses and phone
numbers;
c. Size of the lot and tent;
d. Location of the tent(s) and all other structures or equipment
including trailers and storage units located on the lot;
e. Location of all existing driveway entrances and temporary
parking lot areas;
f. Location of required restroom facilities (a minimum of one (1)
portable facility on site is required);
g. Location of required dumpsters (a minimum of one (1) two (2)
yard dumpster for a location having one thousand (1,000)
square feet or less of sales area and a minimum of two (2) two
(2) yard dumpsters or one (1) four (4) yard dumpster for a
location having more than one thousand (1,000) square feet of
sales area);
h. Location of required on-site, off-street customer parking
spaces (a minimum of one (1) space per three hundred (300)
square feet of sales area is required);
i. Location of nearest fire hydrant;
j. Proof of a valid Missouri State sales tax number;
k. Other information as may be required by the City to ensure
public health and safety.
5. An electrical inspection must be obtained from the Department of
Community Development. All electrical work including generators
must be performed by an electrician licensed with the City. Note
that locations that did not have valid firework stand permits prior
to January 1, 2003, are required to have underground electric
supply lines.
6. A certificate of flame resistance must be submitted for each tent
and a fire inspection must be obtained from the St. Charles Fire
Department.
7. Approval of the driveway entrance and approval of the construction
of temporary surfacing for a parking lot permit from the
Department of Public Works are required if a new driveway or
Section
215.1100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.1100
100:407
temporary surfacing (defined as aggregate, asphalt millings, wood
chips or other material used to cover the ground surface for the
purpose of temporarily improving the ground surface to better
enable it to serve vehicular or foot traffic) is to be installed. These
approvals must address the following:
a. If a vertical curb is present at the entrance location, a concrete
approach may be constructed and left in place to the right-ofway
line. If an approach is not constructed, the existing curb
must be removed prior to use of the parking lot and replaced
within sixty (60) days of the removal.
b. Temporary parking permits are granted for no more than thirty
(30) consecutive calendar days and the construction of the
parking facility must not begin more than fourteen (14)
calendar days before the beginning of the intended use.
c. No portion of City-owned right-of-way shall be surfaced and a
minimum of a ten (10) foot parking setback shall be provided.
d. Where used, temporary paving material shall be removed and
vegetation re-established on the site within sixty (60) calendar
days of the final date of fireworks sales.
e. Where temporary surfacing material is used, a cash deposit,
irrevocable letter of credit or a surety bond made payable to
the City of St. Charles, Missouri, will be required by the
Director of Public Works or his/her designee. The security
should be in an amount equal to the amount required to
perform the reparative measures described in this Section,
based on an estimate approved by the Director of Public Works
or his/her designee. The security shall be subject to the
condition that the reparative measures (actions taken to return
disturbed land to the condition and appearance that existed
before the temporary use) be performed within the first sixty
(60) days following the intended usage of the temporary facility
as indicated on the temporary parking lot application. The
security shall be valid for the entire sixty (60) day period after
which it will be forfeited to the City if reparative measures are
not complete. If the reparative measures are not completed
within the specified time, the City may use the funds from the
security of any necessary portion thereof to complete the
reparative measures. If the security is inadequate to pay for
the costs of the reparative measures, the City shall recover the
balance from the property owner.
f. Each application for construction of a temporary parking lot or
new entrance shall include the following: a sketch showing the
property dimensions, parking lot dimensions, entrance
locations and dimensions and color photographs (a minimum of
six (6)) of the site.
Section
215.1100
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.1100
100:408
8. A certificate of occupancy for any tent or structure from the
Department of Community Development.
D. The following standards shall be used for the review of any fireworks
license and shall apply to the operation of the facility:
1. Structures from which fireworks are to be sold or stored shall not
be located within on hundred (100) feet of any permanent structure
or building, public park, swimming pool or public or private
playground.
2. Structures from which fireworks are sold or stored shall not be
located within one hundred (100) feet of any structure in which
petroleum products are sold or dispensed in any manner other than
in closed containers.
3. A maximum of two (2) semi-truck storage trailers or the equivalent
area of trailer storage as determined by the Fire Marshal shall be
allowed per location. Additional storage may be permitted upon
review and approval of the Fire Marshal. Such trailers shall
maintain a minimum of ten (10) foot separation, have DOT labels on
them and must be marked "EMPTY" with four (4) inch letters when
all contents are removed.
4. All weeds and combustible materials shall be cleared from any
sales location including a distance of at least twenty-five (25) feet
surrounding the sales location.
5. A sign bearing the message "Discharge of Fireworks is Prohibited
at All Times Within the City Limits of the City of St. Charles Except
Between the Hours of 12:00 P.M. and 11:00 P.M. on July 3rd and
4th" in letters at least three (3) inches tall shall be conspicuously
displayed at each sales location. Such sign shall not count towards
the limits of allowable signage provided for by this Section.
Additionally, the operator shall distribute to each purchaser a flyer
of at least twenty-four (24) square inches containing the statement:
"Discharge of Consumer Fireworks Within the City of St. Charles is
Prohibited by Ordinance Except Between the Hours of 12:00 P.M.
and 11:00 P.M. on July 3rd and 4th. Violators may be punished by a
fine up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) or up to three (3) months
imprisonment or both."
6. Fireworks stands shall comply with the provisions of the currently
adopted Building Code relative to temporary structures. All stands
shall be erected in a manner that will reasonably ensure the safety
of all occupants, patrons and surrounding property.
7. A minimum three (3) foot wide, unobstructed aisle running the
length of the stand, inside and behind the sales counter, shall be
provided.
Section
215.1100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.1100
100:409
8. Each stand up to twenty-four (24) feet in length must have at least
two (2) exits. Each stand in excess of twenty-four (24) feet must
have at least three (3) exits. Exit locking devices, if any, shall be
easily released from the inside without special knowledge, key or
effort.
9. Each stand shall maintain a two and five-tenths (2.5) gallon, 2A
rated water-pressure type fire extinguisher or an ABC minimum
2A:10BC rated fire extinguisher near each exit and such
extinguishers shall be kept in good working order and shall be
easily accessible.
10. Signage shall not be subject to the provisions of Chapter 400 but
shall meet the following requirements:
a. No pennants, streamers, balloons, searchlights, strobe lights,
beacons, inflatable signs are permitted;
b. No portable signage or off-premise signage is permitted except
as provided herein;
c. No signage may be attached to non-commercial vehicles;
d. Signage may not extend above or beyond the limits of the
primary structure or the commercial vehicle(s) associated with
the business;
e. All signage must be attached to the primary structure being
used for the sale of fireworks or to a commercial vehicle being
used as storage or an integral part of the operation;
f. No signage may be located in a public right-of-way or on public
property;
g. Total square footage of all signage viewable from any one (1)
angle for one (1) location shall not exceed three hundred (300)
square feet;
h. When a location does not abut a public right-of-way and does
not have direct access from such right-of-way, one (1) off-site,
freestanding sign or banner not to exceed thirty-two (32)
square feet shall be permitted, provided such sign does not
interfere with public safety and is not within the public right-ofway.
Such sign shall not contribute to the three hundred (300)
square foot signage allowance.
11. Persons under sixteen (16) years of age shall not be employed upon
the premises. If any person under eighteen (18) years of age is
employed at a location selling fireworks, the location shall be
supervised by at least one (1) person over the age of twenty-one
(21).
Section
215.1100
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.1100
100:410
12. Sales of fireworks shall be permitted only during the period June
twenty-fifth (25th) through July fifth (5th) each year. No sales shall
be permitted prior to 8:00 A.M. or after 10:00 P.M. on any day,
except on July first (1st), second (2nd) and fourth (4th), upon which
days the closing time may be 11:00 P.M. and July third (3rd), upon
which day the closing time may be Midnight.
13. No sales of fireworks shall be made to any person under eighteen
(18) years of age.
14. Licensees shall not permit smoking or any type of open flames upon
the premises and shall prominently post at least two (2) signs
prohibiting smoking.
15. Licensees shall not permit debris, wrappers or papers to
accumulate on the premises and dumpsters shall be emptied as
necessary to maintain the premises in a clean and orderly manner.
16. Licensees and employees shall not attract customers by means of
flagging of vehicles or engage in any activity which obstructs or
interferes with the free flow of traffic upon any street or highway.
17. Licensees shall be required to, at all times, possess and give to
each paying customer, at no cost, a flyer clearly outlining both the
days and times on which it is legal to set off, use, burn, explode or
fire off fireworks as indicated in Section 215.1090.
E. All items permitted under Chapter 320, RSMo., except those classified
as "1.4G Class C Common Fireworks" by the United States Department
of Transportation, may be sold without acquiring a "fireworks stand"
license.
F. Any license granted hereunder may be suspended and all sales
prohibited by the Mayor and/or his/her designee upon violation of any
of the provisions listed in this Section which pose a danger to the public
or if any ordinance violation remains uncorrected for twenty-four (24)
hours after the licensee has been given notice to correct a violation by
the City. If a written request is delivered to the office of the Mayor
within ten (10) days of the suspension, a hearing shall be held within
ten (10) days of the receipt of such written request by the Mayor to
determine the existence of the violation and the appropriateness of the
suspension. Any licensee whose license has been suspended and does
not request a hearing before the Mayor, or whose suspension is upheld
by the Mayor, shall not be licensed in the next succeeding year for
fireworks sales.
Section
215.1100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.1110
100:411
Section 215.1110. Fireworks — Education. [R.O. 2009 §134.22; Ord.
No. 05-144, 5-17-2005; Ord. No. 07-237, 9-26-2007; Ord. No.
17-217, 10-17-2017156]
The City's cable TV station is hereby authorized and commanded to secure
funding for and, if practicable, produce and develop a short segment on
fireworks safety. This segment shall outline general fireworks safety
principles, as well as educate the public as to the dates and times in which
it will be legal to use and discharge fireworks within the City of St. Charles.
The cable TV station is authorized to secure funding for this segment from
any licensed seller of fireworks.
Section 215.1120. Sale and Use of Rockets and Missiles Prohibited.
[R.O. 2009 §134.23; Ord. No. 05-250, 9-16-2005; Ord. No. 06-153,
6-28-2006; Ord. No. 07-237, 9-26-2007]
Section 215.1130. through Section 215.1150. (Reserved)
A. Notwithstanding any other provision within the Code of Ordinances, it
shall be unlawful for any person or entity, whether licensed under this
Chapter or not, to sell, purchase, discharge, donate, gift, give away or
otherwise dispose of any item as defined as a rocket or missile.
B. For the purpose of this Division, a "rocket" is defined as a casing
attached to a stick that shoots an expelling combustion from one (1) end
that propels it in the air.
C. For the purpose of this Division, a "missile" is defined as a casing
attached to fins that shoots an expelling combustion from one (1) end
that propels it in the air or a collection of multiple plastic tubes
contained within one (1) item that propel into the air by combustion.
156. Editor’s Note: Ord. No. 17-217 also changed the title of this Section from "Fireworks –
Enforcement and Education" to "Fireworks – Education."
Section
215.1110
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.1130
100:412
DIVISION 3
Explosives Code
Section 215.1155. Title. [R.O. 2009 §134.30; Ord. No. 04-133,
7-7-2004]
This Division shall be known and may be cited as "The Explosives Code".
Section 215.1160. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §134.31; Ord. No. 04-133,
7-7-2004]
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
BLASTING AGENT — Any material or mixture consisting of a fuel and
oxidizer intended for blasting, not otherwise classified herein as an
explosive, in which none of the ingredients are classified as explosives
provided that the finished product, as mixed and packaged for use or
shipment, cannot be detonated by means of a No. 8 test blasting cap when
unconfined.
BLASTING CAP NO. 8 — A No. 8 test blasting cap is one containing two (2)
grams of a mixture of eighty percent (80%) mercury fulminate and twenty
percent (20%) potassium chlorate or a cap of equivalent strength.
COUNTY — Unless otherwise specified shall mean that part of St. Charles
County outside of incorporated Cities and Towns and Villages, as well as
within the City of St. Charles.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Division of Building Code Enforcement of
the Department of Community Development of St. Charles County, Missouri,
and shall include authorized agents of the County Division of Building Code
Enforcement of the Department of Community Development.
EXPLOSIVES AND EXPLOSIVE MATERIALS — Gunpowder used for
blasting, all forms of high explosives, fuses, detonators and other detonating
agents, smokeless powders and any chemical compound or mechanical
mixture that is commonly used or intended for the purpose of producing
an explosion containing any oxidizing and combustible units or other
ingredients in such proportions, quantities or packing that ignition by fire,
by friction, by concussion, by percussion, by detonation of, by any part of
the compound or mixture may cause such a sudden generation of highly
heated gases that the resultant gas pressures are capable of producing
destructive effects on contiguous objects or of destroying life or limb; but
explosives shall not include small arms ammunition, gasoline, kerosene or
oils, greases or other petroleum products intended for lubrication purposes.
For the purposes of this Division, explosives shall be classified as Class A,
high explosives and Class B, low explosives and said classifications shall be
as follows:
Class A, high explosives. Those explosives possessing detonating
qualities such as dynamite, nitroglycerin, picric acid, lead azide,
1.
Section
215.1155
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.1160
100:413
PERSON — Any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint stock association and including any trustee, receiver,
assignee or personal representative thereof.
PYROTECHNICS — Any combustible or explosive composition or
manufactured articles designated and prepared for the purpose of
producing audible or visual effects which are commonly referred to as
fireworks.
SINGULAR AND PLURAL — Words used in the singular number shall
include the plural and in the plural the singular.
SCALED DISTANCE — The actual distance (in feet) to the nearest structure,
divided by the square root of the maximum explosive weight (in pounds) per
eight (8) millisecond or greater delay. If delay intervals less than eight (8)
milliseconds are employed or if instantaneous blasting is employed, scaled
distance shall be computed by dividing the actual distance (in feet) by the
square root of the total explosive weight in pounds.
SMALL ARMS AMMUNITION — Any shotgun, rifle, pistol or revolver
cartridge.
UNCONTROLLED STRUCTURES — Any building not owned or controlled
by the explosives user.
Section 215.1165. Scope. [R.O. 2009 §134.32; Ord. No. 04-133,
7-7-2004]
This Division shall apply to the manufacture, storage, sale, transportation or
use of explosives and blasting agents in the County. It shall not apply to the
discharge of fireworks or pyrotechnics and small arms ammunition when
discharged in connection with hunting or target shooting or other lawful
uses connected with firearms.
Section 215.1170. Exception — Military or Governmental Use. [R.O.
2009 §134.33; Ord. No. 04-133, 7-7-2004]
Nothing contained in this Division shall be construed as applying to the
regular military or naval forces of the United States, the duly authorized
militia of the State, the Police or Fire Departments or to regular employees
of the County in the proper performance of their official duties.
Section 215.1175. Exception — Amount of Explosives. [R.O. 2009
§134.34; Ord. No. 04-133, 7-7-2004]
fulminate of mercury, smokeless powder, blasting caps and detonating
primers.
Class B, low explosives. Those explosives not otherwise specified herein
as Class A explosives including, but not limited to, explosives
presenting a flammable hazard such as propellant.
2.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, store, stock or hold for
resale any amount of explosives, blasting agents or blasting caps unless
Section
215.1160
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.1175
100:414
Section 215.1180. Permit — Storage of Explosives — Requirements.
[R.O. 2009 §134.35; Ord. No. 04-133, 7-7-2004]
Section 215.1185. Permit Shall Be Granted — When. [R.O. 2009
§134.36; Ord. No. 04-133, 7-7-2004]
such person has first obtained a written permit therefor from the
Director as hereinafter provided, except for the following items and
amounts:
1. Smokeless gun powder for hand loading of small arms ammunition.
2. Thirty (30) pounds of explosives or blasting agents in industrial
research laboratories and laboratories of technical institutes,
colleges, universities and similar institutions.
3. Retail or wholesale sales of gun powder for hand loading of small
arms ammunition.
All exceptions listed herein are subject to the Federal
Explosives Law PL91-452 and amendments.
A. Application for such permit to possess, store, stock or hold for sale
those items shall be made to the Director on forms provided and shall
contain the following information:
1. Name of applicant.
2. Address of applicant.
3. Place of business.
4. Occupation.
5. Age.
6. Experience in the use of explosives and such other information
relative thereto as the Director may prescribe or require.
7. Maximum amount of each kind of explosives, blasting agents or
blasting caps applicant intends to store or stock at any one (1) time
and the location and type of construction of the magazine or
storage place of same.
A. A person shall be entitled to a permit to store or stock explosives or
blasting agents in the County who has met the following requirements:
1. Filed an application as provided.
2. Secured whatever construction, occupancy or other permits which
the applicant may otherwise be required by law to obtain.
3. Obtained a proper storage facility for the storage of such explosives
as the same may be required by this Division.
Section
215.1175
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.1190
100:415
Section 215.1190. Permit To Explode or Blast Required — Blaster's
License. [R.O. 2009 §134.37; Ord. No. 04-133, 7-7-2004]
Section 215.1195. Application For Permit To Blast — Requirements.
[R.O. 2009 §134.38; Ord. No. 04-133, 7-7-2004]
A. It shall be unlawful, without first having received a permit from the
Director, to explode or cause to be exploded any gunpowder, dynamite,
giant powder, gun cotton or other explosive for the purpose of blasting
out rock, gravel, earth or other like substance within the County.
B. No person shall use or detonate explosives unless he/she is in
possession of a valid license obtained from the Director to use
explosives for blasting purposes. This license shall be known as a
blaster's license. For the purpose of this Division, the Director is
authorized to publish qualifications necessary for an applicant to obtain
a blaster's license. Such qualifications shall take into consideration age,
training education and experience in the knowledge and use of
explosives and shall include a written examination. A license shall be
issued by the Director to any applicant meeting the requirements set
forth by the Director for such a license. Anyone currently licensed as a
blaster by other governmental agencies shall be eligible for a license
without taking an exam.
C. The handling of explosives may be performed by other employees
provided the work is done under the direct supervision of the person
holding the permit to use explosives and providing such employees are
at least twenty-one (21) years of age.
D. The person possessing a valid blaster's license shall be in charge of all
blasting operations. If there is more than one (1) person possessing
such a license on any one (1) operation, one (1) will be designated as
being blaster in charge and shall be responsible for the entire
operation.
A. Application for a permit to use explosives shall be made to the Director
on forms provided and shall contain the following information:
1. Name of applicant.
2. Address of residence.
3. Place of business.
4. Occupation.
5. Age.
6. The location where the blasting is to be done, the type of blasting
material to be used in each charge, the maximum charge with the
required delay, approximate location of charges and the manner in
which the material is to be detonated.
Section
215.1190
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.1195
100:416
Section 215.1200. Blasting — Rules and Regulations. [R.O. 2009
§134.39; Ord. No. 04-133, 7-7-2004]
7. The approximate times and dates of blasting. A blasting permit
shall only be valid for period not to exceed ninety (90) days, unless
it is an ongoing mining operation. A blasting permit for mining shall
be renewed on an annual basis.
8. The name, age and address of the blaster or blasters who shall be
the person or persons who shall actually detonate or have actual
charge of the detonation of any explosive or blasting agent.
9. Blaster's license number.
B. In addition to the above information, there shall be attached to the
application for a permit to blast the following: A certificate of liability
insurance in the minimum amount of one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) for injury to persons and property resulting from the
blasting operations. Such insurance shall be carried in a firm or
corporation which has been duly licensed or permitted to carry on such
business in the State of Missouri and shall be kept and maintained
continuously in force and effect for the duration of the blasting permit.
A. All blasting operations within the County shall be conducted in strict
accordance with the following rules and regulations and it shall be
unlawful for any person to fail to observe and follow said rules and
regulations when blasting. In the event there is a violation of said rules
and regulations, the Director shall have the power and it shall be his/
her duty to revoke the blasting permit issued in connection with the
operation, revoke the license of the blaster in charge, all in accordance
with the terms of this Division and, in addition, the violator or violators
may be punished as otherwise provided by this Division for violations
thereof.
1. Blasting operations shall be carried on with the smallest possible
number of persons present.
2. Before firing any blast, all means of access to the danger zone, the
extent of which shall be determined by the blaster, but in no case to
be closer to the explosion than the blaster, shall be effectively
guarded to exclude all unauthorized personnel. When practical, the
blaster shall then sound a warning of sufficient intensity and
duration to be distinctly audible to all persons within the danger
zone and all such persons shall retire beyond the danger zone. The
danger zone shall then be examined by the blaster to make certain
that all persons have retired therefrom to a place of safety. No blast
shall be fired while any person is in the danger zone.
3. When the point of explosion is within three hundred (300) feet of a
roadway, the blaster shall, just prior to the blast, designate a
sufficient number of employees of the operator, each carrying a red
Section
215.1195
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.1200
100:417
warning flag, to stop all vehicular and pedestrian traffic on each
possible route of travel within three hundred fifty (350) feet of the
point of explosion until the blast has been fired.
4. No person shall return to the danger zone until permitted to do so
by the blaster as announced by audible or visual signal.
5. Immediately following the blast the area shall be examined by the
blaster for evidence of misfired charges.
6. All misfires shall be reported at once to the superintendent or
manager who shall then determine the safe and proper method of
disposal. The unexploded charge shall be detonated if such can be
accomplished without risk of injury to personnel or damage to
property.
7. When electric blasting caps are transported in a motor vehicle
equipped with a radio transmitter, they shall either be in their
original package or stored in a closed metal box that is lined with a
cushioning material such as wood or sponge rubber. When the
electric caps are being placed into or removed from the box, the
transmitter shall not be used.
8. Unless otherwise expressly authorized in writing by the Director,
all blasting operations shall be conducted at no less distance from
any fixed or mobile radio transmitter than indicated in the
following table:
Transmitter Power
Output In Watts
Minimum Distance From Blasting
Operations Using Electric Blasting
Caps In Feet
5—25 100
25—50 150
50—100 220
100—250 350
250—500 450
500—1,000 650
1,000—2,500 1,000
2,500—5,000 1,500
5,000—10,000 2,200
10,000—25,000 3,500
25,000—50,000 5,000
50,000—100,000 7,000
Section
215.1200
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.1200
100:418
When it can be demonstrated by means of approved tests
that electric blasting may be carried out at lesser distances
from the transmitter than required by the table shown, the
Director may allow a variation from the requirements of
said table.
When blasting operations are located near highways or
other public ways, signs shall be erected at least five
hundred (500) feet from the blast areas reading: "BLAST
AREA — SHUT OFF ALL TWO-WAY RADIOS". The letters
of these signs shall be not less than four (4) inches in
height on a contrasting background.
9. Under no circumstances shall the amount of explosives taken
within three (300) feet of a potential point of explosion exceed the
amount estimated by the blaster as necessary for the blast. Such
explosives shall be stacked in piles at least twenty-five (25) feet
from the nearest holes being loaded and at such distances apart
and that any premature explosion will not be likely to propagate
from one pile to another.
10. The explosives containers, if any, shall be opened at the pile and
carried up to the hole, one (1) case or unit at a time for immediate
loading or placed at a loading station not less than six (6) feet from
the hole, except that not more than one hundred (100) pounds of
explosives shall be allowed at the loading station at any one (1)
time. All empty explosives containers (boxes, bags, crates, etc.)
shall be properly disposed of, daily, in a safe manner.
11. Explosives shall be distributed in such a manner that the distances
from storage piles to the allowable maximum quantity of one
hundred (100) pounds of explosives at the loading station or
between such one hundred (100) pound loading station piles shall
not be less than the quantities shown in the following quantitydistance
table:
Pounds of
Explosives
Distance Between Piles of Explosives
in Feet
Up to 50 21
100 25
200 32
300 37
400 41
500 44
750 50
1,000 55
1,500 64
Section
215.1200
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.1200
100:419
Pounds of
Explosives
Distance Between Piles of Explosives
in Feet
2,000 70
2,500 75
5,000 96
10,000 123
12. Excessively large amounts of explosives shall not be delivered to
the loading area at one (1) time. If deliveries of explosives are made
by truck, the quantity permitted at or near the loading operations
shall be limited to one (1) truck load. Other trucks loaded with
explosives shall wait or be unloaded in separate safe places away
from the loading operations.
13. Explosives in excess of immediate requirements, when removed
from the main storage magazine and delivered in the vicinity of a
blasting operation, shall be stored in a Class II magazine.
14. Caps shall not be brought to the loading area nor attached to the
detonating fuse until all is in readiness to fire the blast.
15. Blast matting (which may include earth) shall be required when
blast operations and/or geological conditions create fly rock that
could damage or injure persons or property.
16. In all blasting operations, except as hereinafter otherwise
provided, the maximum peak particle velocity of any one (1) or
three (3) mutually perpendicular components of the ground motion
in the vertical and horizontal directions shall not exceed one (1)
inch per second at the property line of the blast site. The Director
may grant an exception to the rule when it is not an ongoing
blasting operation.
17. Seismographic instrumentation shall be required on any blast site
where the nearest uncontrolled structure or public utility is located
within a scaled distance of sixty-five (65). An "uncontrolled
structure" is defined as any occupied building not owned or
controlled by the explosives user. The seismograph shall be placed
at or near the closest uncontrolled structure(s).
18. Instrumentation shall be in good operating condition and be
properly calibrated with a current (within one (1) year of date of
use) calibration sticker affixed to each instrument. If an
instrument(s) is found to be not operating properly or out of
calibration, blasting operations shall be halted until the
appropriate repairs or recalibration are performed or a proper
instrument(s) is provided. Seismograph operator shall be trained in
the use of that instrument(s).
Section
215.1200
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.1200
100:420
19. Blasting operations without instrumentation will be considered as
being within the limits set forth in this Subsection if at a specified
location on at least five (5) blasts instrumentation has shown that
the maximum peak particle velocity at the specified location is fifty
percent (50%) or less of the limit set forth in this Subsection and
with written permission from the Director, provided that for all
future blasts the scaled distance is equal to or greater than the
scaled distance for the instrumental blast. However, if a scaled
distance less than thirty-five (35) is employed, a seismograph is
required regardless of the seismic readings of previous blasts.
"Scaled distance" means the actual distance in feet divided by the
square root of the maximum explosive weight in pounds that is
detonated per delay period for delay intervals of eight (8)
milliseconds or greater. If delay intervals less than eight (8)
milliseconds are employed or if instantaneous blasting is employed,
scaled distance shall be computed by dividing the actual distance in
feet by the square root of the total explosive weight in pounds.
Blasting operations which would result in ground vibrations that
would have a particle velocity of any one (1) of three (3) mutually
perpendicular components in excess of three-tenths (.30) inches
per second and a frequency of less than twenty (20) Hertz at any
uncontrolled structure is prohibited. In addition, blasting is
prohibited below the frequency of three (3) Hertz. Blasting at
frequencies of twenty (20) Hertz to thirty (30) Hertz shall not
exceed a particle velocity of any one (1) of three (3) mutually
perpendicular components of five-tenths (.50) inches per second.
Blasting at frequencies above thirty (30) Hertz shall not exceed a
particle velocity of any one (1) of three (3) mutually perpendicular
components of eight-tenths (.80) inches per second. The Director
may grant an exception to the requirements of this Subsection for
blasting operations of less than thirty (30) days' duration, provided
that such operations do not exceed the following limits at the
nearest uncontrolled structure:
a. The maximum peak particle velocity of any one (1) of three (3)
mutually perpendicular components of the ground motion in
the vertical and horizontal directions shall not exceed fivetenths
(.50) inches per second for blasts below ten (10) Hertz
or one (1.0) inches per second for blasts from ten (10) to thirty
(30) Hertz or two (2.0) inches per second for blasts above
thirty (30) Hertz.
b. The maximum air blast shall not to exceed one hundred twenty
(120) decibels at two (2) Hertz-flat response and above.
20. Airblast limitations and measurements.
a. Airblast shall be controlled so that it does not exceed the
maximum limit specified below at any uncontrolled structure.
Airblast monitoring equipment shall be used for all blasts at
the nearest uncontrolled structure and records of that
Section
215.1200
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.1200
100:421
Section 215.1205. Blasting Agents — Transportation, Storage and
Use. [R.O. 2009 §134.40; Ord. No. 04-133, 7-7-2004]
Unless otherwise set forth in this Division, blasting agents shall be
transported, stored and used in the same manner as explosives. Storage of
explosives shall comply with the Fire Prevention Code of St. Charles County,
Section 205.060, Ordinances of St. Charles County, Missouri, as amended.
Section 215.1210. Buildings Used For Mixing of Blasting Agents —
Location. [R.O. 2009 §134.41; Ord. No. 04-133, 7-7-2004]
Buildings or other facilities used for mixing blasting agents shall be located
with respect to inhabited buildings, passenger railroads and public
highways in accordance with the latest edition of the Fire Prevention Code
of St. Charles County, Section 205.060, Ordinances of St. Charles County,
Missouri, as amended.
Section 215.1215. Use of Blasting Agents. [R.O. 2009 §134.42; Ord.
No. 04-133, 7-7-2004]
Persons using blasting agents shall comply with all of the applicable
provisions of this Division for the use of explosives.
Section 215.1220. Records. [R.O. 2009 §134.43; Ord. No. 04-133,
7-7-2004]
monitoring shall be retained for at least one (1) year for review
by and production to the Director.
Lower Frequency Limits of
Measuring System, Hz (+ 3dB)
Maximum Level in
dB
2 Hertz or higher — flat response 120 peak
b. All measuring systems used shall have a flat frequency
response of at least two hundred (200) Hz at the upper end.
21. When blasting in the vicinity of uncontrolled structures, the
explosives users will determine the structures lying within a scaled
distance of thirty-five (35). The distance will be determined by the
following:
D = 35vW. Where D is the distance limit and W is the maximum
charge weight per eight (8) ms delay interval. The explosives user
shall contact the owners of structures within the distance limit and
offer to have a pre-blast inspection performed on their structure
at no cost to the owner.
A. A record known as a log shall be kept for every blast.
B. A blasting record, known as a log, shall be kept on the site of any
blasting operations. This log shall be made available to the Director or
Section
215.1200
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.1220
100:422
Section 215.1225. Fees. [R.O. 2009 §134.44; Ord. No. 04-133,
7-7-2004]
The following fees are hereby established for the licenses and permits
required by this Division:
Annual blaster's license $100.00
Annual permit to store, stock or hold
explosives for resale
Class I magazine $150.00
Class II magazine $75.00
Blasting permit, per location $100.00
Section 215.1230. Vendor To Keep Record of Sales — Duties.157
[R.O. 2009 §134.45; Ord. No. 04-133, 7-7-2004]
authorized agents upon demand. This record shall be maintained
available for inspection for a period of six (6) months after such blasting
operations are completed.
C. Minimum recorded data shall be as follows:
1. Amount of explosives used (weight).
2. Kind of blasting caps, distribution of instantaneous or short-period
delay blasting caps or both; delay interval used; order of firing by
switch.
3. Weather conditions including direction and approximate velocity of
wind; atmospheric temperature; relative humidity; cloud
conditions.
4. Date and time of firing of blast.
5. Name of person in responsible charge of loading and firing;
blaster's permit number.
6. Name and location of blasting site.
7. Signature and title of person making report.
D. Any falsification, alterations or misrepresentation of any records of
blasting operations will be cause for suspension or revocation of
blasting permits and blaster's license.
A. Every person who has a permit to store, stock or store for resale
explosives as defined herein shall be required to maintain a bound
ledger and shall record or cause to be recorded therein the following
157. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
215.1220
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.1230
100:423
Section 215.1235. Hours During Which Blasting Prohibited.158 [R.O.
2009 §134.46; Ord. No. 04-133, 7-7-2004]
It shall be unlawful for any person to explode or cause to be exploded,
any gunpowder, dynamite, giant powder, gun cotton or other explosives as
herein defined for any purpose during the hours of 6:00 P.M. to 8:00 A.M.
except that a special permit to use explosives during the hours of 6:00 P.M.
to 8:00 A.M. may be issued by the Director when the Director determines
that conditions beyond the control of the person seeking a special permit
prevent such person from using explosives during regular hours permitted.
Section 215.1240. Reckless and Wanton Handling of Explosives
Prohibited.159 [R.O. 2009 §134.47; Ord. No. 04-133, 7-7-2004]
No person shall load, unload or otherwise handle explosives in a reckless
and wanton manner, thereby endangering the life, limb or property of any
person.
Section 215.1245. Right of Inspection.160 [R.O. 2009 §134.48; Ord.
No. 04-133, 7-7-2004]
information in connection with every sale, vending or other
disbursement of explosives:
1. Name of vendee.
2. Address of vendee.
3. Date and time of sale.
4. Type of explosive.
5. Quantity of explosive.
B. Such record shall be open to inspection by the Director or authorized
agents during usual business hours. No licensed user of explosives or
blasting agents shall be allowed to resell explosives or blasting agents
except by the written authorization of the Director.
A. The Director or the Sheriff's Department Bomb Squad may, at any
reasonable time, inspect premises, buildings and installations used for
storage or sale of explosives or blasting agents or any premises on
which blasting operations are being conducted for the purpose of
determining whether the provisions of this Division are being complied
with.
B. The Director or the Sheriff's Department Bomb Squad may, during
normal business hours, enter and inspect the premises, including
158. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
159. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
160. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
215.1230
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.1245
100:424
Section 215.1250. Inspection of Fire or Accident Scene. [R.O. 2009
§134.49; Ord. No. 04-133, 7-7-2004]
The Director or any authorized agent may inspect the site of any accident
or fire in which there is reason to believe any explosive materials were
involved. The Director or any authorized agents, at any reasonable time,
enter into or upon any property where explosive materials have been used
or are suspected of having been used or have been found in an otherwise
unauthorized location. The Director shall notify the Sheriff's Department
Bomb Squad when it has reason to believe that explosive materials were
involved in any accident or fire.
Section 215.1255. Violation On Inspection — Notice To Violator.
[R.O. 2009 §134.50; Ord. No. 04-133, 7-7-2004]
If upon inspection a violation of this Division is found to exist, the Director
shall file with the person holding the permit a notice citing the violation and
ordering its correction. If such order is not complied with within the time
period specified in the notice, which may require immediate compliance,
the Director may suspend any permit or license issued to the person
involved. Nothing herein relating to revocation of permits shall be
construed to abrogate or suspend any proceedings against or prosecution
of the violator which may be instituted against the violator under the
provisions of this Division.
Section 215.1260. Conflict With State or Federal Regulation of
Explosives — Suspension. [R.O. 2009 §134.51; Ord. No. 04-133,
7-7-2004]
During such time as any provision herein shall conflict with any State or
Federal Statute or regulation, such provision herein conflicting shall be
suspended.
places of storage, of any licensed importer, licensed manufacturer,
licensed manufacturer-limited, licensed dealer or permittee for the
purpose of inspecting or examining any documents and records
required to be kept by such person by law and any explosive materials
kept or stored by such person.
C. Any person who shall hinder or obstruct the Director or authorized
agents or the Sheriff's Department in the performance of his/her official
duties shall be guilty of a violation of the provisions of this Division and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in Article X of
the St. Charles County Code of Ordinances.
Section
215.1245
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.1265
100:425
Section 215.1265. Stolen Explosives.161 [R.O. 2009 §134.52; Ord.
No. 04-133, 7-7-2004]
No person shall, with the intent of depriving the owner of lawful possession
thereof, use, possess, receive, conceal, transport, sell or dispose of any
stolen explosive materials knowing or having reasonable cause to believe
such materials were stolen.
Section 215.1270. Theft or Loss of Explosives. [R.O. 2009 §134.53;
Ord. No. 04-133, 7-7-2004]
Any person who has knowledge of the theft or loss of any explosive
materials shall immediately report such theft or loss to the Director who
shall then notify the St. Charles County Sheriff's Department and its Bomb
Squad.
Section 215.1280. Right To Appeal. [R.O. 2009 §134.55; Ord. No.
04-133, 7-7-2004]
Section 215.1285. Penalty. [R.O. 2009 §134.99]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter for which no
other penalty is set forth shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Section
100.150 of this Code of Ordinances.
A. Any applicant, permittee or other person aggrieved by any order of the
Director issued pursuant to this Division, except the revocation of a
permit which is covered elsewhere in this Division, may file an appeal in
writing with the Director within ten (10) days of such order and the
Director shall fix a time and place for hearing to be held not less that
thirty (30) days of the filing of appeal. The Building Commission shall
hear all appeals and determine, by majority, that the Director acted in
accordance with this Division. All evidence offered at the hearing shall
be preserved by the Director and oral testimony shall be recorded
verbatim. All cost for said appeal shall be paid by the person(s)
requesting the appeal. A deposit of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall
be filed with the written appeal.
B. The decision and action of the Director at the hearing to revoke the
permit shall be reviewable in a court of competent jurisdiction by a writ
or certiorari filed by the permittee so affected or by any other person
aggrieved by the action of the Director, within ten (10) days after said
decision in writing has been made and forwarded to said permittee.
161. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
215.1265
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.1285
100:426
Article VI
Drug Offenses162
DIVISION 1
General Provisions
Section 215.1290. Possession of Marijuana.163
Except as authorized by Sections 195.005 to 195.425, RSMo., it is unlawful
for any person to possess or have under his/her control marijuana as defined
in Section 195.010, RSMo.
Section 215.1295. Possession or Control of A Controlled
Substance.164
Except as authorized by Sections 195.005 to 195.425, RSMo., it is unlawful
for any person to possess or have under his/her control a controlled
substance as defined by Section 195.010, RSMo.
Section 215.1300. Limitations On The Retail Sale of
Methamphetamine Precursor Drugs.
A. The retail sale of methamphetamine precursor drugs shall be limited to:
1. Sales in packages containing not more than a total of three (3)
grams of one (1) or more methamphetamine precursor drugs
calculated in terms of ephedrine base, pseudoephedrine base and
phenylpropanolamine base; and
2. For non-liquid products, sales in blister packs, each blister
containing not more than two (2) dosage units, or where the use of
blister packs is technically infeasible, sales in unit dose packets or
pouches.
B. Any person holding a retail sales license pursuant to Chapter 144,
RSMo., who knowingly violates Subsection (A) of this Section is guilty of
an ordinance violation.
C. Any person who is considered the general owner or operator of the
outlet where ephedrine, pseudoephedrine or phenylpropanolamine
products are available for sale who violates Subsection (A) of this
Section shall not be penalized pursuant to this Section if such person
documents that an employee training program was in place to provide
the employee with information on the State and Federal regulations
regarding ephedrine, pseudoephedrine or phenylpropanolamine.
162. Cross Reference—As To Penalty, §100.150.
163. Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
164. Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.1290
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.1305
100:427
Section 215.1305. Unlawful Use of Drug Paraphernalia.165
It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug
paraphernalia as defined by Section 195.010, RSMo., to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce,
process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject,
ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance as defined by Section 195.010, RSMo., or an imitation controlled
substance as defined by Section 195.010, RSMo., in violation of Sections
195.005 to 195.425, RSMo.
Section 215.1310. Inhalation or Inducing Others To Inhale Solvent
Fumes To Cause Certain Reactions, Prohibited — Exceptions.
No person shall intentionally smell or inhale the fumes of any solvent,
particularly toluol, amyl nitrite, butyl nitrite, cyclohexyl nitrite, ethyl nitrite,
pentyl nitrite and propyl nitrite and their iso-analogues or induce any other
person to do so for the purpose of causing a condition of, or inducing
symptoms of, intoxication, elation, euphoria, dizziness, excitement,
irrational behavior, exhilaration, paralysis, stupefaction, or dulling of senses
or nervous system, or for the purpose of, in any manner, changing,
distorting or disturbing the audio, visual or mental processes; except that
this Section shall not apply to the inhalation of any anesthesia for medical
or dental purposes.
Section 215.1315. Inducing, or Possession With Intent To Induce,
Symptoms By Use of Solvents and Other Substances, Prohibited.
A. As used in this Section "alcohol beverage vaporizer" means any device
which, by means of heat, a vibrating element, or any method, is capable
of producing a breathable mixture containing one (1) or more alcoholic
beverages to be dispensed for inhalation into the lungs via the nose or
mouth or both.
B. No person shall intentionally or willfully induce the symptoms of
intoxication, elation, euphoria, dizziness, excitement, irrational
behavior, exhilaration, paralysis, stupefaction, or dulling of the senses
or nervous system, distortion of audio, visual or mental processes by
the use or abuse of any of the following substances:
1. Solvents, particularly toluol;
2. Ethyl alcohol;
3. Amyl nitrite and its iso-analogues;
4. Butyl nitrite and its iso-analogues;
5. Cyclohexyl nitrite and its iso-analogues;
165. Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.1305
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.1315
100:428
Section 215.1320. Possession or Purchase of Solvents To Aid Others
in Violations, Prohibited — Violations of Sections 215.1310 To
215.1315 — Penalty.166
Section 215.1325. Ephedrine Control. [R.O. 2009 §96.11; Ord. No.
02-283, 12-13-2002]
6. Ethyl nitrite and its iso-analogues;
7. Pentyl nitrite and its iso-analogues; and
8. Propyl nitrite and its iso-analogues.
C. This Section shall not apply to substances that have been approved by
the United States Food and Drug Administration as therapeutic drug
products or are contained in approved over-the-counter drug products
or administered lawfully pursuant to the order of an authorized medical
practitioner.
D. No person shall intentionally possess any solvent, particularly toluol,
amyl nitrite, butyl nitrite, cyclohexyl nitrite, ethyl nitrite, pentyl nitrite
and propyl nitrite and their iso-analogues for the purpose of using it in
the manner prohibited by Section 215.1310 and this Section.
E. No person shall possess or use an alcoholic beverage vaporizer.
F. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit the legal
consumption of intoxicating liquor.
A. No person shall intentionally possess or buy any solvent, particularly
toluol, amyl nitrite, butyl nitrite, cyclohexyl nitrite, ethyl nitrite, pentyl
nitrite and propyl nitrite and their iso-analogues for the purpose of
inducing or aiding any other person to violate the provisions of Sections
215.1310 and 215.1315 hereof.
B. Any person who violates any provision of Sections 215.1310—215.1320
is guilty of an ordinance violation for the first (1st) violation.
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this Section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
COUNTER — Any obstructive, physical barrier that separates
ephedrine products from access by a customer or the general public
and which makes such products available to a customer or the general
public only through or by the act of an employee of the seller.
EPHEDRINE — All forms of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, ephedrine
hydrochloride, pseudoephedrine hydrochloride, phenylpropanolamine
and all combinations of these chemicals.
166. Note—Under certain circumstances this offense can be a felony under state law.
Section
215.1315
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.1325
100:429
Section 215.1330. through Section 215.1345. (Reserved)
EPHEDRINE PRODUCT — Any product that contains ephedrine, its
salts, isomers or salts of isomers as its sole active ingredient or in
combination with less than therapeutically significant quantities or
other active ingredients.
PACKAGE — Any number of pills, tablets, capsules, caplets or individual
units of a substance held within a container intended for sale.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, trust, limited
liability company, firm, association or other entity selling an ephedrine
product to customers.
SELL — To knowingly furnish, give away, exchange, transfer, deliver,
surrender or supply, whether for monetary gain or not.
B. Restrictions On Public Access To Ephedrine Products. It shall be
unlawful for any person to display or offer to sell any ephedrine product
unless the ephedrine product is placed behind a counter.
C. Exception. The prohibition contained in Subsection (B) above shall not
apply to the sale of animal feed containing ephedrine or dietary
supplement products containing naturally occurring or herbal ephedra
and extract of ephedra.
D. Reporting Theft Of Ephedrine Products.
1. Any person who sells ephedrine products and who discovers a
theft, disappearance or other loss of an ephedrine product shall
report the theft, disappearance or loss in writing to the St. Charles
Police Department within three (3) calendar days of such a
discovery.
2. Any person who sells ephedrine products shall report to the St.
Charles Police Department any difference between the quantity of
ephedrine products shipped and the quantity of ephedrine products
received within three (3) calendar days of discovery.
Section
215.1325
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.1330
100:430
DIVISION 2
Synthetic Cannabinoids
Section 215.1350. Definitions. [Ord. No. 10-62 §1, 4-13-2010]
For the purpose of this Division, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ILLEGAL SMOKING PRODUCT — Any substance, whether described as
tobacco, herbs, incense, spice or any blend thereof, which includes any one
(1) or more of the follow chemicals:
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, entity, wholesaler,
retailer or any licensed or unlicensed business.
Section 215.1355. Sale, Gift, Offer or Display Unlawful. [Ord. No.
10-62 §1, 4-13-2010]
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, gift or publicly display
for sale any illegal smoking product.
Section 215.1360. Possession Unlawful. [Ord. No. 10-62 §1,
4-13-2010]
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess any illegal smoking
product.
Section 215.1365. Penalty. [Ord. No. 10-62 §1, 4-13-2010]
Any person violating Section 215.1355 or 215.1360 of the Code of
Ordinances of the City of St. Charles shall be guilty of an ordinance violation
and subject to the penalty set forth in Section 215.1405(A). A separate
offense shall be deemed committed for each sale, offer to sell, gift or
public display for sale. Any person violating Section 215.1355 or 215.1360
a second (2nd) or subsequent time shall be guilty of an ordinance violation
and upon a plea of guilty or a finding of guilt shall be subject to a sentence
of no less than a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
Section 215.1370. through Section 215.1385. (Reserved)
2-[(1R, 3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol (also
known as CP47, 497) and homologues;
1.
(6As, 10aS)-9-(hydroxmethyl)-6, 6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a,
7, 10, 10a-tetrahydro benzo[c]chromen-1-ol)(also known as HU-211 or
Dexanabinol);
2.
3. 1-Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-018); or
Butyl-3-(1—naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-073);
regardless of whether the substance is marketed for the purpose of
being smoked.
4.
Section
215.1350
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.1370
100:431

DIVISION 3
Drug Paraphernalia and Controlled Substances
Section 215.1390. Delivery To Minors.167 [R.O. 2009 §135.22; CC
1981 §20-134; Ord. No. 82-14, 3-17-1982]
Any person eighteen (18) years of age or over who violates Section
215.1305 by delivering drug paraphernalia to a person under eighteen (18)
years of age who is at least three (3) years his/her junior is guilty of a
separate and special offense and upon conviction shall be subject to the
penalty set forth in Section 215.1405.
Section 215.1395. Advertising.168 [R.O. 2009 §135.23; CC 1981
§20-135; Ord. No. 82-14, 3-17-1982]
It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill
or other publication any advertisement knowing, or under circumstances
where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the advertisement,
in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended
for use as drug paraphernalia.
Section 215.1400. Possession, Distribution or Delivery of MDPV
Prohibited — Penalty. [Ord. No. 11-77 §1, 4-20-2011]
A. For purposes of this Section, the following words mean:
DELIVER — The actual, constructive, or attempted transfer from one
person to another of MDPV, whether or not there is an agency
relationship, and includes a sale.
DISTRIBUTE — To deliver other than by administering or dispensing
MDPV.
MDPV — Includes any material, compound, mixture or preparation
containing any quantity of the following substances having a stimulant
effect on the central nervous system, including their salts, isomers
and salts of isomers of 3.4 Methylenedioxyprovalerone, Methylone,
Mephedrone, 4-methoxymethcathinone, 4-Fluoromethcathinine, and
3-Fluoromethcathinone.
POSSESS — With the knowledge of the presence and nature of a
substance, either actually or constructively in control of a substance.
A person has actual possession if he/she has the substance on his/
her person or within easy reach and convenient control. A person
who, although not in actual possession, has the power and intention
at a given time to exercise dominion or control over the substance
either directly or through another person or persons is in constructive
possession of it.
167. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §215.1405.
168. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §215.1405.
Section
215.1390
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.1400
100:433
Section 215.1405. Penalty. [R.O. 2009 §135.99; CC 1981 §§20-131,
20-134, 20-136; Ord. No. 75-73, 12-10-1975; Ord. No. 82-14,
3-17-1982; Ord. No. 10-62 §2, 4-13-2010]
Section 215.1410. through Section 215.1450. (Reserved)
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to possession, distribute or deliver
any substance containing MDPV.
C. The penalty for violation of this Section is set forth in Section 100.150
of the Code of Ordinances.
A. Any person who violates the provisions of Section 215.1355, 215.1360
or 215.1390 shall be confined in the City Prison for a term of not more
than one (1) year or be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or be punished by both
such confinement and fine.
B. Any person who shall violate Section 215.1395 and no penalty is
otherwise provided, shall pay a civil penalty as follows:
Section Offense
First
Offense
Second
Offense
Third and
Subsequent
Offenses
215.1395 Advertisement of
drug
paraphernalia
$100.00 $300.00 $500.00
Section
215.1400
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.1410
100:434
Article VII
Public Health And Safety Offenses169
DIVISION 1
Public Safety
Section 215.1460. Abandonment of Airtight or Semi-Airtight
Containers.170
Section 215.1470. Cisterns, Wells and Dangerous Excavations To Be
Securely Fenced and Covered.171 [R.O. 2009 §96.07; CC 1981 §20-51]
It shall be the duty of every owner or occupant of an unenclosed lot of
ground in this City having a cistern or well, or both, or any other deep
or dangerous excavation thereon to cover or fence the same with a close,
secure and substantial cover or fence and to keep and maintain the same so
as to prevent persons or animals from falling therein.
Section 215.1480. Misuse of Emergency Telephone Service
Unlawful; Definitions. [Ord. No. 13-220 §1, 11-19-2013]
It shall be unlawful for any person to misuse the emergency telephone
service. For the purposes of this Section, "emergency" means any incident
involving danger to life or property that calls for an emergency response
dispatch of police, fire, EMS or other public safety organization, "misuse
the emergency telephone service" includes, but is not limited to, repeatedly
calling 911 for non-emergency situations causing operators or equipment
to be in use when emergency situations may need such operators or
A. A person commits the offense of abandonment of airtight icebox if he/
she abandons, discards or knowingly permits to remain on premises
under his/her control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned
or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semi-airtight
container which has a capacity of one and one-half (1½) cubic feet or
more and an opening of fifty (50) square inches or more and which has a
door or lid equipped with hinge, latch or other fastening device capable
of securing such door or lid without rendering such equipment
harmless to human life by removing such hinges, latches or other
hardware which may cause a person to be confined therein.
B. Subsection (A) of this Section does not apply to an icebox, refrigerator
or other airtight or semi-airtight container located in that part of a
building occupied by a dealer, warehouseman or repairman.
C. The defendant shall have the burden of injecting the issue under
Subsection (B) of this Section.
169. Cross Reference—As To Penalty, §100.150.
170. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
171. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
215.1460
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.1480
100:435
equipment and "repeatedly" means three or more times within a one-month
period.
Section 215.1490. Exceeding The Occupant Load Of An Area, Room
Or Space; Failure To Conspicuously Post Occupant Load Sign. [Ord.
No. 18-021, 2-6-2018]
Section 215.1500. (Reserved)
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner, possessor or person in charge of
management of an area, room, or space to exceed the occupant load of
the area, room, or space as set forth in the International Fire Code
which is adopted by reference pursuant to Code of Ordinances Section
205.060, or the occupant load stated on the occupant load sign posted
in an area, room, or space. The notice requirement of Section 109.3, or
such successor section, of the International Fire Code shall not be
applicable to this offense.
B. It shall be unlawful to not conspicuously place near the main exit or exit
access doorway from an area, room or space, the occupant load sign.
The occupant load sign shall be of the height and width dimensions and
shall have the print font size as determined by the City Building Code
Official responsible for determining occupant loads.
C. For purposes of this Section:
1. The possessor of an area, room, or space shall mean the person
who has the legal right to occupy or possess the area, room, or
space;
2. The person in charge of management of an area, room, or space is
the person managing the area, room, or space at the time the
occupancy load is exceeded; and
3. The owner of an area, room, or space is the person who has the fee
interest in the area, room, or space.
D. It shall be prima facie evidence of exceeding the occupant load of an
area, room, or space if the number of persons present in an area, room,
or space is greater than the occupant load stated on the occupant load
sign posted in an area, room, or space.
E. Repeat And Habitual Offenders. If it is shown on the trial of an offense
under this Section that the defendant has previously been finally
convicted of an offense under this Section, on conviction the person
shall be punished by a fine of not less than three hundred dollars
($300.00).
F. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other
remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief,
administrative adjudication and revocation of licenses or permits.
Section
215.1480
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.1500
100:436
DIVISION 2
Public Health
Section 215.1510. Tattooing Restricted.172 [R.O. 2009 §96.08; CC
1981 §20-58; Ord. No. 82-27, 4-21-1982]
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct the business of, solicit or offer
to perform or perform any tattooing upon a live human body unless such
person be a licensed medical or osteopathic doctor or physician.
Section 215.1520. Sale of Body Piercing Instruments To Persons
Under Eighteen Years of Age Prohibited. [R.O. 2009 §96.10; Ord. No.
97-278, 8-25-1997]
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell in the City of
St. Charles to any person under eighteen (18) years of age any device
or instrument designed for the piercing of the human body or its skin,
which device or instrument has as a purpose the attachment of objects of
adornment to the human body.
Section 215.1530. through Section 215.1570. (Reserved)
172. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
215.1510
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.1530
100:437

Article VIII
Offenses Concerning Tobacco173
DIVISION 1
In General
Section 215.1580. Smoking in Elevators.174 [R.O. 2009 §96.04; CC
1981 §14-5; Ord. No. 79-15, 2-14-1979]
It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or to carry any lighted or
burning tobacco in any form onto any elevator used by the general public.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this Section upon conviction
shall be punished as provided in Section 100.150.
Section 215.1590. through Section 215.1610. (Reserved)
173. Cross Reference—As To Penalty, §100.150.
174. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
215.1580
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.1590
100:439

DIVISION 2
Offenses Concerning Tobacco and Minors175
Section 215.1620. Definitions.
For purposes of this Division, the following definitions shall apply:
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT — Any non-combustible product
containing nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether
chewed, absorbed, dissolved, or ingested by any other means. Alternative
nicotine product does not include any vapor product, tobacco product or
any product regulated as a drug or device by the United States Food and
Drug Administration under Chapter V of the Food, Drug and Cosmetic
Act.[Ord. No. 15-121§2, 6-2-2015]
DISTRIBUTE — A conveyance to the public by sale, barter, gift or sample.
MINOR — A person under the age of eighteen (18).
PROOF OF AGE — A driver's license or other generally accepted means of
identification that contains a picture of the individual and appears on its
face to be valid.
ROLLING PAPERS — Paper designed, manufactured, marketed or sold for
use primarily as a wrapping or enclosure for tobacco which enables a
person to roll loose tobacco into a smokeable cigarette.
SAMPLE — A tobacco product, alternative nicotine product, or vapor
product distributed to members of the general public at no cost or at
nominal cost for product promotional purposes.[Ord. No. 15-121§2,
6-2-2015]
SAMPLING — The distribution to members of the general public of tobacco
product, alternative nicotine product, or vapor product samples.[Ord. No.
15-121§2, 6-2-2015]
TOBACCO PRODUCTS — Any substance containing tobacco leaf including,
but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco
or dipping tobacco, but does not include alternative nicotine products or
vapor products.[Ord. No. 15-121§2, 6-2-2015]
VAPOR PRODUCT — Any non-combustible product containing nicotine that
employs a heating element, power source, electronic circuit, or other
electronic, chemical or mechanical means, regardless of shape or size,
that can be used to produce vapor from nicotine in a solution or other
form. Vapor product includes any electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device and any
vapor cartridge or other container of nicotine in a solution or other form
that is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic
cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device.
Vapor product does not include any alternative nicotine product or tobacco
product.[Ord. No. 15-121§2, 6-2-2015]
175. Cross Reference—As to minors—curfew, §§215.340 et seq.
Section
215.1620
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.1620
100:441
VENDING MACHINE — Any mechanical, electric or electronic self-service
device which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment,
dispenses tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor
products.[Ord. No. 15-121§2, 6-2-2015]
Section 215.1630. Unlawful To Sell or Distribute Tobacco Products
To Minors — Vending Machine Requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, provide or distribute tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products or vapor products to persons
under eighteen (18) years of age. [Ord. No. 15-121 §2, 6-2-2015]
B. All vending machines that dispense tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products or vapor products shall be located within the
unobstructed line of sight and under the direct supervision of an adult
responsible for preventing persons less than eighteen (18) years of age
from purchasing any tobacco product, alternative nicotine product or
vapor product from such machine or shall be equipped with a lock-out
device to prevent the machines from being operated until the person
responsible for monitoring sales from the machines disables the lock.
Such locking device shall be of a design that prevents it from being left
in an unlocked condition and which will allow only a single sale when
activated. A locking device shall not be required on machines that are
located in areas where persons less than eighteen (18) years of age are
not permitted or prohibited by law. An owner of an establishment whose
vending machine is not in compliance with the provisions of this
Subsection shall be subject to the penalties contained in Subsection (D)
of this Section. A determination of non-compliance may be made by a
local law enforcement agency or the Division of Alcohol and Tobacco
Control. Nothing in this Section shall apply to a vending machine if
located in a factory, private club or other location not generally
accessible to the general public. [Ord. No. 15-121 §2, 6-2-2015]
C. No person or entity shall sell, provide or distribute any tobacco product,
alternative nicotine product or vapor product or rolling papers to any
minor or sell any individual cigarettes to any person in this State. This
Subsection shall not apply to the distribution by family members on
property that is not open to the public. [Ord. No. 15-121 §2,
6-2-2015]
D. Any person, including, but not limited to, a sales clerk, owner or
operator, who violates Subsections (A), (B) or (C) of this Section or
Section 215.1660 of this Division shall be penalized as follows:
1. For the first offense, twenty-five dollars ($25.00);
2. For the second offense, one hundred dollars ($100.00);
3. For a third and subsequent offense, two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00).
Section
215.1620
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.1630
100:442
E. Any owner of the establishment where tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products or vapor products are available for sale who violates
Subsection (C) of this Section shall not be penalized pursuant to this
Section if such person documents the following: [Ord. No. 15-121 §2,
6-2-2015]
1. An in-house or other tobacco compliance employee training
program was in place to provide the employee with information on
the State and Federal regulations regarding sales of tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products or vapor products to
minors. Such training program must be attended by all employees
who sell tobacco products, alternative nicotine products or vapor
products to the general public;
2. A signed statement by the employee stating that the employee has
been trained and understands the State laws and Federal
regulations regarding the sale of tobacco, alternative nicotine
products or vapor products to minors; and
3. Such in-house or other tobacco compliance training meets the
minimum training criteria, which shall not exceed a total of ninety
(90) minutes in length, established by the Division of Alcohol and
Tobacco Control.
F. The exemption in Subsection (E) of this Section shall not apply to any
person who is considered the general owner or operator of the outlet
where tobacco products, alternative nicotine products or vapor
products are available for sale if: [Ord. No. 15-121 §2, 6-2-2015]
1. Four (4) or more violations per location of Subsection (C) of this
Section occur within a one (1) year period; or
2. Such person knowingly violates or knowingly allows his/her
employees to violate Subsection (C) of this Section.
G. If a sale is made by an employee of the owner of an establishment in
violation of this Division, the employee shall be guilty of an offense
established in Subsections (A), (B) and (C) of this Section. If a vending
machine is in violation of Section 215.1660, the owner of the
establishment shall be guilty of an offense established in Subsections
(C) and (D) of this Section. If a sample is distributed by an employee of a
company conducting the sampling, such employee shall be guilty of an
offense established in Subsections (C) and (D) of this Section.
H. A person cited for selling, providing or distributing any tobacco
product, alternative nicotine product or vapor product to any individual
less than eighteen (18) years of age in violation of Subsections (A), (B)
or (C) of this Section shall conclusively be presumed to have reasonably
relied on proof of age of the purchaser or recipient, and such person
shall not be found guilty of such violation if such person raises and
proves as an affirmative defense that such individual presented a
driver's license or other government-issued photo identification
Section
215.1630
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.1630
100:443
Section 215.1640. Minors Prohibited From Purchase or Possession
of Tobacco — Misrepresentation of Age. [Ord. No. 15-121 §2,
6-2-2015]
Section 215.1650. Retail Sales Tax License Required For Sale of
Tobacco Products. [Ord. No. 15-121 §2, 6-2-2015]
No person shall sell cigarettes, tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products or vapor products unless the person has a retail sales tax license.
Section 215.1660. Required Sign Stating Violation of State Law To
Sell Tobacco To Minors Under Age Eighteen — Display of Sign
Required Where. [Ord. No. 15-121 §2, 6-2-2015]
purporting to establish that such individual was eighteen (18) years of
age or older. [Ord. No. 15-121 §2, 6-2-2015]
I. Any person adversely affected by this Section may file an appeal with
the Administrative Hearing Commission which shall be adjudicated
pursuant to the procedures established in Chapter 621, RSMo.
A. No person less than eighteen (18) years of age shall purchase, attempt
to purchase or possess cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products or vapor products unless such person is an employee
of a seller of cigarettes, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products
or vapor products and is in such possession to effect a sale in the course
of employment or an employee of the Division of Alcohol and Tobacco
Control for enforcement purposes pursuant to Subsection (5) of Section
407.934, RSMo.
B. Any person less than eighteen (18) years of age shall not misrepresent
his/her age to purchase cigarettes, tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products or vapor products.
C. Any person who violates the provisions of this Section shall be
penalized as follows:
1. For the first violation, the person is guilty of an infraction and shall
have any cigarettes, tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products or vapor products confiscated;
2. For a second violation and any subsequent violations, the person is
guilty of an infraction, shall have any cigarettes, tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products or vapor products confiscated and
shall complete a tobacco education or smoking cessation program,
if available.
A. The owner of an establishment at which tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products or vapor products or rolling papers are sold at retail
or through vending machines shall cause to be prominently displayed in
a conspicuous place at every display from which tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products or vapor products are sold and on every
Section
215.1630
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.1660
100:444
Section 215.1670. Restrictions On Sales of Individual Packs of
Cigarettes.
Section 215.1680. Proof of Age Required, When Defense To Action
For Violation Is Reasonable Reliance On Proof — Liability.
vending machine where tobacco products are purchased a sign that
shall:
1. Contain in red lettering at least one-half (½) inch high on a white
background the following:
"IT IS A VIOLATION OF STATE LAW FOR CIGARETTES, OTHER
TOBACCO PRODUCTS, ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS, OR
VAPOR PRODUCTS TO BE SOLD OR OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO
ANY PERSON UNDER THE AGE OF EIGHTEEN OR FOR SUCH
PERSON TO PURCHASE, ATTEMPT TO PURCHASE OR POSSESS
CIGARETTES, OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS, ALTERNATIVE
NICOTINE PRODUCTS, OR VAPOR PRODUCTS."; and
2. Include a depiction of a pack of cigarettes at least two (2) inches
high defaced by a red diagonal diameter of a surrounding red circle
and the words "Under 18".
A. No person or entity shall sell individual packs of cigarettes or smokeless
tobacco products unless such packs satisfy one (1) of the following
conditions prior to the time of sale:
1. It is sold through a vending machine; or
2. It is displayed behind the checkout counter or it is within the
unobstructed line of sight of the sales clerk or store attendant from
the checkout counter.
A. A person or entity selling tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products or vapor products or rolling papers or distributing tobacco
product, alternative nicotine product or vapor product samples shall
require proof of age from a prospective purchaser or recipient if an
ordinary person would conclude on the basis of appearance that such
prospective purchaser or recipient may be under the age of eighteen
(18). [Ord. No. 15-121 §2, 6-2-2015]
B. The operator's or chauffeur's license issued pursuant to the provisions
of Section 302.177, RSMo., or the operator's or chauffeur's license
issued pursuant to the laws of any State or possession of the United
States to residents of those States or possessions, or an identification
card as provided for in Section 302.181, RSMo., or the identification
card issued by any uniformed service of the United States, or a valid
passport shall be presented by the holder thereof upon request of any
agent of the Division of Alcohol and Tobacco Control or any owner or
employee of an establishment that sells tobacco, alternative nicotine
products or vapor products for the purpose of aiding the registrant,
Section
215.1660
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.1680
100:445
Section 215.1690. through Section 215.1750. (Reserved)
agent or employee to determine whether or not the person is at least
eighteen (18) years of age when such person desires to purchase or
possess tobacco products, alternative nicotine products or vapor
products procured from a registrant. Upon such presentation, the
owner or employee of the establishment shall compare the photograph
and physical characteristics noted on the license, identification card
or passport with the physical characteristics of the person presenting
the license, identification card or passport. [Ord. No. 15-121 §2,
6-2-2015]
C. Any person who shall, without authorization from the Department of
Revenue, reproduce, alter, modify or misrepresent any chauffeur's
license, motor vehicle operator's license or identification card shall be
deemed guilty of an ordinance violation.
D. Reasonable reliance on proof of age or on the appearance of the
purchaser or recipient shall be a defense to any action for a violation of
Subsections (A), (B) and (C) of Section 215.1630 of this Division. No
person shall be liable for more than one (1) violation of Subsections (B)
and (C) of Section 215.1630 on any single day.
Section
215.1680
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.1690
100:446
Article IX
Miscellaneous Offenses176
Section 215.1760. Putting Dead Animals and The Like Into Potable
Water.177 [R.O. 2009 §96.01; CC 1981 §14-3; Ord. No. 90-256,
10-4-1990]
It shall be unlawful for any person to put or cause to be put any dead animal
carcass or any part thereof or any fowl, offal or any other filth into any well,
cistern, spring, reservoir, water tank, drinking fountain, trough or basin
used for drinking purposes or into any brook or branch within this City,
which is or may be used for household or domestic purposes or the water of
which is or may be used by the public for drinking purposes.
Section 215.1770. Disposition of Animal Carcasses.
Every person owning or caring for any animal that has died from any
cause shall dispose of the animal carcass within twenty-four (24) hours
after knowledge of such death, either by arranging for a person permitted
under Chapter 269, RSMo., to dispose of or transport it, or by the owner
or person entitled to such body causing the same to be deposited in a
permitted sanitary landfill notwithstanding any other provision of the law
or rule to the contrary, allowing it to be buried in a sanitary landfill or
buried, incinerated, composted, or disposed of in a manner approved by
the State veterinarian within the twenty-four (24) hour period upon his/her
own or any other available premises, provided that such disposition is in
accordance with the provisions of Subsection (2) of Section 269.020, RSMo.
176. Cross Reference—As To Penalty, §100.150.
177. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
215.1760
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
215.1770
100:447
Chapter 220
HEALTH, SAFETY AND SANITATION - NUISANCES
Cross References—As to animals, ch. 210; as to noise, ch. 230; as to trees
and shrubs, weeds, ch. 225.
Section
215.1770
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
215.1770
100:448
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 220.010. Mosquito Breeding Places. [R.O. 2009 §96.09; CC
1981 §14-41; Ord. No. 80-58, 6-3-1980]
A. Defined. For the purpose of this Section, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
MOSQUITO BREEDING PLACES — Collections of water in which
mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed are those contained in ditches,
ponds, pools, excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy
vaults, fountains, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs
(except horse troughs in frequent use), urns, cans, boxes, bottles, tubs,
buckets, defective house roof gutters, tanks of flush closets or other
water containers.
B. Evidence. The natural presence of mosquito larvae in standing or
running water shall be evidence that mosquitoes are breeding therein.
C. Treatment. Collections of water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely
to breed shall be treated by such one (1) or more of the following
methods as shall be approved by the Director of Community
Development:
1. Screening with wire netting of at least sixteen (16) meshes to the
inch each way or any other material which will effectually prevent
the ingress or egress of mosquitoes.
2. Complete emptying every seven (7) days of unscreened containers,
together with their thorough drying or cleansing.
3. Using a larvicide approved and applied under the direction of the
Director of Community Development or his/her designee.
4. Covering completely the surface of the water with kerosene,
petroleum or paraffin oil once every seven (7) days.
5. Cleaning and keeping sufficiently free of vegetable growth and
other obstructions and stocking with mosquito-destroying fish.
6. Filling or draining to the satisfaction of the Director of Community
Development or his/her designee.
7. Proper disposal, by removal or destruction, of tin cans, tin boxes,
broken or empty bottles and other articles likely to hold water.
Section
220.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
220.010
100:449

ARTICLE II
Nuisances
Section 220.020. Nuisances Enumerated.178 [R.O. 2009 §96.20; CC
1981 §14-33; Ord. No. 80-58, 6-3-1980; Ord. No. 80-60, 6-3-1980;
Ord. No. 80-78, 7-16-1980; Ord. No. 80-101, 9-3-1980; Ord. No.
01-157, 7-19-2001]
A. In addition to any other act declared to be a nuisance by this Code of
Ordinances or any other ordinance of the City, nuisances are defined
and declared to be as follows:
1. Any act done or committed or suffered to be done or committed by
any person or any substance or things kept, maintained, placed or
found in or upon any public or private place within the City which is
injurious or dangerous to the public health or the manufacturing or
vending of any article obnoxious to the health of the inhabitants of
the City;
2. Any business carried on or pursuit followed or act done by any
person to the hurt, injury, annoyance, inconvenience or damage of
the public;
3. Any stockyard, slaughterhouse or any similar business which may
be dangerous or detrimental to the public health in the City or
within one (1) mile of the corporate limits thereof;
4. Any pond or pool of stagnant water upon any premises and any foul
or dirty water or liquid when discharged through any drain, pipe or
spout or thrown into or upon any street, thoroughfare or premises
to the injury and annoyance of the public;
5. Any collection of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes
breed or are likely to breed, unless such collection of water is
treated so as to effectively prevent such breeding;
6. Any privy or private vault kept in such a condition as to emit
offensive, noxious or disagreeable odor and any substance emitting
an offensive, noxious, unhealthy or disagreeable effluvium in the
neighborhood where it exists. Any carcass of a dead animal which
the owner or keeper permits to remain within the limits exceeding
twenty (20) hours after death;
7. Any obstruction caused or permitted on any street or sidewalk to
the danger or annoyance of the public and any stones, dirt,
garbage, filth, slops, vegetable matter or other articles thrown or
placed by any person on or in any street, alley, sidewalk or other
public place or on any premises or any body or stream of water
178. Cross References—As to general offenses, ch. 215; as to obstructions, §§505.160 et seq.; as
to penalty, §100.150.
Section
220.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
220.020
100:451
within the City which in any way may cause or is liable to cause any
injury or annoyance to the public;
8. Confining or keeping within the City any animals or fowl in any
unclean or filthy pen, shed or other enclosure so as to be a
nuisance;
9. The keeping of hogs;
10. The keeping of horses, mules, sheep, goats, pigs or other animals in
or under any dwelling;
11. Any cellar, vault, private drain, pool, privy, sewer or sink upon any
premises permitted to become nauseous, foul, offensive or injurious
to the public health;
12. Any bawdy house or building or room to which persons are allowed
or permitted by the owner, keeper or occupant to resort for the
purpose of prostitution;
13. The placing, depositing or throwing or causing to be placed,
deposited or thrown of any rubbish, garbage, trash, scrap paper,
handbills, confetti, shavings, dirt, hulls, shells, stalks, dead animals
or any other kind of waste materials on any sidewalk, street,
parkways, road shoulders or other public places or on any private
lots or premises in the City in such manner and extent to render the
same unsightly, unclean or unsafe;
14. Paper, lumber, rocks, boxes, barrels, bottles, cans or other trash or
debris or other material accumulating or remaining on any
premise, whether improved or unimproved, occupied or vacant, or
on any open lot or alley within the City in such a manner as to
create a condition which provides shelter, food or protection for
rodents or a breeding place for such rodents;
15. The abandonment, neglect or disregard of any premises so as to
permit the premises to become unclean, with an accumulation of
litter or waste thereon or to permit the premises to become
unsightly, unsanitary or obnoxious or a blight to the vicinity or
offensive to the senses of users of the public way abutting the
premises and so to continue for a period longer than ten (10) days;
16. Any tree on any property which, by reason of its dying, decay or
other reason, is a menace to the safety of persons using any street,
alley or sidewalk or persons occupying any premises or parcel of
ground;
17. The obstruction or blocking of any driveway or curb cut used as
access to commercial property, whether on public or private
property, by the use of parked motor vehicles, construction
materials, debris or similar means. Closure of driveways or curb
cuts may be accomplished by the use of decorative gates, wheel
Section
220.020
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
220.020
100:452
Section 220.030. Creation or Maintenance Prohibited.179 [R.O. 2009
§96.21; Ord. No. 95-82, 3-22-1995]
No person shall permit, cause, maintain, allow to remain or create within
the corporate limits of the City or within one-half (½) mile of the corporate
limits any nuisance as defined by Section 220.020.
Section 220.040. Notice To Abate. [R.O. 2009 §96.22; Ord. No.
95-82, 3-22-1995; Ord. No. 04-192, 8-13-2004; Ord. No. 07-162,
6-11-2007]
Whenever any nuisance as defined in Section 220.020 exists, the Mayor
or the Mayor's designee shall cause to be served a notice in writing upon
the person permitting, causing, maintaining, allowing to remain or creating
the nuisance, stating the existence of the nuisance and requesting its
abatement in the time specified in this Article. When such nuisance, in
the opinion of the Mayor, endangers public health or safety, the Mayor
may cause the notice to include the provision that the property owner,
contractor, subcontractor or other entity identified as having responsibility
for the nuisance shall not be issued any new permits of any type by the City
and at the discretion of the Mayor may include provisions to stop all work
and/or withhold inspections and/or withhold issuance of any new permits on
any or all projects the contractor or subcontractor is currently engaged in.
Section 220.050. Responsibility For Abatement. [R.O. 2009 §96.23;
Ord. No. 95-82, 3-22-1995]
Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard, the person permitting,
causing, maintaining, allowing to remain or creating the nuisance shall be
responsible for its abatement.
Section 220.060. Notice Procedure. [R.O. 2009 §96.24; Ord. No.
95-82, 3-22-1995; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
The Mayor or the Mayor's designee shall give notice to abate to the person
permitting, causing, maintaining, allowing to remain or creating the
nuisance. The period within which the nuisance must be prevented, abated
or removed, in compliance with the notice, shall be at least five (5) days
stops, planters or the installation of a continuous curb of no higher
than the existing curb line as approved by the Director of
Community Development.
18. Any violation of this Code of Ordinances which, if continued, is
liable to endanger, annoy or injure the public;
19. Every act or thing done or made, permitted, allowed or continued
on any property, public or private, by any person, his/her agent or
employee to the damage or injury of any inhabitants of this City.
179. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
220.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
220.060
100:453
after the posting of the property as set forth hereafter. If the nuisance
is permitted, caused, maintained, allowed to remain or created by the
occupant or owner of the premises or the agent of the occupant or owner or
by a person other than the owner or occupant of the premises or the agent
of the owner or occupant, the notice shall be served by certified mail at the
last known address of the person permitting, causing, maintaining, allowing
to remain or creating the nuisance. This notice shall be mailed at least five
(5) days before the time of compliance by certified mail. In all instances,
the notice shall also be posted at least five (5) days before the deadline for
compliance in a conspicuous place upon the premises where the nuisance
exists.
Section 220.070. Content of Notice. [R.O. 2009 §96.25; Ord. No.
95-82, 3-22-1995; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
The notice shall direct prevention, abatement or removal of the nuisance
within five (5) days from the posting of the premises and the notice shall
advise that upon failure to comply with the notice to abate, the Mayor or the
Mayor's designee shall undertake such prevention, abatement or removal
of the nuisance at the cost of the occupant or owner of the premises or the
agent of the occupant or owner of the premises or a person other than the
occupant or owner of the premises or the agent of the occupant or owner of
the premises if permitted, caused, maintained, allowed to remain or created
by them or any of them or their agent.
Section 220.080. Request For Hearing. [R.O. 2009 §96.26; Ord. No.
95-82, 3-22-1995]
The person to whom the notices are directed may file a written request for
hearing within the period of compliance prescribed in Section 220.060.
Section 220.090. Procedure For Hearing. [R.O. 2009 §96.27; Ord.
No. 95-82, 3-22-1995; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
Section 220.100. Abatement of Nuisance.180 [R.O. 2009 §96.28; Ord.
No. 95-82, 3-22-1995; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
A. The hearing shall be held as soon as practicable after the filing of the
request and notice shall be sent to the person requesting the hearing by
certified mail or personal service at least five (5) days in advance of the
hearing.
B. At any such hearing the City may be represented by the City Attorney or
his/her designee and the person to whom the notices have been
directed may be represented by counsel and introduce such evidence
and call such witnesses as either party deems necessary. The Mayor or
the Mayor's designee shall conduct the hearing and his/her decision
affirming or failing to find a nuisance shall be in writing and include
findings of fact and conclusions of law.
Section
220.060
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
220.100
100:454
Section 220.110. Costs Assessed Upon Conviction. [R.O. 2009
§96.29; Ord. No. 95-82, 3-22-1995]
Any person convicted of a violation of Section 220.020 shall be punished
as provided in Section 100.150 and every day such nuisance is permitted,
caused, maintained, allowed to remain or created after notice shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense. Unless a special tax bill has
been issued pursuant to this Article against the property upon which the
nuisance had existed, the cost of abating or removing such nuisance may
be made part of the judgment, by the judge, in addition to the fine imposed
A. If the nuisance described in the notice has not been abated within the
five (5) day period of compliance or in the event that the finding of a
nuisance has been affirmed by the Mayor or his/her designee, hereafter
the Mayor and his/her designee may prevent, abate or remove the
nuisance. Whenever the nuisance prevented, abated or removed by the
City was permitted, caused, maintained, allowed to remain or created
by the occupant or owner of the premises or the agent of the occupant
or owner of the premises, then all costs and expenses incurred by the
City in preventing, abating or removing such nuisance on any property
within the City may be assessed against the person permitting, causing,
maintaining, allowing to remain or creating the nuisance. Pursuant to
this Section, whenever the City has prevented, abated or removed a
nuisance within the corporate limits of the City, the costs and expenses
incurred may be assessed as a special tax bill against the real property
upon which the nuisance existed.
B. Special tax bills for costs and expenses incurred by the City in the
prevention, abatement or removal of nuisances shall be issued in the
following manner:
1. When a nuisance has been prevented, abated or removed by the
City pursuant to this Article, the Mayor shall, in writing, so report
to the City Council. The City Council may, by ordinance, levy and
assess a special tax and order the issuance of special tax bills
against the real property upon which the nuisance existed.
2. The special tax bills issued against real property under the
authority of this Section shall be a special lien against such
property with the same effect as special tax bills issued pursuant to
Sections 140.090 through 140.160.
3. Special tax bills issued pursuant to this Article shall be collected by
the Director of Finance. If a lien is recorded at the office of the
County Recorder of Deeds office, the fee for the recording of the
lien shall also be assessed upon the property.
180. State Law References—Authority of city to abate nuisances and charge the expense
thereof to owners or occupants of property, §71.780, RSMo.; additional authority, §77.560,
RSMo.
Section
220.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
220.110
100:455
in case of conviction in Municipal Court of the person permitting, causing,
maintaining, allowing to remain or creating any such nuisance.
Section 220.120. Emergencies. [R.O. 2009 §96.30; Ord. No. 95-82,
3-22-1995; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
In cases where it reasonably appears that there is an immediate danger
to the health, life or safety of any person or the health, safety or general
welfare of the people of this City, the Mayor may take emergency measures
to abate and remove a nuisance as may be defined in this Article. The cost
of such abatement or removal may be assessed in the manner prescribed
in Sections 220.100 and 220.110. However, before assessing the costs, the
Mayor shall hold a hearing not more than ten (10) days after the abatement
or removal of the nuisance to determine the person permitting, causing,
maintaining, allowing to remain or creating the nuisance and the proper
assessment of costs and expenses. Such hearing shall be in accordance with
Section 220.090. In instances wherein personal property is seized in order
to prevent the spread of disease, compensation for the goods seized shall be
made pursuant to Section 77.560, RSMo.
Section
220.110
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
220.120
100:456
ARTICLE IIA
Nuisance Properties
Section 220.121. Violation of Article. [Ord. No. 13-236 §1,
12-3-2013]
Section 220.122. Definitions. [Ord. No. 13-236 §1, 12-3-2013]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGGRAVATED CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY — Property upon which
two (2) or more of the behaviors listed below have occurred during any
three-hundred-sixty-five-day period, as a result of any two (2) separate
factual events that have been independently investigated by any law
enforcement agency:
CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY — Property upon which three (3) or more
of the behaviors listed below have occurred during any one-hundred-eightyday
period, as a result of any three (3) separate factual events that have
been independently investigated by any law enforcement agency or code
enforcement officer:
A. Any certain property within the City of St. Charles which becomes a
chronic nuisance property or an aggravated chronic nuisance property
is in violation of this Article and subject to the remedies set forth in
Section 220.123.
B. Any owner who permits property under his, her or its ownership or
control to be a chronic nuisance property or an aggravated chronic
nuisance property shall be in violation of this Article and subject to the
remedies set forth in Section 220.123.
A. First degree murder as defined in 565.020 RSMo.;
B. Any kidnapping offense as defined in 565.110 RSMo.;
C. Any offense involving deadly weapons as defined in Chapter 571 RSMo.;
Criminal street gang actvity as defined in Section 578.421 et seq.
RSMo.;
D.
Possession, manufacture or delivery of controlled substances as defined
in Chapter 579 RSMo.; [Ord. No. 19-131, 6-4-2019]
E.
F. Sexual offenses as defined in Chapter 566 RSMo.;
Possession, cultivation, manufacture or delivery of cannabis as defined
in Chapter 579 RSMo., except for medical marijuana lawfully
possessed, cultivated, manufactured or dispensed pursuant to Article
XIV, Section 1, of the Missouri Constitution; [Ord. No. 19-131,
6-4-2019]
G.
A. First degree murder as defined in 565.020 RSMo.;
Section
220.121
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
220.122
100:457
CONTROL — The ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract or
govern conduct that occurs on that property.
OWNER — Any person, partnership, limited liability company, trust, or
corporation having any legal or equitable interest in the property. Owner
includes, but is not limited to:
PERMIT — To suffer, allow, consent to, acquiesce by failure to prevent, or
expressly assent or agree to the doing of an act.
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, limited liability
company, trust, or corporation capable of owning or using property in the
City of St. Charles.
PROPERTY —
B. Any kidnapping offense as defined in 565.110 RSMo.;
C. Any offense involving deadly weapons as defined in Chapter 571 RSMo.;
Criminal street gang activities as defined in Section 578.421 et seq.
RSMo.;
D.
Possession, manufacture or delivery of controlled substances as defined
in Chapter 579 RSMo.; [Ord. No. 19-131, 6-4-2019]
E.
F. Sexual offenses as defined in Chapter 566 RSMo.;
Possession, cultivation, manufacture or delivery of cannabis as defined
in Chapter 579 RSMo., except for medical marijuana lawfully
possessed, cultivated, manufactured or dispensed pursuant to Article
XIV, Section 1, of the Missouri Constitution; [Ord. No. 19-131,
6-4-2019]
G.
H. Gambling as defined in Chapter 572 RSMo.;
I. Assault or any related offense as defined in Chapter 565 RSMo.; and
J. Prostitution as defined in Chapter 567 RSMo.
A mortgagee in possession in whom is vested:
1. All or part of the legal title to the property; or
All or part of the beneficial ownership and the right to the present
use and enjoyment of the premises; or
2.
A.
B. An occupant who can control what occurs on the property; or
C. Any person acting as an agent of an owner as defined herein.
Any real property, including that which is affixed, incidental or
pertinent to land, including but not limited to any premises, room,
house, building, structure, apartment, condominium unit or any
separate part or portion thereof, whether permitted or not.
A.
Section
220.122
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
220.122
100:458
Section 220.123. Remedies. [Ord. No. 13-236 §1, 12-3-2013]
Any two or more buildings, premises or building complexes under
common ownership that are contiguous, or whose property lines are
within two hundred fifty (250) feet of each other may be considered a
single property.
B.
A. In the event the Municipal Court determines property to be a chronic
nuisance property or an aggravated chronic nuisance property, the
Court may order that the property be closed and secured against all use
and occupancy for a period of not less than thirty (30) days, but not
more than one hundred eighty (180) days, or the Court may employ any
other remedy deemed by it to be appropriate to abate the nuisance.
B. In addition to the remedy provided in Subsection (A) above, the Court
may impose upon the owner of the property a civil penalty in the
amount of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day, payable to the
City, for each day the owner had actual knowledge that the property
was a chronic nuisance property or an aggravated chronic nuisance
property and permitted the property to remain a chronic nuisance
property or an aggravated chronic nuisance property.
C. In determining what remedy or remedies shall be employed, the Court
may consider evidence of other conduct which has occurred on the
property, including, but not limited to:
1. The actions or lack of action taken by the owner to mitigate or
correct the problem at the property;
2. Whether the problem at the property was repeated or continuous;
3. The magnitude or gravity of the problem;
4. The cooperation of the person in charge with the City;
5. The existence and frequency of violations of the Property
Maintenance Code (Chapter 500, Article V, of the Code of
Ordinances of the City of St. Charles City);
6. The cost of the City investigating and correcting or attempting to
correct the condition;
7. The disturbance of neighbors;
8. The recurrence of loud and obnoxious noises; or
9. Repeated consumption of alcohol in public.
D. The Court may authorize the City to physically secure the property
against use or occupancy in the event the owner fails to do so within the
time specified by the Court or to take other steps necessary to abate a
chronic public nuisance or an aggravated chronic nuisance.
Section
220.122
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
220.123
100:459
Section 220.124. Notification Procedure. [Ord. No. 13-236 §1,
12-3-2013]
When the Chief of Police receives two or more police reports documenting
the occurrence of nuisance activity on or within a property, the Chief
of Police shall independently review such reports to determine whether
they describe acts set forth in Section 220.122 of this Article. Upon such
findings, the Chief may:
E. In the event that the City is authorized to secure the property or
otherwise abate a chronic public nuisance or an aggravated chronic
nuisance, all costs reasonably incurred by the City to effect a closure or
abate the nuisance shall be assessed against the owner. The City shall
submit a statement of costs to the Court for its review. If no objection of
the statement is made within the period described by the Court, or if
the Court, after objection is made, determines that the statement of
costs is accurate, the Court shall approve such costs.
F. Any person who is assessed the cost of abatement or civil penalty by the
Court shall be personally liable for the payment thereof to the City. If
payment is not made, the City may pursue all available collection
procedures, including but not limited to the filing of a lien on the
property found to be a chronic public nuisance or an aggravated
chronic nuisance, a civil collection action, or requesting a Court to find
the owner in contempt of Court for nonpayment of such costs.
G. A tenant is entitled to his or her reasonable relocation costs from the
owner, as those are determined by the Court if, without actual notice,
the tenant moved into the property, after the owner received notice as
described herein of the Police Chief's determination as described
above.
H. The City, in addition to any other remedies set forth herein, may, at its
discretion, charge an owner of a chronic public nuisance or an
aggravated chronic public nuisance with a violation of this Article
which shall be processed and prosecuted as an ordinance violation.
A. Notify the owner in writing that the property is in danger of becoming a
chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the following
information:
1. The street address or a legal description sufficient for identification
of the property.
2. A statement that the Chief of Police has information that the
property may be a chronic nuisance property, with a concise
description of the nuisance activities that may exist, or that have
occurred. The Chief of Police shall offer the person in charge an
opportunity to propose a course of action that the Chief of Police
agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the violation.
Section
220.123
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
220.124
100:460
3. Demand that the owner respond to the Chief of Police within ten
(10) days to discuss the nuisance activities.
B. After complying with the notification procedures described herein,
when the Chief of Police receives a police report documenting the
occurrence of a third nuisance activity at or within a property and
determines that the property has become a chronic nuisance property,
the Chief of Police shall:
1. Notify the owner in writing that the property has been determined
to be a chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the
following information:
a. The street address or legal description sufficient for
identification of the property.
b. A statement that the Chief of Police has determined the
property to be a chronic nuisance property with a concise
description of the nuisance activities leading to his/her
findings.
c. Demand that the owner respond within ten (10) days to the
Chief of Police and propose a course of action that the Chief of
Police agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to
the violation.
d. Service shall be made either personally or by first class mail,
postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the
owner at the address of the property believed to be a chronic
nuisance property, or such other place which is likely to give
the person in charge notice of the determination by the Chief
of Police.
e. A copy of the notice shall be served on the owner at such
address as shown on the tax rolls of the County or the
occupant, at the address of the property, if these persons are
different than the owner, and shall be made either personally
or by first class mail, postage prepaid.
f. A copy of the notice shall also be posted at the property after
ten (10) days has elapsed from the service or mailing of the
notice to the owner and the owner has not contacted the Chief
of Police.
2. The failure of any person to receive notice that the property may be
a chronic nuisance property shall not invalidate or otherwise affect
the proceedings under this Article. The notification procedures set
forth in this Section 220.124 need not be followed in cases of
aggravated chronic public nuisances.
3. After the notification, but prior to the commencement of legal
proceedings by the City pursuant to this Article, an owner may
Section
220.124
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
220.124
100:461
Section 220.125. Commencement of Action; Burden of Proof. [Ord.
No. 13-236 §1, 12-3-2013]
Section 220.126. Emergency Closing Procedures. [Ord. No. 13-236
§1, 12-3-2013]
stipulate with the Chief of Police that the owner will pursue a
course of action the parties agree will abate the nuisance activities
giving rise to the violation. In addition to the abatement of the
conditions leading to a designation of the property as a chronic
nuisance or an aggravated chronic nuisance, the owner may also be
required to stipulate to the abatement of violations of the Property
Maintenance Code (Chapter 500, Article V, of the Code of
Ordinances of the City of St. Charles). If the agreed course of
action does not result in the abatement of the nuisance activity or
if no agreement concerning abatement is reached within thirty (30)
days, the Chief of Police shall request authorization for the City
Attorney or designee to commence a legal proceeding to abate the
nuisance.
4. Concurrent with the notification procedures set forth herein, the
Chief of Police shall send copies of the notice, as well as any other
documentation which supports legal proceedings, to the City
Attorney or designee.
A. The City Attorney or designee may commence an action to abate a
chronic nuisance or an aggravated chronic nuisance as described in
Section 220.122.
B. In an action seeking abatement of a chronic nuisance property, the City
shall have the initial burden of showing by preponderance of the
evidence that the property is a chronic nuisance property or an
aggravated chronic nuisance property.
C. It is a defense to an action seeking the closure of a chronic nuisance
property or an aggravated chronic nuisance property that the owner of
the property at the time in question could not, in the exercise of
reasonable care or diligence, determine that the property had become a
chronic nuisance property or an aggravated chronic nuisance property,
or could not, in spite of the exercise of reasonable care and diligence,
control the conduct leading to the findings that the property is a chronic
nuisance property or an aggravated chronic nuisance property.
A. In the event that it is determined that the property is an immediate
threat to the public safety and welfare, the City may apply to the Court
for such interim relief, as is deemed by the Chief of Police to be
appropriate. In such an event, the notification provision set forth in
Section 220.125 above need not be complied with; however, the City
shall make a diligent effort to notify the person in charge prior to a
Court hearing.
Section
220.124
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
220.126
100:462
B. In the event that the Court finds the property constitutes a chronic
nuisance property or an aggravated chronic nuisance property, and
finds that the property is an immediate threat to the public safety and
welfare, the Court may order the remedies set forth in Section 220.123
of this Article. In addition, in the event that it also finds the person in
charge had knowledge of activities or conditions of the property
constituting or violating this Article and permitted the activities to
occur, the Court may assess a civil fine as provided above.
Section
220.126
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
220.126
100:463

ARTICLE III
Litter
Section 220.130. Purpose. [R.O. 2009 §96.61; Ord. No. 02-237,
9-20-2002]
A community is judged, in large part, by its outward appearance. The
following regulations regarding litter within the City provide standards so
as to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the City.
Section 220.140. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §96.62; Ord. No. 02-237,
9-20-2002]
For the purposes of this Article, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
GARBAGE — Waste resulting from the handling, cooking, processing,
preparation, serving, storage and consumption of food, including animal,
fish, fowl, fruits, vegetables or other matter which is subject to
decomposition, decay, putrefaction and the generation of offensive and
noxious gases or odors.
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined herein and all other
waste materials which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to
create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
RECEPTACLES, PRIVATE AND PUBLIC — Private receptacles are
containers made of durable, rust- resistant, water-tight, rodent-proof and
easily cleaned material with close-fitting fly-tight covers. Public receptacles
are litter containers which are placed on roadways or fastened to poles and
maintained by the City and marked as "litter receptacles".
REFUSE — All putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes including
ashes, street cleaning waste, dead animals and all other abandoned
personal property and solid matter industrial waste. "Refuse" includes
animal offal, the droppings from pet animals, manure and feces.
RUBBISH — Non-putrescible and solid wastes, both combustible and noncombustible,
including, but not limited to, circulars, leaflets, pamphlets,
wrappers, handbills, newspapers and any other printed or non-printed
paper material, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves,
wood, glass and other similar materials.
Section 220.150. Litter in Public Places.181 [R.O. 2009 §96.63; Ord.
No. 02-237, 9-20-2002]
No person shall throw, deposit or cause to be placed litter upon any street,
sidewalk, alley or other public place within the City except in public and or
private receptacles.
181. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
220.130
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
220.160
100:465
Section 220.160. Placement of Litter in Receptacles.182 [R.O. 2009
§96.64; Ord. No. 02-237, 9-20-2002]
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in any authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner and in such containers as will
prevent it from being carried or deposited by wind and rain upon any street,
sidewalk, alley or other public place or upon private property within the
City.
Section 220.170. Sweeping Litter Into Gutters Prohibited.183 [R.O.
2009 §96.65; Ord. No. 02-237, 9-20-2002]
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, alley or other
public place within the City the accumulation of any litter from any building
or lot from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying the property shall keep the sidewalks, entrance walks, parking
lots and parking areas in front of or upon their premises free of litter.
Section 220.180. Litter in Waters.184 [R.O. 2009 §96.66; Ord. No.
02-237, 9-20-2002]
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, wading pool,
lake, river or other body of water within the City.
Section 220.190. Litter On Occupied Private Property.185 [R.O. 2009
§96.67; Ord. No. 02-237, 9-20-2002]
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property
within the City, whether owned by such person or not. The owner or person
in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles
for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being
carried or deposited by the wind and rain upon any street, sidewalk, alley
or other public place or any private property.
Section 220.200. Owner To Maintain Premises Free of Litter.186
[R.O. 2009 §96.68; Ord. No. 02-237, 9-20-2002]
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the property free of litter; provided however, this Section shall
not prohibit the storage of litter in an authorized private receptacle for
collection.
182. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
183. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
184. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
185. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
186. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
220.160
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
220.210
100:466
Section 220.210. Litter On Vacant Lot.187 [R.O. 2009 §96.69; Ord.
No. 02-237, 9-20-2002]
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property or public property within the City whether owned by such person
or not.
Section 220.220. Animal Offal and Other Offensive Wastes.188 [R.O.
2009 §96.70; Ord. No. 02-237, 9-20-2002]
It is expressly recognized that animal offal, the droppings from pet animals,
manure and feces create a danger to public health, safety and welfare when
deposited on sidewalks, roadways or upon the shoulders of public roadways
or shoulders of private property. It shall be the responsibility of the owner
of such animals to dispose of such wastes in a sanitary manner as provided
above.
Section 220.230. Litter From Vehicles.189 [R.O. 2009 §96.71; Ord.
No. 02-237, 9-20-2002]
Section 220.240. Penalties and Enforcement. [R.O. 2009 §96.72;
Ord. No. 02-237, 9-20-2002]
Any person violating any provision of this Article shall be subject to the
penalty set out in Section 100.150 of this Code.
A. The operator of every vehicle and trailer transporting solid waste
materials or other materials within the City shall provide proper
devices necessary to completely secure the solid waste or other
material which because of size, weight and configuration could blow or
bounce off the vehicle. Tailgates in an upright position, backboards of at
least one (1) foot in height, ropes, chains, straps or a combination of
these devices is required to completely secure other solid waste
materials or other materials to prevent blowing, bouncing, leaking,
falling or spillage. Materials shall not extend above the side, front or
back of the cargo carrying portion of the vehicle unless the material is
securely fastened to the vehicle.
B. No person shall throw or discard any litter materials out of any vehicle
onto any roadway or public or private property.
187. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
188. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
189. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
220.210
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
220.240
100:467

ARTICLE IV
Handbills
Section 220.250. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §96.80; Ord. No. 07-232,
9-5-2007]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any sample
or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other
printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or
literature which:
HANDBILL DISTRIBUTOR — Any person engaging or engaged in the
business for hire or gain of distributing commercial or non-commercial
handbills, other than newspapers distributed to subscribers thereof or
neighborhood newspapers containing current news and information as well
as advertising matter distributed partly to subscribers and partly to the
general public, and any person receiving compensation directly or indirectly
for the distribution of such handbills.
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general
law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the
1. Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing;
Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment or other activity for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales;
2.
Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance,
exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged
for the purpose of gain or profit, but the terms of this Subsection
shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is
taken up for the purpose of defraying the expense incident to such
meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind when
the meeting, performance, exhibition or event is held, given or takes
place in connection with the dissemination of information or is
promoting the interests of any non-profit organization or is in the
furtherance of a civic or patriotic undertaking; provided that nothing
contained in this Subsection shall be deemed to authorize the holding,
giving to taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance,
exhibition or event of any kind without a license, where such license is
or may be required by any law of this State or under any ordinance of
this City; or
3.
While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is
predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed and
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain
of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
4.
Section
220.250
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
220.250
100:469
United States, in accordance with Federal Statute or regulation, and any
newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by
general law or which has made or is making bona fide application for
entry into the United States mails as second (2nd) class matter or any
neighborhood newspaper containing current news and information as well
as advertising matter distributed partly to the general public and, in
addition thereto, means and includes any periodical or current magazine
regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per year and sold to
the public.
NON-COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any
sample or devise, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine,
paper booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or
copies of any matter or literature not included in the definitions of a
commercial handbill or a newspaper.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant,
and includes any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or
mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other
structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys
or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, plazas,
grounds and buildings.
Section 220.260. Purpose. [R.O. 2009 §96.81; Ord. No. 07-232,
9-5-2007]
A. To protect the people against the nuisance of promiscuous distribution
of handbills and circulars, particularly commercial handbills, with the
resulting detriment and danger to public health and safety, the public
interest, convenience and necessity requires the regulation thereof and
to that end the purposes of this Article are specifically declared to be:
1. Protect the people against the unlawful activities or operations of
persons representing themselves as solicitors, canvassers or
handbill distributors.
2. Protect local residents against trespassing by solicitors, canvassers
or handbill distributors upon the private property of such residents
if they have given reasonable notice that they do not desire to be
solicited by such persons or do not desire to receive handbills or
advertising matter.
3. Protect the people against the health and safety menace and the
expense incident to the littering of the streets and public places by
the promiscuous and uncontrolled distribution of advertising
matter and commercial handbills.
Section
220.250
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
220.260
100:470
Section 220.270. Compliance. [R.O. 2009 §96.82; Ord. No. 07-232,
9-5-2007]
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of handbill
distributor for hire or for any person to distribute commercial or noncommercial
handbills without first complying with the terms of this Section
and all other applicable laws and regulations. Nothing contained in this
Section shall apply to any person advertising his/her business or activity
upon his/her own premises, if such business or activity is regularly
established at a definite location in the City and if a license has been
obtained therefore, if such license is required under the terms of any
applicable law or ordinance.
Section 220.280. Deposit or Distribution On Streets or Other Public
Places. [R.O. 2009 §96.83; Ord. No. 07-175, 6-22-2007; Ord. No.
07-232, 9-5-2007]
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or non-commercial
handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the
City. It shall not be unlawful, on any sidewalk, street or other public place
within the City, for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to
the receiver thereof, any handbill to any person willing to accept it.
Section 220.290. Creating Litter Prohibited. [R.O. 2009 §96.84; Ord.
No. 07-232, 9-5-2007]
Any person who shall distribute leaflets, handbills or other literature in
such a manner that a substantial quantity of the literature remains on the
sidewalks and roadways of the City shall be guilty of a violation of this
Section. It is a defense to prosecution under this Section that the person
distributing the literature has provided a trash receptacle large enough to
contain the quantity of the literature which they intend to distribute; clearly
designated the trash receptacle by posting a sign with the words "Dispose
of Trash Here" on the receptacle; placed it within ten (10) feet of the place
where the distribution of the literature is occurring and removed after the
distribution of literature has ceased.
4. Preserve to the people their constitutional right to receive and
disseminate information not restricted under the ordinary rules of
decency and good morals and public order, by distinguishing
between the nuisance created by the promiscuous distribution of
advertising and commercial circulars and the right to deliver noncommercial
handbills to all who are willing to receive such
handbills.
Section
220.260
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
220.300
100:471
Section 220.300. Deposit in or On Vehicles Where Posted Signs
Prohibit Such Conduct — Prevention of Scattering By Wind or
Elements — Distribution To Occupants of Vehicles. [R.O. 2009
§96.85; Ord. No. 07-175, 6-22-2007; Ord. No. 07-232, 9-5-2007]
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or non-commercial
handbill in or upon any vehicle that is located upon a public or private
parking lot which has signs posted prohibiting the conduct of placing
handbills on vehicles; nor shall a person throw or deposit any commercial or
non-commercial handbill in or upon any vehicle which has a sign indicating
that no handbills should be placed upon the vehicle. Notwithstanding the
fact that a handbill distributor is distributing commercial or noncommercial
handbills in a public or private parking lot which does not have
signs posted prohibiting the conduct of placing handbills on the vehicles, it
shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter
or cast or through his/her agents, employees or otherwise to cause to be
distributed, deposited, placed, thrown, scattered or cast any commercial or
non-commercial handbill in or upon any vehicle except in a manner that will
prevent the handbill from being scattered by the wind or elements. It shall
not be unlawful, in any public place, for a person to hand out or distribute,
without charge to the receiver thereof, any handbill to any occupant of a
vehicle who is willing to accept it.
Section 220.310. Distribution On Private Property Generally. [R.O.
2009 §96.86; Ord. No. 07-175, 6-22-2007; Ord. No. 07-232,
9-5-2007]
Subject to all of the provisions of this Article, handbills may be distributed
on private premises, provided they are so placed or deposited as to prevent
them from being blown or from drifting about the premises, the sidewalks,
streets or other public places. Handbills may not be deposited in mailboxes
when prohibited by Federal laws or regulations.
Section 220.320. Distribution On Posted Private Property —
Prevention of Scattering By Wind or Elements — Compliance With
Request Not To Distribute. [R.O. 2009 §96.87; Ord. No. 07-175,
6-22-2007; Ord. No. 07-232, 9-5-2007]
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial
handbills upon any private premises, if there is placed thereon,
in a conspicuous position near the entrance, a sign bearing the notice
"No Trespassing", "No Peddlers or Agents", "No Advertisements" or any
similar notice indicating in any manner that the occupants of the premises
do not desire to be molested or have the right of privacy disturbed or to
have any such handbills left upon the premises. Notwithstanding the fact
that a handbill distributor is distributing commercial or non-commercial
handbills on private premises which does not have signs posted prohibiting
the conduct of depositing or distributing handbills on the premises, it shall
be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or
cast or through his/her agents, employees or otherwise to cause to be
Section
220.300
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
220.320
100:472
distributed, deposited, placed, thrown, scattered or cast any commercial
or non-commercial handbill on the premises except in a manner that will
prevent the handbill from being scattered by the wind or elements. A
request by any person lawfully on the premises that such handbill not be
distributed must be complied with.
Section 220.330. Handbill Presumption. [R.O. 2009 §96.88; Ord. No.
07-232, 9-5-2007]
If a handbill is found on another person's property or vehicle and permission
was not given for the placement of the handbill on the property or vehicle,
then it shall be presumed that the person whose name appears on the
handbill as the person, promoter, business or performer who will benefit
from the event or promotion set out in the handbill authorized placement of
the handbill on the property or vehicle. This presumption may be overcome
by proof that each person distributing the handbill and signed an
acknowledgment that handbills are not to be distributed in violation of
ordinances and by setting out in the acknowledgment the name and address
of the person and the location the person was assigned to distribute
handbills.
Section 220.340. Exemptions From Article. [R.O. 2009 §96.89; Ord.
No. 07-175, 6-22-2007; Ord. No. 07-232, 9-5-2007]
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the
United States, nor to newspapers, except that newspapers shall be placed
on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place
or upon private property.
Section
220.320
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
220.340
100:473
Chapter 225
TREES AND SHRUBS - WEEDS
Section
220.340
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
220.340
100:474
ARTICLE I
Trees and Shrubs190
Section 225.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §92.01; CC 1981 §27-12;
Ord. No. 88-6, 1-20-1988; Ord. No. 01-156, 7-19-2001]
For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
STREET TREE — Any tree located within the right-of-way of any public
street or alley open to travel within the City.
TREE TOPPING OR TOP A TREE — Removing the vertical leader stems
and cutting tree limbs back to a stub, bud or a lateral branch not large
enough to assume a terminal role, resulting in decay of the trunk and/or
main branches and sprout production. Usually involves removing more than
one-third (1/3) of the tree canopy.
Section 225.020. Permit Required To Plant Trees.191 [R.O. 2009
§92.02; CC 1981 §27-19; Ord. No. 88-6, 1-20-1988]
No person shall plant or cause to be planted any street tree without first
securing a permit therefor from the Director of Public Works of the City.
Applications may be filed only by the owner of the property adjacent to the
tree location. Applications for such permit shall be made to the Director
of Public Works and shall indicate the species, size and location of the
proposed tree as well as any other information deemed necessary by the
Director of Public Works in order to secure compliance with the provisions
of this Article.
Section 225.030. Permit Required To Work On Trees —
Information.192 [R.O. 2009 §92.03; CC 1981 §§27-23—27-24; Ord. No.
88-6, 1-20-1988; Ord. No. 01-156, 7-19-2001]
A. Permit Required To Work On Street Trees. It shall be unlawful for any
person to transplant, move or otherwise disturb, alter or do any surgery
on any street tree without first obtaining a permit therefor from the
Director of Public Works or designee; provided that a utility company
which is performing maintenance work on its lines pursuant to Public
Service Commission regulation does not need to obtain a permit to
perform such work. Notwithstanding the foregoing exemption, a utility
company which desires to remove or otherwise disturb street trees in
order to install its lines shall either obtain the permit required by this
Section if the lines are above ground or include the information
required by this Section in its application for an excavation permit
pursuant to Sections 505.420 et seq., if the lines are below ground. The
190. Cross References—As to dumping into sewers and waterways, §215.030; as to health,
safety and sanitation, ch. 220; as to nuisances, §§220.020 et seq.; as to streets and
sidewalks, ch. 505.
191. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §225.180.
192. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §225.180.
Section
225.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
225.030
100:475
Section 225.040. No Charge For Permits. [R.O. 2009 §92.04; CC
1981 §27-25; Ord. No. 88-6, 1-20-1988]
There shall be no charge for any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of
this Article.
Section 225.050. Requirements For Trimming and Maintenance.193
[R.O. 2009 §92.05; CC 1981 §27-15; Ord. No. 88-6, 1-20-1988; Ord.
No. 01-156, 7-19-2001; Ord. No. 02-65, 3-8-2002; Ord. No. 03-303,
11-26-2003]
Director of Public Works or designee shall not issue the permit unless
the work to be done shall be necessary to the proper maintenance and
preservation of the street trees and the Director of Public Works or
designee finds that the proposed method and workmanship thereof are
consistent with standards of the International Society of Arboriculture.
The Director may require the posting of a bond before a permit is
granted. The bond shall be of sufficient amount to cover reasonable
damages that may occur to life or property while the provisions of the
permit are being carried out.
B. Permits—Information To Be Shown—When Void. Every permit granted
by the Director of Public Works shall describe the work to be done,
define the species, sizes and locations of all trees or shrubs concerned
and contain a definite date of expiration. Any permit may be declared
void if its terms are violated.
A. All street trees shall be trimmed so as to provide on all sides other than
the roadway side a clearance of nine (9) feet. On the roadway side of all
major streets a clearance of fourteen (14) feet shall be provided and
maintained and a clearance of twelve (12) feet shall be provided and
maintained on the roadway side of any other street. The Director of
Public Works shall have authority to trim or remove, if need be, any
street tree or other tree located on public property or within any
publicly held right-of-way which shall interfere with, or is about to
interfere with, any street, sidewalk, public storm or sanitary sewer,
pipeline or appurtenances or other public utility lines, poles and
appurtenances. All tree pruning and trimming shall be done in
compliance with the current issue of the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) A300 Tree, Shrub and Other Woody Plant Maintenance
— Standard Practices (Pruning).
B. Tree Topping.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to top any tree on any Cityowned
land or public street right-of-way.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person working for hire to top any tree,
whether on private or public land, within the corporate limits of the
193. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §225.180.
Section
225.030
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
225.050
100:476
Section 225.060. Types of Trees — Height Class.194 [R.O. 2009
§92.06; CC 1981 §27-16; Ord. No. 88-6, 1-20-1988; Ord. No. 01-156,
7-19-2001]
It shall be unlawful for any person to plant or cause to be planted any street
tree of any type other than those shown in the following table:
Small Trees: 15 — 30 feet in height (space 30 feet apart)
Botanical Name Common Name
Acer beurgeranum Trident Maple
Acer campestre Hege Maple
Acer ginnala Amur Maple
Acer griseum Paperbark Maple
Acer tataricum Tartarian Maple
Acer truncatum Purpleblow Maple
Amelanchier species Serviceberry
Carpinus caroliniana American Hornbeam
Cercis canadensis Eastern Redbud
Chionanthus virginicus White Fringe Tree
Cornus species Dogwood species (requires special
conditions)
Cotinus coggygria Smokebush
Hamamelis species Witchhazel
Hibiscus syricus Rose of Sharon
Magnolia species Magnolia species
Styrax japonicus Japanese Snowbell
Syringa reticulata Japanese Tree Lilac
Xanthocarpus sorbifolium Yellowhorn
Medium Trees: Over 30 — 40 feet in height (space 40 feet apart)
Botanical Name Common Name
Aesculus glabra Ohio Buckeye
Cladrastis lutea Yellowwood
Cotinus obovatus American Smoketree
Koelreuteria paniculata Golden Raintree
City; except that this Subsection shall not apply to work on any tree
within that portion of the side yard behind the front building line or
the rear yard, as defined in Section 400.050 of property utilized as
a residence.
194. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §225.180.
Section
225.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
225.060
100:477
Medium Trees: Over 30 — 40 feet in height (space 40 feet apart)
Botanical Name Common Name
Maackia amurensis Amur Maackia
Malus species Malus species (select cultivars with
upright/oval shape)
Ostrya virginiana Hophornbeam
Parrotia persica Persian Parrotia
Phellodendron amurense Amur Corktree
Prunus serrulata Kwanzan Cherry
Pyrus calleryana Callery Pear (use cultivars only, i.e.,
"Cleveland Select")
Sassafrass albidum Common Sassafras
Large Trees: Over 40 feet in height (space 40 — 50 feet apart)
Botanical Name Common Name
Acer platanoides Norway Maple
Acer rubrum Red Maple
Acer saccharum Sugar Maple
Aesculus hippocstanum Horsechestnut
Alnus glutinosa European Alder
Betula nigra River Birch
Carpinus betulus European Hornbeam
Celtis species Hackberry
Cercidiphyllum japonicum Katsuratree
Corylus colurna Turkish Filbert
Eucommia ulmoides Hardy Rubber Tree
Fagus species Beech species
Fraxinus species Ash species
Ginkgo biloba Ginko (use male form only)
Gleditsia tricanthos varinermis Thornless Honeylocust (use seedless
cultivars)
Liriodendron tulipifera Tuliptree
Metasequoia glyptostroboides Dawn Redwood
Nyssa sylvatica Blackgum
Platanus x acerifolia London Plantree "Bloodgood"
Prunus x yedoensis Yoshino Cherry
Pterocarya fraxinifolia Caucasian Wingnut
Quercus alba White Oak (produces acorns)
Section
225.060
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
225.060
100:478
Large Trees: Over 40 feet in height (space 40 — 50 feet apart)
Botanical Name Common Name
Quercus acutissima Sawtooth Oak
Quercus bicolor Swamp White Oak
Quercus imbricaria Shingle Oak
Quercus macrocarpa Bur Oak
Quercus phellos Willow Oak
Quercus robur English Oak
Quercus rubra Red Oak
Quercus velutina Black Oak
Saphora japonica Japanese Pagodatree
Taxodium distichum Baldcypress
Tilia species Linden species
Ulmus americana American Elm Hybrids
Ulmus parvifolia Lacebark Elm
Zelkova serrata Japanese Zelkova
Note: All trees should be single stem. Select the appropriate tree for the
site, including height, spread, sunlight, soil conditions, width of planting
area, overhead lines and underground utilities.
Section 225.070. Minimum Distance of Street Trees From
Improvements. [R.O. 2009 §92.07; CC 1981 §27-17; Ord. No. 88-6,
1-20-1988; Ord. No. 92-148, 7-8-1992; Ord. No. 01-156, 7-19-2001]
It shall be unlawful for any person to plant or cause to be planted any street
tree closer to any alley, private drive, street light, traffic signal or street
intersection than the minimum distance shown from such improvements in
the following table:
Height
Class of
Tree
Right-of-
Way of
Alleys
Edge
Private
Drives
Street
Lights
Traffic
Signals
Street
Intersections
15' to 30' 5' 5' 30' 30' 40'
Over 30' to
40'
5' 7' 30' 30' 40'
Over 40' 5' 10' 30' 40' 40'
Note: Distance measured from the nearest point in feet
Section 225.080. Minimum Clearance Between Trees. [R.O. 2009
§92.08; CC 1981 §27-18; Ord. No. 88-6, 1-20-1988]
Section
225.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
225.080
100:479
Section 225.090. Duty To Maintain Trees Planted — Trimming and
Pruning Sidewalk Overhang. [R.O. 2009 §92.09; CC 1981
§§27-20—27-21; Ord. No. 88-6, 1-20-1988]
Section 225.100. When Trees or Shrubs Declared A Nuisance. [R.O.
2009 §92.10; CC 1981 §27-22; Ord. No. 88-6, 1-20-1988; Ord. No.
03-122, 5-27-2003]
Any tree or shrub or part thereof located in, overhanging or interfering
with the use of any highway or street in the City that, in the opinion of the
Director of Public Works, violates the provisions of this Article or endangers
the life, health, safety or property of the public shall be declared a public
nuisance. The owner shall be notified of the existence of a nuisance and
given a reasonable time for its correction or removal. If not corrected or
removed within the time allotted, the Director of Public Works shall cause
the nuisance to be corrected or removed and the cost shall be assessed
against the owner or occupant and collected as provided by law.
A. It shall be unlawful to plant or cause to be planted any street tree
without providing the following minimum clearance between such tree
and any other street tree on the same side of the street:
1. The minimum clearance between the trunks of any two (2) street
trees of the same type shall be that clearance provided in Section
225.060.
2. The clearance between the trunks of any two (2) street trees of
different types shall be determined and shall be that clearance
arrived at by adding the minimum clearance shown for each type of
street tree concerned, as shown in Section 225.060, and dividing
the sum thereof by two (2).
3. The minimum clearance from any existing street tree not shown in
Section 225.060 shall be determined by the Director of Public
Works so that the existing street tree at its maturity will not come
in conflict with or overlap the street tree to be planted at its
maturity.
A. Duty To Maintain Street Trees Planted. Any person applying for a
permit to plant a street tree shall be solely responsible for the cost of
purchase and planting of the tree. Maintenance of a street tree shall be
the responsibility of the owner of the property adjacent to the tree
location.
B. Trimming, Pruning, Topping And The Like, Generally—Height To Be
Trimmed Above Street And Sidewalk. All trees standing in or extending
over any street, including sidewalks, shall be kept trimmed to the
heights described in Section 225.050. This provision applies to both
street trees and trees located on private property.
Section
225.080
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
225.110
100:480
Section 225.110. Cost-Sharing Tree Removal and Tree-Trimming
Program.195 [R.O. 2009 §92.11; CC 1981 §27-22.1; Ord. No. 89-174,
8-16-1989]
Section 225.120. Unlawful To Damage Trees or Remove Protection
Devices.196 [R.O. 2009 §92.12; CC 1981 §§27-26—27-27; Ord. No.
88-6, 1-20-1988; Ord. No. 03-122, 5-27-2003]
A. The City hereby establishes a Cost-Sharing Tree Removal and Tree-
Trimming Program with the following guidelines:
1. The City will pay fifty percent (50%) of the costs of trimming or
removing dangerous, dead or damaged trees located within City
right-of-way. The remaining fifty percent (50%) of the costs must be
paid by the landowners.
2. The City will contract to have the tree trimmed or removed and the
landowners must pay the landowner's share of the costs to the City
prior to the beginning of the trimming or removal.
3. The Director of Public Works or his/her designee will be the final
judge as to whether the tree needs to be trimmed or removed.
4. Trees will be trimmed or removed on a first-come, first-served
basis, except where the costs may be reduced by trimming or
removing multiple trees in one (1) area.
5. The City's total share of the Cost-Sharing Tree Removal and Tree-
Trimming Program shall not exceed amounts budgeted for the
purpose.
6. Cost participation by the landowner can be waived by the Mayor
when the income of the owner is substantially from Social Security
or other comparable restrictive sources, such as railroad
retirement, and when the total income of the family from all
sources does not exceed guidelines by HUD, Section 8 or other
Federal Housing Assistance Plans, as followed by the Mayor's office
for utility tax refunds.
7. If the damage to the tree has been caused by the City, then the City
will pay the entire cost.
8. No variance to this policy shall be granted unless seven (7)
members of the City Council vote in favor of the variance.
A. Unlawful To Damage, Injure Or Destroy Any Street Tree. It shall be
unlawful for any person to damage, injure or destroy any street tree
unless the same shall be done pursuant to the provisions of this Article
195. Cross References—As to cost-sharing sidewalk replacement program, §505.320; as to
penalty, §225.180.
196. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §225.180.
Section
225.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
225.120
100:481
Section 225.130. Impeding Free Passage of Sustenance To Trees or
Shrubs.197 [R.O. 2009 §92.13; CC 1981 §27-28; Ord. No. 88-6,
1-20-1988; Ord. No. 03-122, 5-27-2003]
No person shall deposit, place or maintain upon any highway or street of the
City any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other material which will impede
the free passage of water, air and fertilizer to the roots of any tree or shrub
growing therein, except by permission of the Director of Public Works, or
when such materials are designed for the construction of sidewalks, paving,
gutters or other public improvements and have been placed under a permit
granted by the Director.
Section 225.140. Administration and Enforcement —
Interference.198 [R.O. 2009 §92.14; CC 1981 §§27-13—27-14; Ord.
No. 88-6, 2-4-1988]
or to attach to, around or through any such tree any rope, wire, chain,
sign, box or other material.
B. Removing Or Injuring Guards Or Devices Placed To Protect Trees. It
shall be unlawful for any person to remove, injure or misuse any guard
or device placed or intended to protect any tree on or in any street
within the City.
A. Administration And Enforcement. It shall be the responsibility of the
Director of Public Works of this City to carry out, enforce and
administer the provisions of this Article. The Director shall also have
the authority to plant, replant, trim, prune, spray, fertilize and
otherwise treat any tree or shrub located within the right-of-way of a
public street whenever necessary to carry out the provisions of this
Article.
B. Interference With Enforcement. No person shall prevent, delay or
interfere with the Director of Public Works or any employees under the
Director's control in the execution or enforcement of this Article;
provided however, that nothing herein shall be construed as an attempt
to prohibit the pursuit of any legal or equitable remedy in any court of
competent jurisdiction for the protection of property rights by the
owner of any property within the City.
197. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §225.180.
198. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §225.180.
Section
225.120
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
225.140
100:482
ARTICLE II
Weeds
Section 225.150. Prohibited Over Certain Height.199 [R.O. 2009
§92.25; CC 1981 §27-37; Ord. No. 3690, 8-26-1969; Ord. No. 75-20,
4-9-1975; Ord. No. 79-56, 6-6-1979; Ord. No. 02-170, 7-9-2002; Ord.
No. 17-154 § 1, 8-3-2017]
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any parcel of ground located within
the corporate limits of the City to allow or maintain on any such parcel
of ground any growth of weeds, grass or any grasslike vegetation to a
height in excess of eight (8) inches; provided, however, that nothing in this
Article shall be construed to apply to any field used for commercial farming
purposes.
Section 225.160. Notice To Remove — Removal By City Upon
Owner's Failure.200 [R.O. 2009 §92.26; CC 1981 §27-38; Ord. No.
3423, 9-21-1966; Ord. No. 75-20, 4-9-1975; Ord. No. 79-56,
6-6-1979; Ord. No. 80-59, 6-3-1980; Ord. No. 82-70, 9-8-1982; Ord.
No. 04-215, 9-10-2004; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
A. Whenever weeds, in violation of Section 225.150, are allowed to grow
on any part of any lot or ground within the City, the owner of the ground
or, in case of joint tenancy, tenancy by entireties or tenancy in common,
each owner thereof shall have violated Section 225.150. The Mayor or
his/her designee shall give a hearing after four (4) days' notice thereof,
either personally or by United States mail, to the owner or owners or
his/her or their agents or by posting such notice on the premises;
however, if no person or lawful representative of any entity claiming an
interest in the subject property shall appear for the hearing, the Mayor
or his/her designee may immediately declare the weeds to be a
nuisance and order the same to be abated within five (5) days.
Otherwise, following the hearing, the Mayor or his/her designee may
declare the weeds to be a nuisance and order the same to be abated
within five (5) days. In either case, if the weeds are not cut down and
removed within five (5) days following the date of the hearing, the
Mayor or his/her designee shall have the weeds cut down and removed
and shall certify the costs of same to the City Clerk who shall cause a
special tax bill therefor against the property to be prepared and to be
collected by the Director of Finance with other taxes assessed against
the property; and the tax bill from the date of its issuance shall be a first
(1st) lien on the property until paid and shall be prima facie evidence of
the recitals therein and of its validity and no mere clerical error or
informality in the same or in the proceedings leading up to the issuance
shall be a defense thereto. Each special tax bill shall be issued by the
City Clerk and delivered to the Director of Finance on or before June
199. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §225.180. State Law References—Authority to prevent and
remove nuisances, §§77.530, 77.560, RSMo.
200. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §225.180.
Section
225.150
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
225.160
100:483
Section 225.170. Occupant Responsible For Weeds. [R.O. 2009
§92.27; CC 1981 §27-39; Ord. No. 82-70, 9-8-1982]
It shall be unlawful for any person occupying any property whether as
owner, agent of owner, tenant or occupant to allow or permit any growth of
weeds as defined in Section 225.150.
Section 225.180. Penalty. [R.O. 2009 §92.99; CC 1981 §27-40; Ord.
No. 82-70, 9-8-1982; Ord. No. 87-216, 11-6-1987; Ord. No. 93-118,
6-2-1993; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
first (1st) of each year. Such tax bills if not paid when due shall bear
interest at the rate of eight percent (8%) per annum.
B. If weeds are allowed to grow on the same property in violation of
Section 225.150 more than once during the same growing season, the
Mayor or his/her designee may, without further notification, have the
weeds removed and the cost of the same shall be billed in the manner
described in Subsection (A) of this Section. The provisions of this
Section shall not apply to lands owned by a public utility and lands,
rights-of-way and easements appurtenant or incidental to lands
controlled by any railroad.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this Code for which no other
penalty is set forth shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Section
100.150.
B. Violation Concerning Height Of Weeds.
1. Any owner, agent of owner, tenant or occupant who violates the
provisions of Section 225.150 and allows, permits or maintains any
growth of weeds to a height in excess of eight (8) inches shall, upon
conviction, be punished as provided in Section 100.150.
2. Refusal to comply with an order to remove weeds shall be a
separate offense. In addition to the requirement of removal of such
weeds as required by this Chapter, any person who violates, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with the provisions of this Chapter
and the written notice of the Mayor or the Mayor's designee, within
the time limit stated in the notice, shall upon conviction thereof be
punished as provided in Section 100.150. Each day that any
violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
Section
225.160
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
225.180
100:484
Chapter 230
NOISE CONTROL
Section 230.010. Title and Purpose. [R.O. 2009 §97.01; CC 1981
§20-138; Ord. No. 83-58, 8-10-1983]
Section 230.020. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §97.02; CC 1981 §20-139;
Ord. No. 83-58, 8-10-1983; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ANSI — American National Standards Institute or its successor bodies. All
acoustical terminology shall be that contained in ANSI S1.1 "Acoustical
Terminology".
ARI — Air-Conditioning and Refrigeration Institute or its successor bodies.
ASHRAE — American Society of Heating Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning
Engineers or its successor bodies.
ASTM — American Society for Testing Materials or its successor bodies.
DECIBEL — A logarithmic unit of measurement which indicates the ratio
between two (2) quantities, commonly electrical or sound energy levels or
pressure levels. See "SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL".
DISCRETE TONE — A sound wave whose instantaneous sound pressure
varies essentially as a sinusoidal function of time.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities, municipal departments or commissions or
any governmental agencies of underground or overhead gas, electrical,
steam or water transmission or distribution system, collection,
communication, supply or disposal system, including poles, wires, mains,
drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes,
traffic signals, hydrants, towers, electric substations, telephone exchange
buildings, gas regulator stations and other similar equipment and
accessories in connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the
furnishing of utility service by such public utilities, municipal departments,
commissions or any governmental agencies or for the public health, safety
or welfare.
A. This Chapter shall be known as the "Noise Control Ordinance" of the
City.
B. The purposes of this Chapter are to abate certain loud, unnecessary,
unnatural and unusual noises and to establish maximum noise limits for
motor vehicle and transportation noise, construction power equipment
noise and other general environmental noise.
Section
225.180
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
230.020
100:485
FLUCTUATING NOISE — A noise whose sound pressure level varies
significantly but does not equal the ambient environmental level more than
once during the period of observation.
IEC — International Electrotechnical Commission or its successor bodies.
IMPULSE NOISE — Characterized by brief excursions of sound pressure
which significantly exceed the ambient environmental sound pressure. The
duration of a single impulse is usually less than one (1) second.
INTERMITTENT NOISE — A noise whose sound pressure level equals the
ambient environmental level two (2) or more times during the period of
observation. The period of time during which the level of the noise remains
at an essentially constant value different from that of the ambient noise
level is on the order of one (1) second or more.
ISO — International Organization for Standardization or its successor
bodies.
MAYOR — The Mayor or duly authorized representative.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any passenger vehicle, truck, truck-trailer, trailer or
semi-trailer propelled or drawn by mechanical power.
OCTAVE BAND — A frequency band with lower and upper cut-off
frequencies having a ratio of two (2). The cut-off frequencies of seven
hundred seven (707) Hertz and one thousand four hundred fourteen (1,414)
Hertz define an octave band in common use.
PERIOD OF OBSERVATION — The time interval during which acoustical
data are obtained. The period of observation is determined by the
characteristics of the noise being measured and should also be at least ten
(10) times as long as the response time of the instrumentation. The greater
the variance in indicated sound level, the longer must be the observation
time for a given expected accuracy of the measurement.
PERSON — Every natural person, partnership, association or corporation
which may own, operate or control those devices or facilities herein
described.
REPETITIVE IMPULSE NOISE — More than five (5) impulses per hour.
SAE — Society of Automotive Engineers or its successor bodies.
SOUND LEVEL OR NOISE LEVEL — For airborne sound, a weighted sound
pressure level obtained by the use of metering characteristics and Aweighting
as specified in the referenced standards. When the A-weighting
is employed, it must be indicated.
SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL — A sound, in decibels, is twenty (20) times the
logarithm to the base ten (10) of the ratio of the pressure of this sound to
the reference sound pressure having the value of two (2) multiplied by 10 4
dynes per square centimeter.
STEADY NOISE — A noise whose level remains essentially constant.
Section
230.020
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
230.020
100:486
ZONING DISTRICT — Districts established by the zoning ordinance of the
City and found in Chapter 400 of this Code of Ordinances.
Section 230.030. Prohibited Uses. [R.O. 2009 §97.03; CC 1981
§20-140(a—f); Ord. No. 83-58, 8-10-1983; Ord. No. 91-17, 2-7-1991;
Ord. No. 97-427, 12-10-1997; Ord. No. 99-60, 2-17-1999; Ord. No.
01-170, 7-19-2001; Ord. No. 02-190, 7-26-2002; Ord. No. 03-122,
5-27-2003; Ord. No. 03-290, 11-12-2003; Ord. No. 05-174,
6-17-2005; Ord. No. 10-208 §1, 9-29-2010; Ord. No. 13-023 §1,
2-7-2013]
A. No person shall make or cause, permit or allow to be made, upon a
public way or in such close proximity to a public way as to be distinctly
and loudly audible upon such public way, any noise of any kind by
crying, calling or shouting or by means of any whistle, rattle, bell, gong,
clapper, hammer, drum, horn, hand organ, mechanically operated
piano, other musical instrument, wind instrument, mechanical device,
radio, phonograph, sound-amplifying or other similar electronic device;
provided that a licensed peddler is not restricted or prohibited so long
as he/she shall have met the requirements and conditions hereinafter
specified in Subsection (E) below nor does this prohibition apply to
bands and orchestras or similar musical bodies utilized as part of a
parade or similar authorized musical production. The reasonable
sounding of bells, chimes or similar devices by houses of religious
worship and by ice cream trucks is exempt from the operation of this
provision.
B. No person shall use or perform any hand organ or other musical
instrument or device in any public way or public street of the City
before 7:00 A.M. or after 10:00 P.M. of any day.
C. No person shall operate a gasoline-powered grass cutting device, lawn
mower or similar mechanical apparatus normally used for cutting
lawns, yards or fields before 7:00 A.M. or after 10:00 P.M. of any day.
D. Restricted Use Of Certain Equipment.
1. No person shall use or operate any pile driver, shovel, fork lifts,
trash compactors without a sound-attenuating cover, hammer,
derrick, hoist, tractor, roller or any other mechanical apparatus in
building or construction operations or for any other reason
outdoors between the hours of 11:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M., except for
work on essential services, within six hundred (600) feet of a
residence or hospital.
2. No property owner, property manager, landlord or other person
with any lawful property interest in a piece of property shall cause,
allow the use or operation on of any pile driver, shovel, fork lift,
trash compactor without a sound-attenuating cover, hammer,
derrick, hoist, tractor, roller or any other mechanical apparatus in
building or construction operations on any property under their
Section
230.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
230.030
100:487
control outdoors between the hours of 11:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M.,
except for work on essential services, within six hundred (600) feet
of a residence or hospital.
3. Any property owner, property manager, landlord or other person
with any lawful property interest in a piece of property or control
over a piece of property shall be individually and strictly liable for
any violation of Subsection (D) which occurs on such property.
E. No person shall activate or cause or suffer to be activated any horn or
audible signal device on any motor vehicle of any kind except as a
warning of danger or peril as provided in Section 345.090.
F. No person shall operate or allow to be operated in any area zoned for
commercial use any motor of a motor vehicle which weighs in excess of
five (5) tons (ten thousand (10,000) pounds) for a consecutive period of
longer than two (2) minutes while such vehicle is in a stationary
location on private property located within three hundred (300) feet of
property devoted to residential uses; any property owner, property
manager, landlord or other person with any lawful property interest in a
piece of property or control over a piece of property shall be
individually and strictly liable for any violation of Subsection (F) which
occurs on such property. Except that the provisions of this Subsection
shall not apply: [Ord. No. 16-222 §1, 11-1-2016]
G. No person shall operate an internal combustion powered street
sweeping device, street vacuum or similar apparatus normally used for
the cleaning of parking lots within one thousand two hundred (1,200)
feet of an occupied residential structure between the hours of 11:00
P.M. in the evening to 6:00 A.M. the following day from Sunday evening
to Friday morning and between the hours of 11:00 P.M. in the evening
to 7:00 A.M. the following day from Friday evening to Sunday morning.
The operation of City-owned street sweeping devices is exempt from
this restriction. The operation of any snow removal equipment while
engaged in snow removal is exempt from this restriction.
H. Noise Restrictions Dealing With Music.
1. No person shall use, cause to be used or operate any musical
instrument or electronic device for playing music in such a manner
as to create an unreasonably loud noise or so as to be plainly
audible at a distance of twenty-five (25) or more feet from the
sound source by another person located on a residential property
before 7:00 A.M. or after 10:00 P.M. of any day except for a college,
university or school hosting a school-sponsored athletic or social
event as a part of its regular course and curriculum on a Friday or
Saturday in which case musical instruments or electronic devices
for playing music may be used or operated on school property from
7:00 A.M. to 11:59 P.M.
Section
230.030
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
230.030
100:488
Section 230.040. Noise Limits On Motor Vehicles.201 [R.O. 2009
§97.04; CC 1981 §20-140(g—j)(r—t); Ord. No. 83-58, 8-10-1983; Ord.
No. 91-17, 2-7-1991; Ord. No. 97-427, 12-10-1997; Ord. No. 99-60,
2-17-1999; Ord. No. 01-170, 7-19-2001; Ord. No. 02-190, 7-26-2002;
Ord. No. 03-122, 5-27-2003; Ord. No. 03-217, 9-3-2003]
2. No person shall use, cause to be used or operate any mechanical
device, engine, generator or tool used for auto repair or alteration
in such a manner as to create an unreasonably loud noise or so as
to be plainly audible at a distance of twenty-five (25) or more feet
from the sound source by another person located on a residential
property before 7:00 A.M. or after 10:00 P.M. of any day.
3. For the purposes of this Subsection, "plainly audible sound" shall
mean any sound that can be detected by a person using his/her
unaided hearing faculties. Example: If the sound source under
investigation is a portable sound amplification or reproduction
device, the enforcement officer need not determine the title of the
song, specific words or the artist performing the song. The
detection of the rhythmic bass component of the music is sufficient
to constitute a plainly audible sound.
4. A variance from the provisions of this Subsection (H) may be
granted in accordance with Section 230.110.
A. No person shall sell or offer for sale any motor vehicle that produces a
maximum noise exceeding the following noise limit at a distance of fifty
(50) feet from the centerline of travel, under test procedures, standards
and recommended practices as itemized below and with reference to
Sections 230.060 and 230.070. Such stock as is certified to the City on
the effective date of this Chapter shall be exempt from the prohibition
contained in this Section. Test procedures shall be in substantial
conformity with standards and recommended practices established by
the Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc., including SAE
Recommended Practice J 184 and ANSI Standards S1.1 1960 and S1.4
1961.
Type of Vehicle Date of Manufacture Noise Limit
Motorcycle Before January 1, 1980 84 dB(A)
After January 1, 1980 80 dB(A)
Test procedures according to SAE Proposed Standard J 331
Any motor vehicle with a
gross vehicle weight of ten
thousand (10,000) pounds or
more
Before July 1,1975 86 dB(A)
After January 1, 1975 84 dB(A)
201. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
230.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
230.040
100:489
Type of Vehicle Date of Manufacture Noise Limit
Test procedures according to SAE Standard J 336a
Passenger car, motor-driven
cycle and any other motor
vehicle
Before January 1, 1975 84 dB(A)
After January 1, 1975 80 dB(A)
Test procedures according to SAE Standard J 986a
B. Noise Related To Operation Of Vehicle.
1. Noise limits as related to speed.
a. No person shall operate within the speed limits specified in this
Section either a motor vehicle or combination of vehicles of a
type subject to registration at any time or under any condition
as to exceed the following noise limit for the category of motor
vehicle, measured at a distance of not less than fifty (50) feet
from the centerline of travel, under ANSI Standards S1.1 1960
and S1.4 1961 and SAE Standard J 184 with meter set for fast
response and the A-weighted scale:
Noise Limit in Relation to
Posted Speed Limit
Type of Vehicle 35 mph or less Over 35 mph
Any motor vehicle with a
manufacturer's GVW
rating of ten thousand
(10,000) pounds or more
and any combination of
vehicles towed by such
motor vehicle
86 dB(A) 90 dB(A)
Any motorcycle 78 dB(A) 82 dB(A)
Any other motor vehicle
and any combination of
motor vehicles towed by
such vehicle
73 4dB(A) 79 dB(A)
b. This Subsection (B)(1) applies to the total noise from a vehicle
or combination of vehicles and shall not be construed as
limiting or precluding the enforcement of any other provisions
of this Code relating to motor vehicle mufflers for noise
control.
2. No person shall operate a motor vehicle or combination of vehicles,
of a type subject to registration, at any time or under any condition
when the noise limit set forth in Appendix A to this Chapter is
exceeded under stationary test procedures as outlined for this
Section by the regulations as promulgated under Section 230.100.
Section
230.040
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
230.040
100:490
C. No person shall sell, lease or agree to sell or lease any of the types of
equipment herein enumerated which shall exceed the noise level herein
established at a distance of fifty (50) feet, under test procedures and
standards SAE J 184, SAE J 952b, ANSI S1.1 1960, ANSI S1.4 1961 and
with reference to Sections 230.060 and 230.070.
Type of Equipment
Construction and industrial machinery, such as crawlers-tractors,
dozers, rotary drills and augers, loaders, power shovels, cranes,
derricks, motor graders, paving machines, off-highway trucks,
ditchers, trenchers, compactors, scrapers, wagons, pavement
breakers, compressors and pneumatic powered equipment, etc.,
but not including pile drivers:
Noise Limit
Manufactured before January 1, 1980 86 dB(A)
Manufactured after January 1, 1980 80 dB(A)
Type of Equipment
Agricultural tractors and equipment:
Noise Limit
Manufactured before January 1, 1980 86 dB(A)
Manufactured after January 1, 1980 80 dB(A)
Type of Equipment
Powered commercial equipment of twenty (20) hp or less intended
for infrequent use in a residential area, such as chain saws,
pavement breakers, log chippers, powered hand tools and the like:
Noise Limit
80 dB(A)
Type of Equipment
Powered equipment intended for repetitive use in residential areas.
Such equipment includes lawn mowers, small lawn and garden
tools, riding tractors, snow removal equipment:
Noise Limit
Manufactured before January 1, 1978 70 dB(A)
Manufactured after January 1, 1978 65 dB(A)
D. No person shall alter, modify or change any exhaust muffler, intake
muffler or other equipment designed to abate noise on any motor
equipment unless such alteration, modification or change shall reduce
the noise emitted by such equipment. Nothing in this Section shall be
interpreted to prohibit the replacement of worn noise abatement
equipment certified as meeting or exceeding specifications of the
manufacturer's original equipment.
Section
230.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
230.040
100:491
Section 230.050. Maximum Noise Levels in Certain Zoning
Districts.202 [R.O. 2009 §97.05; CC 1981 §20-140(k—q); Ord. No.
83-58, 8-10-1983; Ord. No. 98-398, 9-14-1998]
E. No person shall sell or offer for sale any engine powered pleasure
vessel, engine powered craft or motor boat which may exceed the
following noise limit as measured at the distance of fifty (50) feet under
test procedures per SAE J 952b and with reference to SAE J 184 and
ANSI Standards S1.1 1960, S1.4 1961 and Sections 230.060 and
230.070:
Noise Limit
Manufactured before January 1, 19785 85 dB(A)
Manufactured after January 1, 1975 76 dB(A)
F. No person shall sell or offer for sale a new power-driven recreational or
off-highway vehicle including dune buggies and snowmobiles, go-karts
and mini bikes that produce noise measured at the distance of fifty (50)
feet exceeding the following, under test procedures per SAE J 952b and
with reference to SAE J 184 and ANSI Standards S1.1 1960, S1.4 1961
and Sections 230.060 and 230.070.
Type of Vehicle Noise Limit
Snowmobile 73 dB(A)
Any other vehicle including dune buggy, allterrain
vehicle, mini-bike
73 dB(A)
This Subsection (F) shall not be interpreted to include motor homes,
off-highway trucks, construction equipment and other equipment
included under Subsections (A) and (C) above.
G. No person shall operate a motor-driven vehicle of a type not subject to
registration for road use at any time or under any condition of
acceleration or deceleration as to exceed 82 dB(A) as measured from
the distance of fifty (50) feet under ANSI Standards S1.1 1960 and S1.4
1961 and SAE Standard J 184 with meter set for fast response and the
A-weighted scale. This Subsection (G) shall not be interpreted to
include the operation of off-highway trucks and construction equipment
regulated under Subsection (C) of this Section.
A. In "I-1" Light Industrial zoning districts, at no point on the boundary of
a residence, business or commercial district shall the sound pressure
level of any individual operation or plant or the combined operations of
any person, firm or corporation exceed the decibel levels in the
designated octave bands shown below for the zoning districts indicted
as measured using test equipment per ANSI Standards S1.1 1960, S1.4
202. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
230.040
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
230.050
100:492
1961, S1.11 1966 and S1.12 1967 and SAE J 184 and with reference to
Sections 230.060 and 230.070.
Octave Band Center
Frequency
(Hz)
Maximum Sound Pressure Levels (dB)
Along District Boundaries
(Daytime, Steady Noise)
Residence Business —
Commercial
31.5 72 79
63 71 78
125 65 72
250 57 64
500 51 58
1,000 45 52
2,000 39 46
4,000 34 41
8,000 32 39
Maximum repetitive impulse noise sound
pressure levels to be 10 dB lower than the
values shown for steady noise.
1. For monitoring purposes, the A scale levels (slow response) of 55
dB(A) and 62 dB(A) respectively for residence and businesscommercial
districts may be used. Any noise levels in excess of
these values constitute a violation of this Subsection.
2. Where noise levels below the above-mentioned 55 dB(A) and 62
dB(A) are measured, the octave band test is to be applied in order
to determine compliance with this Section.
3. Maximum nighttime sound pressure levels 10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M.
are to be seven (7) dB lower than the values shown for daytime
steady noise for each octave band center frequency.
B. In "M-2" Heavy Industrial zoning districts, at no point either on the
boundary of a residence, business or commercial district or at one
hundred twenty-five (125) feet from the nearest property line of a plant
or operation, whichever distance is greater, shall the sound pressure
level of any individual operation or plant or the combined operations of
any person, firm or corporation exceed the decibel levels in the
designated octave bands shown below for the zoning districts included,
as measured using test equipment per ANSI Standards S1.1 1960, S1.4
1961, S1.11 1966 and S1.12 1967 and SAE J 184 and with reference to
Sections 230.060 and 230.070.
Section
230.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
230.050
100:493
Octave Band Center
Frequency
(Hz)
Maximum Sound Pressure Levels (dB)
Along District Boundaries
(Daytime, Steady Noise)
Residence Business —
Commercial
31.5 75 80
63 74 79
125 69 74
250 64 69
500 58 63
1,000 52 57
2,000 47 52
4,000 43 48
8,000 40 45
Maximum repetitive impulse noise sound
pressure levels to be 10 dB lower than the
values shown for steady noise.
1. For monitoring purposes, the A scale levels (slow response) of 61
dB(A) and 66 dB(A) respectively for residence and businesscommercial
districts may be used. Any noise levels in excess of
these values constitute a violation of this Section.
2. Where noise levels below the above-mentioned 61 dB(A) and 66
dB(A) values are measured, the octave band test is to be applied in
order to determine compliance with this Section.
3. Maximum nighttime sound pressure levels 10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M.
are to be seven (7) dB lower than the values shown for daytime
steady noise or each octave band center frequency.
C. In business and commercial zoning districts, all activities involving the
production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair of materials,
goods or products or any property use shall conform with the
performance standards stated in Subsection (A) above, provided that
performance standards shall in every case be applied at the boundaries
of the lot on which any such activities take place.
D. In residential zoning districts, any property use shall conform with the
performance standards stated in Section (A) above for residence
district boundaries, provided that performance standards shall in every
case be applied at the boundaries of the lot on which such use is
established.
E. The maximum sound pressure levels established in Subsections (A), (B),
(C) and (D) to be applied to the boundaries of a lot shall not apply to
Section
230.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
230.050
100:494
Section 230.060. Sae Standards and Recommended Practices. [R.O.
2009 §97.06; CC 1981 §20-141; Ord. No. 83-58, 8-9-1983]
Test procedures as to noise levels emitted by motor vehicles and by engine
powered equipment when offered for sale shall conform to SAE standards
and recommended practices:
SAE J 184 Qualifying a Sound Data Acquisition System. SAE Recommended
Practice.
SAE J 331 SAE Standard for Sound Levels for Motorcycles, as it is proposed
on the effective date of this Chapter.
SAE J 366a Exterior Sound Level for Heavy Trucks and Buses. SAE
Recommended Practice.
SAE J 952b Sound Levels for Engine Powered Equipment. SAE Standard.
SAE J 986a Sound Levels for Passenger Cars and Light Trucks. SAE
Standard.
construction sites. Construction site noise level shall be regulated by
Section 230.030(D).
F. In all instances in which a "I-2" Heavy Industrial District does not adjoin
a residence, business or commercial district, the performance
standards governing noise for the "I-1" Light Industrial Districts shall
apply at the nearest residence or commercial district boundary line, as
these districts are defined and designated under the provisions of the
zoning regulations set forth in Chapter 400.
G. Any property uses established in an industrial, business or commercial
district shall be so operated as to comply with the performance
standards governing vibrations set forth:
1. In an "I-2" industrial zoning district, any property use creating
intense or shaking vibrations such as are created by drop forges or
heavy hydraulic surges shall be set back at least three hundred
(300) feet from the zoning district line of any residence or
commercial zoning district and at least one hundred fifty (150) feet
from the zoning district line in any "I-1" industrial zoning district
unless such operation is controlled in such manner as to prevent
such transmission beyond the zoning district line of earth-shaking
vibrations perceptible without the aid of instruments.
2. In an "I-1" industrial zoning district, business or commercial zoning
district any property use creating earth-shaking vibrations such as
are created by drop forges or hydraulic surges shall be controlled
in such manner as to prevent transmission beyond the lot lines of
earth-shaking vibrations perceptible without the aid of
instruments.
Section
230.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
230.060
100:495
and such other and further standards as may be propounded in the code of
recommended practices of the Director.
Section 230.070. Test Equipment Standards. [R.O. 2009 §97.07; CC
1981 §20-142; Ord. No. 83-58, 8-9-1983]
Test equipment standards applicable to tests and measurements described
and required herein are:
ANSI S1.1 1960 Acoustic Terminology (ISO R131) (IEC 50-08)
ANSI S1.4 1961 General Purpose Sound Level Meters (IEC 123-1961)
ANSI S1.11 1966 Octave, Half Octave and Third Octave Band Filter Sets
(IEC 225-1966)
ANSI S1.12 1967 Laboratory Standard Microphones
IEC 179 1965 Precision Sound Level Meters
and such other and further standards as may be propounded in the code of
recommended practices of the Director.
Section 230.080. Certification of Compliance. [R.O. 2009 §97.08; CC
1981 §20-143; Ord. No. 83-58, 8-9-1983]
The Director may require, upon reasonable notice, that the manufacturer,
distributor, importer or designated agent shall certify in writing to the City
that his/her vehicles or equipment sold or offered for sale within the City
comply with the applicable provisions of the appropriate Sections of this
Chapter.
Section 230.090. Re-Evaluation of Noise Level Limits. [R.O. 2009
§97.09; CC 1981 §20-144; Ord. No. 83-58, 8-9-1983]
It is the intent of the City to periodically re-evaluate the future noise level
limits and other standards contained in this Chapter and, if it is determined
to be appropriate, to adjust such standards either upward or downward in
light of future possible advances in technology or the state of the art.
Section 230.100. Enforcement of Regulations And Enforcement
Factors.203 [R.O. 2009 §97.10; CC 1981 §20-145; Ord. No. 83-58,
8-10-1983]
A. The Chief of Police may establish regulations for the implementation of
enforcement. Any regulation promulgated under this Section shall
pertain only to the means, manner or method of implementation of
enforcement of the Chapter and shall not change, alter or amend the
requirements of the Chapter. The regulations promulgated hereunder
203. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
230.060
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
230.100
100:496
Section 230.110. Noise Variances. [R.O. 2009 §97.11; CC 1981
§20-146; Ord. No. 83-58, 8-10-1983; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
or amendments or changes thereof shall become effective upon review
and approval by the City Council.
B. Violation of the regulations promulgated under this provision shall be
punished as provided for in Section 100.150.
C. Copies of the regulations promulgated under this Section shall be kept
on file at the office of the City Clerk. These regulations shall be
available for public inspection and copying during normal business
hours.
D. Enforcement Factors. In the enforcement of standards established in
this Chapter, a Police Officer or Code Enforcement Officer may be
required to exercise judgment in determining if a particular noise is
sufficiently loud or otherwise so offensive that it would unreasonably
disturb other persons in the vicinity. When making such determinations,
the Police Officer or Code Enforcement Officer shall consider each of
the following factors: [Ord. No. 19-169, 8-20-2019204]
1. The intensity (sound pressure level) of the noise.
2. Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual.
3. Whether the origin of the noise is natural or man-made.
4. The volume and intensity of background noise, if any.
5. The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities during
the sleeping hours of 10:30 P.M. to 7:00 A.M.
6. The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates.
7. The time of the day or night along with the day of week and time of
year the noise occurs.
8. The duration of the noise.
9. Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant.
A. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to those events, activities
or locations which have been granted a variance, as hereinafter set out,
by the City Council.
B. The City Council shall have the authority to grant variances subject to
the conditions and under the circumstances set out in this Section.
These variances, to be known and entitled as noise variances, shall
exclude the event, activity or location for which the permit is issued
204. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 19-169 also changed the title of this Section to include "And
Enforcement Factors."
Section
230.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
230.110
100:497
from the operation and requirement of this Chapter, subject to the
provisions of this Section.
C. Any person seeking a variance pursuant to this Section shall file an
application with the City Clerk on a form prescribed by the Chief of
Police. The application shall contain, in addition to such information as
shall be required by the Chief of Police, information demonstrating that
bringing the source of sound for which the variance is sought or the
activity involved into compliance with this Chapter would cause an
unreasonable hardship for the applicant, the community or for other
persons. Upon receiving such an application, the Clerk shall submit it to
the Mayor. Upon receipt of an application, the Mayor shall cause such
investigation as he/she deems necessary to be made concerning the
application. This investigation may include, but need not be limited to,
consulting with such departments as he/she may deem necessary or
desirable. The Mayor, subject to the provisions of Subsection (D) below
may, in his/her discretion, cause a public hearing to be held on any
application for a noise variance. If no public hearing is held, the Mayor,
subject to the provisions of Subsection (D) below, shall allow interested
parties to submit written comments concerning an application for a
noise variance. The applicant shall, prior to the investigation of the
application by the Mayor, cause a public notice of the application for a
noise variance to be published at least twice in a daily newspaper of
general circulation published in the City in a form prescribed by the
City Clerk.
D. The Mayor, in addition to such other investigation as he/she may deem
necessary:
1. Shall require applicant to show that the notice requirements herein
provided for have been met;
2. Shall permit applicant to offer such evidence as it desires to
establish applicant's position that a variance should be granted;
3. Shall permit those opposing applicant's request for a variance to
offer evidence in opposition to the granting of a variance;
4. May, in his/her discretion, refuse to receive or hear evidence that is
cumulative and may reasonably limit the time allowed to present
evidence by those supporting and those opposing the application.
E. The Mayor shall consider all evidence received pursuant to this Section
and based upon this evidence and the results of his/her investigation
shall make a recommendation to the City Council as to whether a noise
variance should be granted. The Mayor shall make his/her
recommendation based upon the factors set out in Subsection (F) and
shall state the reasons for his/her recommendation in writing. The
application and the recommendation of the Mayor shall be placed on
the agenda of the City Council and shall be considered in due course
according to the rules of the City Council. In deciding whether to grant
the noise variance, the City Council shall consider the factors set out in
Section
230.110
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
230.110
100:498
Subsection (F) below. The City Council shall, by resolution, grant or
deny the variance. If a resolution approving a noise variance is passed,
the City Clerk shall issue a noise variance subject to the terms of this
Section.
F. The following factors shall be considered in determining whether to
grant the variance:
1. The balance of the hardship to the applicant, the community and
other persons in not granting the variance against the adverse
impact on the health, safety and welfare of persons adversely
affected and any other adverse effects of the granting of the
variance.
2. The number, if any, of previous variances granted to the applicant
or for the same location or activity.
3. The nearness of any residence or residences or any other use which
would be adversely affected by noise in excess of the limits
prescribed by the Chapter.
4. The sound level of the sound to be generated by the event or
activity.
5. Whether the type of noise to be produced by the event is usual or
unusual for the location or area for which the variance is
requested.
6. The density of population of the area in which the event or activity
is to take place.
7. The time of day or night which the activity or event will take place.
8. The nature of the sound to be produced including, but not limited
to, whether the sound will be steady, intermittent or of a repetitive
impulse nature.
G. Neither the Mayor nor the City Council shall consider the
communicative content of the activity or event in determining whether
to grant or deny a variance. The rights of all interested persons to due
process of law and equal protection of law shall not be denied.
H. Variances shall only be granted subject to the following conditions:
1. The event or activity for which the permit is sought shall be held in
a public place.
2. The event or activity for which the permit is sought shall be open to
the public. There shall be no discrimination on the basis of race,
color, creed, national origin or sex.
3. Variances issued shall be subject to such reasonable conditions as
the City Council shall require including, but not limited to:
Section
230.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
230.110
100:499
Section 230.120. Noise Control in The New Town At St. Charles.
[R.O. 2009 §97.12; Ord. No. 09-195, 11-3-2009]
Chapter 235
a. Limiting the days of the week for which the variance is valid.
b. Limiting the number of days for which the variance is valid.
c. Limiting the hours of the day or days for which the variance is
valid. Such conditions shall be noted on the variance issued to
the applicant and non-compliance with any condition of the
variance shall terminate the variance and subject the
applicant, event or activity to the provisions of this Chapter.
The variance shall not be valid unless all conditions thereof are
agreed to by the applicant or its duly authorized officer or
agent, in writing.
I. Any variance issued pursuant to this Section shall be kept at the site of
the event or activity for which the variance was obtained. The variance
shall be displayed, on request, to any Law Enforcement Officer,
environmental protection department employee or park patrol officer.
The requirements of this Chapter are made express conditions of the
granting of the variance and failure to comply with these conditions
shall cause the variance to terminate as provided for in Subsection (H)
of this Section.
J. The City Council, in granting or denying a variance pursuant to this
Section, shall be an administrative body, acting in a quasi-judicial
capacity, subject to review as provided in State Statutes pertinent to
administrative proceedings.
A. Pursuant to Ordinances 03-172 and 03-174, the Urban Code for New
Town at St. Charles was adopted. Section 1.3.9.b of the Urban Code
sets forth the general ambient noise standards which shall apply within
the New Town at St. Charles as follows:
Sound levels in Zones T1, T2, T3 and T4 shall not exceed seventy-five
(75) decibels between 6:00 A.M. and 12:00 A.M. Midnight and sixtyfive
(65) decibels between 12:00 A.M. Midnight and 6:00 A.M. Sound
levels in Zones T5 and T6 shall not exceed eighty-five (85) decibels
between 6:00 A.M. and 12:00 A.M. Midnight and seventy-five (75)
decibels between 12:00 A.M. Midnight and 6:00 A.M. The sound level
shall be measured at the property line of the property producing the
noise with a sound level meter set to the A frequency rating.
B. Within the New Town at St. Charles, no person shall make, cause,
permit or allow to be made any noise of any kind which exceeds the
decibel level set forth in Subsection (A).
C. Violation of this Section shall be punished as provided in Section
100.150.
Section
230.110
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
230.120
100:500
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section 235.010. Establishment.
There is hereby created within and for the City of St. Charles an emergency
management organization to be known as the City of St. Charles Emergency
Management Organization, which is responsible for the preparation and
implementation of emergency functions required to prevent injury and
minimize and repair damage due to disasters, to include emergency
management of resources and administration of such economic controls as
may be needed to provide for the welfare of the people, and emergency
activities (excluding functions for which military forces are primarily
responsible) in accordance with Chapter 44, RSMo., and supplements
thereto, and the Missouri Emergency Operations Plan adopted thereunder.
Section 235.020. Organization.
This agency shall consist of a Director and other members appointed by the
City of St. Charles Emergency Management Organization to conform to the
State organization and procedures for the conduct of emergency operations
as outlined in the Missouri Emergency Operations Plan.
Section 235.030. Functions.
The organization shall perform emergency management functions within
the City of St. Charles and may conduct these functions outside the
territorial limits as directed by the Governor during the time of emergency
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 44, RSMo., and supplements thereto.
Section 235.040. Director.
Section 235.050. Scope of Operation.
A. The Director will be appointed by the Mayor and shall serve at the
pleasure of the Mayor.
B. The Director shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration and operations of local emergency management
operations, subject to the direction and control of the Mayor or City
Council.
C. The Director shall be responsible for maintaining records and
accounting for the use and disposal of all items of equipment placed
under the jurisdiction of the City of St. Charles Emergency
Management Organization.
A. The City of St. Charles in accordance with Chapter 44, RSMo., may:
1. Appropriate and expend funds, make contracts, obtain and
distribute equipment, materials and supplies for emergency
management purposes; provide for the health and safety of
Section
230.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
235.050
100:501
Section 235.060. Mutual-Aid Agreements.
The Mayor or Public Safety Agency may enter into mutual-aid arrangements
or agreements with other public and private agencies within and without
the State for reciprocal emergency aid as authorized in Section 44.090,
RSMo.
Section 235.070. City May Accept Services, Etc..
The Mayor of the City may, with the consent of the Governor, accept
services, materials, equipment, supplies or funds gifted, granted or loaned
by the Federal Government or an officer or agency thereof for emergency
management purposes, subject to the terms of the offer.
Section 235.080. Oath.
No person shall be employed or associated in any capacity in the City of
St. Charles Emergency Management Organization who advocates or has
advocated a change by force or violence in the constitutional form of the
Government of the United States or in this State or the overthrow of any
Government in the United States by force or violence, or has been convicted
of or is under indictment or information charging any subversive act against
the United States. Each person who is appointed to serve in the City of
St. Charles Emergency Management Organization shall, before entering
upon his/her duties, take an oath, in writing, before a person authorized to
administer oaths in this State, which oath shall be substantially as follows:
"I, _______________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and
defend the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the
State of Missouri against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will bear
true faith and allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely,
without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well
and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I
do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I a member
of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the
Government of the United States or of this State by force or violence;
and that during such a time as I am a member of the City of St. Charles
Emergency Management Organization, I will not advocate nor become a
member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow
of the Government of the United States or of this State by force or violence."
persons, the safety of property; and direct and coordinate the
development of disaster plans and programs in accordance with the
policies and plans of the Federal and State Governments.
2. Appoint, provide or remove rescue teams, auxiliary fire and Police
personnel and other emergency operation teams, units or
personnel who may serve without compensation.
Section
235.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
235.090
100:502
Section 235.090. Office Space.
The Mayor is authorized to designate space in any City-owned or leased
building for the City of St. Charles Emergency Management Organization.
Section 235.100. Authority To Declare Civil Emergency. [R.O. 2009
§41.12; CC 1981 §7-12; Ord. No. 93-157, 7-9-1993; Ord. No. 07-162,
6-11-2007]
A. Whenever it is the judgment of the Mayor, or in the Mayor's absence or
inability to act, the Mayor Pro Tem, that there reasonably appears to
exist a state of civil emergency within the City or the clear threat of
such a civil emergency exists, the Mayor shall be empowered, in order
to preserve the peace and order of the City and protect its citizens and
their property, in addition to any other power granted to the Mayor by
law, to issue a proclamation declaring a state of civil emergency to
exist.
B. The Mayor may in the proclamation exercise such of the following
powers as to the Mayor may appear reasonably necessary for the
purposes aforesaid:
1. Impose a curfew upon all or any portion of the City as the Mayor
may deem advisable during such hours of the day or night as the
Mayor deems necessary. In such times and in such places, all
persons shall remove themselves to their places of residence, shall
remain off and away from the public streets, sidewalks, parkways,
parks and all other open or public places and shall not assemble,
gather, loiter or congregate in any manner in groups, assemblies or
meetings; provided however, persons performing medical services,
essential utility services, public officials, Police Officers,
Firefighters and all other persons explicitly enumerated as
exempted in such proclamation may be exempted from the curfew;
2. Order the closing of any and all business establishments
throughout the City or any portion thereof during the period for
which the state of emergency exists or during the curfew hours;
3. Order discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or giving
away of any firearms or other weapons of any character
whatsoever;
4. Order the closing of any or all establishments or portions thereof,
the chief activity of which is the sale, distribution, dispensing or
giving away of firearms or ammunition or other weapons of any
character whatsoever;
5. Order the closing of all retail and wholesale liquor stores, taverns
and other places dispensing, serving or permitting the
consumption of intoxicating liquor;
Section
235.090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
235.100
100:503
Section 235.110. Waiver of Inspection Fees. [R.O. 2009 §41.13; CC
1981 §7-14; Ord. No. 93-181, 8-17-1993; Ord. No. 07-162,
6-11-2007]
The Mayor may waive fees for inspections of buildings and facilities,
including building fees, electrical fees, plumbing fees and other similar fees,
when the inspections are necessary because of flooding or other natural
disasters occurring within the City.
Chapter 236
MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
Section 236.010. Regulation Of Unmanned Aircraft Systems
(Drones). [Ord. No. 17-110 § 1, 6-6-2017]
6. Order the discontinuance of the sale, distribution or giving away of
intoxicating liquors;
7. Order the closing of all private clubs or portions thereof wherein
the consumption of intoxicating liquor is permitted;
8. Order the closing of gasoline stations and other establishments, the
chief activity of which is the sale, distribution or dispensing of
gasoline or other liquid, flammable or combustible products;
9. Designate any public place, public street, thoroughfare, boulevard,
parking area and any other place closed to motor vehicles, persons
and pedestrian traffic; and
10. Order all regular, special and reserve Policemen, Firemen and
other conservators of the peace to report for duty assignment, such
reporting to be in accordance with prearranged plans or under the
direction of lawful authority.
A. Definitions. For purposes of this Section, the following words and
phrases shall have the following meanings:
UNMANNED AIRCRAFT (also known as a "drone") — A high-powered,
aerial vehicle that:
UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEM — An unmanned aircraft, and
associated elements (including communication links and the
Does not carry a human operator and is operated without the
possibility of direct human intervention from within or on the
aircraft;
1.
2. Uses aerodynamic forces to provide vehicle lift;
3. Can fly autonomously or be piloted remotely; and
4. Can be expendable or recoverable.
Section
235.100
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
236.010
100:504
components that control the unmanned aircraft), that is required for
the pilot in command to operate safely and efficiently in the national
airspace system. To be part of an unmanned aircraft system, the
unmanned aircraft must be:
VISUAL OBSERVER — A person who is designated by the operator of an
unmanned aircraft system to assist the operator to see and avoid other
air traffic or objects aloft or on the ground.
1. Capable of sustained flight in the atmosphere;
Flown within the visual line of sight of the person operating the
aircraft; and
2.
3. Flown for hobby or recreational purposes.
B. Unmanned Aircraft System Operator Requirements. An operator of an
unmanned aircraft system shall:
1. Adhere to applicable federal and State laws and regulations
regarding their use, and as may be amended from time to time, and
implemented thereafter;
2. Remain below any surrounding obstacles within the airspace, when
possible;
3. Remain within visual line of sight of the operator of the unmanned
aircraft system; or, alternatively, the unmanned aircraft shall
remain within the visual line of sight of a visual observer, provided
that the operator of the unmanned aircraft system and the visual
observer maintain effective communication with each other at all
times;
4. Not intentionally operate an unmanned aircraft system over
persons unprotected by shelter or moving vehicles, or within
twenty-five (25) feet of any person, building, or vehicle;
5. Not operate an unmanned aircraft system within five (5) miles of an
airport or heliport without first notifying the airport and control
tower;
6. Not operate an unmanned aircraft system in adverse weather
conditions, such as in high winds or reduced visibility;
7. Not operate an unmanned aircraft system, nor shall a visual
observer observe the operation of an unmanned aircraft system,
under the influence of alcohol or controlled substances;
8. Ensure the operating environment is safe and shall not operate an
unmanned aircraft system in a reckless or negligent manner so as
to endanger the life or property of another;
9. Not without the consent of the owner of the property, public utility,
or appropriate governmental entity operate an unmanned aircraft
Section
236.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
236.010
100:505
Chapter 240
HUMAN RIGHTS
system within twenty-five (25) feet of or over sensitive
infrastructure or property, such as power stations, utility lines,
water treatment facilities, correctional facilities, heavily traveled
roadways, government facilities, or other public utility facilities;
and
10. Limit operation of an unmanned aircraft system to daylight-only
operations, or civil twilight [thirty (30) minutes before official
sunrise to thirty (30) minutes after official sunset, local time], with
appropriate anticollision lighting; provided, notwithstanding the
foregoing, a person may, with the consent of the property owner,
operate an unmanned aircraft system between civil twilight and
10:00 P.M. directly above the areas of property that are fully lit by
one (1) or more outdoor light fixtures, provided that each light
fixture is at a height no less than sixty (60) feet above the surface of
the ground.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Knowingly operate an unmanned aircraft system directly over the
private property of another without the property owner's consent,
if such operation of the unmanned aircraft system:
a. Enters into the air space of the private property; and
b. It interferes substantially with the property owner's use and
enjoyment of his/her property; or
2. Operate an unmanned aircraft system weighing in excess of fiftyfive
(55) pounds [twenty-five (25) kilograms] except as may be
otherwise expressly permitted by Federal or State law.
Section
236.010
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
236.010
100:506
ARTICLE I
In General
Section 240.010. Purposes of Chapter.
Section 240.020. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall be deemed to
have the meanings indicated below:
COMMISSION — The Missouri Commission on Human Rights.
COMPLAINANT — A person who has filed a complaint with the Commission
alleging that another person has engaged in a prohibited discriminatory
practice.
DISABILITY — A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits
one (1) or more of a person's major life activities, being regarded as having
such an impairment, or a record of having such an impairment, which with
or without reasonable accommodation does not interfere with performing
the job, utilizing the place of public accommodation, or occupying the
dwelling in question. For purposes of this Chapter, the term "disability" does
not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as
such term is defined by Section 195.010, RSMo.; however, a person may be
considered to have a disability if that person:
DISCRIMINATION — Any unfair treatment based on race, color, religion,
national origin, ancestry, sex, age as it relates to employment, disability,
A. The purposes of this Chapter are:
1. To secure for all individuals within the City freedom from any
discriminatory practice made unlawful by Article III of this Chapter.
2. To implement within the City the policies embodied in Missouri and
Federal human rights legislation and to promote cooperation
between the City and the State and Federal agencies enforcing that
legislation.
3. To provide a City Commission on Human Rights which is dedicated
to the elimination of discriminatory practices made unlawful by
Article III of this Chapter.
Has successfully completed a supervised drug rehabilitation program
and is no longer engaging in the illegal use of, and is not currently
addicted to, a controlled substance or has otherwise been rehabilitated
successfully and is no longer engaging in such use and is not currently
addicted;
1.
Is participating in a supervised rehabilitation program and is no longer
engaging in illegal use of controlled substances; or
2.
Is erroneously regarded as currently illegally using, or being addicted
to, a controlled substance.
3.
Section
240.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
240.020
100:507
public assistance recipient, sexual orientation or familial status as it relates
to housing.
DWELLING — Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied
as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one (1) or
more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion
thereof.
FAMILIAL STATUS — One (1) or more individuals who have not attained the
age of eighteen (18) years being domiciled with:
HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS — Housing:
PERSON — Includes one (1) or more individuals, corporations,
partnerships, associations, organizations, labor organizations, legal
representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, trustees,
trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, fiduciaries or other organized groups of
persons.
1. A parent or another person having legal custody of such individual; or
The designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with
the written permission of such parent or other person.
The protection afforded against discrimination on the basis of familial
status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of
securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age
of eighteen (18) years.
2.
Provided under any State or Federal program that the Commission
determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly
persons, as defined in the State or Federal program;
1.
Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons sixty-two (62) years of age
or older; or
2.
Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one (1) person fiftyfive
(55) years of age or older per unit.
Housing qualifies as housing for older persons under this Chapter if:
1. The housing has significant facilities and services specifically
designed to meet the physical or social needs of older persons, or
if the provision of such facilities and services is not practicable,
that such housing is necessary to provide important housing
opportunities for older persons;
2. At least eighty percent (80%) of the units are occupied by at least
one (1) person fifty-five (55) years of age or older per unit; and
3. The owner or manager of the housing has published and adhered to
policies and procedures which demonstrate an intent by said owner
or manager to provide housing for persons fifty-five (55) years of
age or older.
3.
Section
240.020
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
240.020
100:508
PLACES OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION — All places or businesses
offering or holding out to the general public goods, services, privileges,
facilities, advantages or accommodations for the peace, comfort, health,
welfare and safety of the general public or such public places providing
food, shelter, recreation and amusement including, but not limited to:
RENT — Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for
consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
RESPONDENT — A person who is alleged to have engaged in a prohibited
discriminatory practice in a complaint filed with the Commission.
UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICE — Any act that is unlawful
under this Chapter.
Any inn, hotel, motel or other establishment which provides lodging to
transient guests, other than an establishment located within a building
which contains not more than five (5) rooms for rent or hire and which
is actually occupied by the proprietor of such establishment as his/her
residence;
1.
Any restaurant, cafeteria, lunchroom, lunch counter, soda fountain or
other facility principally engaged in selling food for consumption on the
premises including, but not limited to, any such facility located on the
premises of any retail establishment;
2.
Any gasoline station, including all facilities located on the premises of
such gasoline station and made available to the patrons thereof;
3.
Any motion picture house, theater, concert hall, sports arena, stadium
or other place of exhibition or entertainment;
4.
Any public facility owned, operated or managed by or on behalf of this
State or any agency or subdivision thereof, or any public corporation;
and any such facility supported in whole or in part by public funds; or
5.
Any establishment which is physically located within the premises of
any establishment otherwise covered by this Section or within the
premises of which is physically located any such covered establishment,
and which holds itself out as serving patrons of such covered
establishment.
6.
Section
240.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
240.020
100:509

ARTICLE II
Commission On Human Rights
Section 240.030. Functions, Powers and Duties.
Section 240.040. through Section 240.050. (Reserved)
A. The Commission shall have the following functions, powers and duties:
1. To encourage fair treatment for and to foster mutual understanding
and respect among, and to discourage discrimination against, any
racial, ethnic, religious or other group protected by this Chapter,
members of these groups or persons with disabilities.
2. To formulate and carry out educational programs designed to
minimize or eliminate those discriminatory practices made
unlawful by Article III of this Chapter.
3. To receive and investigate complaints alleging any discriminatory
practices made unlawful by Article III of this Chapter.
4. To implement the purposes of this Chapter by conference,
conciliation and persuasion so that persons may be guaranteed
their civil rights and good will be fostered.
5. To provide mediation services to resolve incidences of alleged
discriminatory practices made unlawful by Article III of this
Chapter.
6. To cooperate with other organizations, private and public, to
discourage discrimination.
7. To advise the City Council on human rights issues.
8. To hold public hearings on the state of human rights and relations
in the City and on specific human rights issues.
9. To sponsor or initiate specifically targeted workshops and ongoing
programs to improve human relations and to decrease tensions in
the City.
10. To present informational programs on human rights to school,
business, service and other organizations.
11. To formulate policies and to adopt, promulgate, amend and rescind
suitable rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of this
Chapter and said policies of the Commission in connection
therewith.
12. To provide each year to the City Council a full written report of all
its activities and of its recommendations.
Section
240.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
240.040
100:511

ARTICLE III
Discriminatory Practices
Section 240.060. Unlawful Housing Practices.
A. It shall be an unlawful housing practice:
1. To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, to
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, to deny or otherwise
make unavailable a dwelling to any person because of race, color,
religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, disability, public assistance
recipient, sexual orientation or familial status.
2. To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of
services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race,
color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, disability, public
assistance recipient, sexual orientation or familial status.
3. To make, print or publish or cause to be made, printed or published
any notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or
rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or
discrimination based on race, color, religion, national origin,
ancestry, sex, disability, public assistance recipient, sexual
orientation or familial status, or an intention to make any such
preference, limitation or discrimination.
4. To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, national
origin, ancestry, sex, disability, public assistance recipient, sexual
orientation or familial status that any dwelling is not available for
inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available.
5. To induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any
dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective
entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular
race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, disability, public
assistance recipient, sexual orientation or familial status.
6. To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a
disability of:
a. That buyer or renter;
b. A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented or made available; or
c. Any person associated with that buyer or renter.
7. To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of
services or facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a
disability of:
Section
240.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
240.060
100:513
a. That person;
b. A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented or made available; or
c. Any person associated with that person.
B. For purposes of Sections 240.060, 240.070 and 240.080, discrimination
includes:
1. A refusal to permit, at the expense of the person with the disability,
reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be
occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to
afford such person full enjoyment of the premises, except that, in
the case of a rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do
so, condition permission for a modification on the renter's agreeing
to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed
before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted.
2. A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices or services when such accommodations may be necessary
to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a
dwelling.
3. In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily
dwellings for first (1st) occupancy after March 13, 1991, a
failure to design and construct those dwellings in such a manner
that:
a. The public use and common use portions of such dwellings are
readily accessible to and usable by persons with a disability.
b. All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all
premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow
passage by persons with a disability in wheelchairs.
c. All premises within such dwellings contain the following
features of adaptive design:
(1) An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
(2) Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other
environmental controls in accessible locations;
(3) Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later
installation of grab bars; and
(4) Usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual in a
wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
C. As used in Subdivision (3) of Subsection (B) of this Section, the term
"covered multi-family dwelling" means:
Section
240.060
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
240.060
100:514
Section 240.070. Discrimination in Commercial Real Estate Loans.
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance
company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose
business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate
loans to deny a loan or other financial assistance because of race, color,
religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, disability, public assistance recipient,
sexual orientation or familial status to a person applying therefor for the
purpose of purchasing, construction, improving, repairing or maintaining a
dwelling, or to discriminate against him/her in fixing of the amount, interest
rate, duration or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial
assistance because of the race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex,
disability, public assistance recipient, sexual orientation or familial status
of such person or of any person associated with him/her in connection with
such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective
owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwellings in relation to which
such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given.
Section 240.080. Discrimination in Selling or Renting By Real
Estate Agencies Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers'
organization or other service organization or facility relating to the business
of selling or renting dwellings on account of race, color, religion, national
origin, ancestry, sex, disability, public assistance recipient, sexual
orientation or familial status.
Section 240.090. Discrimination in Public Accommodations
Prohibited — Exceptions.
1. Buildings consisting of four (4) or more units if such buildings have
one (1) or more elevators; and
2. Ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four (4) or more
units.
D. Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American
National Standard for Buildings and Facilities providing accessibility
and usability for people with physical disabilities, commonly cited as
"ANSI A117.1", suffices to satisfy the requirements of Subsection
(B)(3)(a) of this Section.
A. All persons within the City of St. Charles are free and equal and shall be
entitled to the full and equal use and enjoyment within this State of any
place of public accommodation, as hereinafter defined, without
discrimination or segregation on the grounds of race, color, religion,
national origin, sex, ancestry, public assistance recipient, sexual
orientation or disability.
Section
240.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
240.090
100:515
Section 240.100. Additional Unlawful Discriminatory Practices.
Section 240.110. Exemptions.
B. It is an unlawful discriminatory practice for any person, directly or
indirectly, to refuse, withhold from or deny any other person or to
attempt to refuse, withhold from or deny any other person any of the
accommodations, advantages, facilities, services or privileges made
available in any place of public accommodation, as defined in Section
240.020 and this Section, or to segregate or discriminate against any
such person in the use thereof on the grounds of race, color, religion,
national origin, sex, ancestry, public assistance recipient, sexual
orientation or disability.
C. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to a private club, a place of
accommodation owned by or operated on behalf of a religious
corporation, association or society or other establishment which is not
in fact open to the public, unless the facilities of such establishments
are made available to the customers or patrons of a place of public
accommodation as defined in Section 240.020 and this Section.
A. It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice:
1. To aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce the commission of acts
prohibited under this Chapter or to attempt to do so;
2. To retaliate or discriminate in any manner against any other person
because such person has opposed any practice prohibited by this
Chapter or because such person has filed a complaint, testified,
assisted or participated in any manner in any investigation,
proceeding or hearing conducted pursuant to this Chapter;
3. For the City to discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion,
national origin, sex, ancestry, age as it relates to employment,
disability, public assistance recipient, sexual orientation or familial
status as it relates to housing; or
4. To discriminate in any manner against any other person because of
such person's association with any person protected by this
Chapter.
A. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to invalidate or limit any law
of the State or of the City that requires dwellings to be designed and
constructed in a manner that affords persons with disabilities greater
access than is required by this Chapter.
B. Nothing in Sections 240.060, 240.070 and 240.080:
1. Requires that a dwelling be made available to an individual whose
tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of
other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial
physical damage to the property of others.
Section
240.090
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
240.110
100:516
2. Limits the applicability of any reasonable local restriction
regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy
a dwelling, nor does any provision of said Sections regarding
familial status apply with respect to housing for older persons.
3. Shall prohibit conduct against a person because such person has
been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal
manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance as defined by
Section 195.010, RSMo.
C. Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit a religious organization,
association or society or any non-profit institution or organization
operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious
organization, association or society from limiting the sale, rental or
occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or from giving
preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is
restricted on account of race, color or national origin. Nor shall
anything in this Chapter prohibit a private club not in fact open to the
public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes
provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial
purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodging to its
members or from giving preference to its members.
D. Nothing in this Chapter, other than the prohibitions against
discriminatory advertising in Subsection (A)(3) of Section 240.060,
shall apply to:
1. The sale or rental of any single-family house by a private individual
owner, provided the following conditions are met:
a. The private individual owner does not own or have any interest
in more than three (3) single-family houses at any one time;
and
b. The house is sold or rented without the use of a real estate
broker, agent or salesperson or the facilities of any person in
the business of selling or renting dwellings and without
publication, posting or mailing of any advertisement. If the
owner selling the house does not reside in it at the time of the
sale or was not the most recent resident of the house prior to
such sale, the exemption in this Section applies to only one (1)
such sale in any twenty-four (24) month period.
2. Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living
independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and
occupies one (1) of such living quarters as his/her residence.
Section
240.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
240.110
100:517

ARTICLE IV
Enforcement Procedures
Section 240.120. Complaints.
Section 240.130. Complaints — Investigation, Conciliation and
Mediation.
A. Any individual who claims to be aggrieved by a discriminatory practice
may file with the Commission a verified complaint in writing stating the
name and address of the person alleged to have committed such
practice, the particulars thereof, and such other information as may be
required by the Commission.
B. Any complaint filed under this Section in which affirmative relief is
sought shall state what relief is sought or proposed.
C. All such complaints shall be filed within one hundred eighty (180) days
of the date of the alleged discriminatory practice.
D. An individual who files a complaint with the Commission shall be
advised of the possibility of filing a complaint with the Missouri
Commission on Human Rights.
A. Complaints shall be investigated and conciliated or mediated by
individuals who have been approved by the Commission and trained in
investigation, conciliation and mediation.
B. Upon filing of a complaint, the Chairperson of the Commission shall
designate an individual to investigate the allegations. The individual
shall promptly investigate such allegations, and if he/she determines
that probable cause exists for crediting the allegations of the complaint,
he/she shall thereupon undertake to eliminate the alleged
discriminatory practice or practices by conference, conciliation and
persuasion or mediation and shall inform the Commission of the results
of such efforts. If the individual determines that no such probable cause
exists, he/she shall so report to the Commission, which shall thereupon
dismiss the complaint without further proceedings, or direct further
investigation or, if it determines that probable cause exists for crediting
the allegations of the complaint, direct that the alleged discriminatory
practice or practices be the subject of conference, conciliation and
persuasion or mediation. Neither the members of the Commission nor
any person participating in the investigation shall disclose what has
occurred in the course of such efforts to conciliate. The determination
of probable cause shall be made, and the investigation and conciliation
or mediation shall be conducted, in accordance with such rules,
regulations and guidelines as the Commission shall prescribe.
C. If such efforts fail to eliminate the alleged discriminatory practice or
practices, the complainant shall be referred to the Missouri
Commission on Human Rights.
Section
240.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
240.140
100:519
Section 240.140. Prosecutions — Time Limitations.
A. No prosecution for a violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be
commenced unless a complaint shall have first been filed with the
Commission and efforts of the Commission to eliminate the alleged
violation have failed.
B. The period of limitation for any violation of this Chapter shall not run
during any time while a complaint involving the alleged violation is
pending before the Commission.
Section
240.140
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
240.140
100:520
Chapter 245
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
Cross References—As to abandonment of airtight or semi-airtight
containers, §215.1460; as to disposition of animal carcasses, §215.1770.
Section
240.140
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
240.140
100:521

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 245.010. Definitions.205 [R.O. 2009 §50.01; CC 1981 §13-1;
Ord. No. 3705, 11-6-1969; Ord. No. 84-26, 3-22-1984; Ord. No.
91-146, 8-7-1991]
For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
AUTHORIZED COLLECTOR — A person with whom the City has contracted
for the collection, removal and disposal of garbage and rubbish.
BOARD OF HEALTH — The duly elected and designated Board of Health of
the City.
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT — Stores, restaurants, hotels, offices,
wholesale establishments, retail establishments, hospitals, plants, shops,
manufacturing establishments, schools and churches. (The term shall not
be construed to include apartments, flats, private dwellings, trailer courts
or boarding houses.)
GARBAGE — Food waste from homes, kitchens, apartments, hotels,
restaurants, stores, markets and similar establishments.
HOUSEHOLD SERVICE CARTS — Receptacles for trash and refuse
intended primarily for household use, equipped with handles and wheels
of a capacity not exceeding one hundred (100) gallons, capable of being
wheeled by one (1) person and dumped into trash collection trucks by one
(1) person with the use of special equipment installed upon the trucks. Any
household service cart shall meet the above description and, in addition
thereto, be approved by the City and the authorized collector and be
compatible with the equipment installed upon the authorized collector's
trash collection trucks.
HOUSEHOLD UNIT — Any room or grouping of rooms located within a
building or mobile home and forming a single housekeeping unit with
facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking
and eating by any number of individuals living together as a single
housekeeping unit.
RECYCLABLES — Newspapers, household glass containers, bimetal cans,
aluminum cans and plastics.
RECYCLING — The separation and reuse of materials which might
otherwise be disposed of as solid waste.
RUBBISH — Refuse such as waste paper, rags, cartons, boxes, excelsior,
leather, cloth materials, shrub trimmings tied in bundles not to exceed
four (4) feet in length, yard trimmings, cans, plastics, glass, crockery,
ashes and clinkers from heating plant furnaces or other materials light
in weight and easily handled or a combination of any two (2) or more
205. State Law References—Collection and disposal of garbage in cities of the third class,
§§71.680—71.690, RSMo.
Section
245.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
245.010
100:523
of the foregoing types of materials. This term shall not include ashes or
cinders from other than household or small heating plants, tree limbs, street
sweepings, catch-basin murk, concrete, dirt, concrete mortar or plaster
mortar, stones, bricks, scrap metal or other similar construction materials
or materials resulting from the erection or destruction of buildings.
Section 245.020. Collection, Removal and Disposal. [R.O. 2009
§50.02; CC 1981 §13-2; Ord. No. 3705, 11-6-1969; Ord. No. 82-15,
3-17-1982; Ord. No. 88-178, 9-21-1988; Ord. No. 93-122, 6-2-1993;
Ord. No. 06-278, 10-10-2006]
Section 245.030. Unlawful Disposition.206 [R.O. 2009 §50.03; CC
1981 §13-3; Ord. No. 80-85, 7-23-1980]
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any garbage, rubbish,
furniture items, appliances or machinery of any type or any other items by
depositing the same in or on any public alley, street, roadway, vacant lot
or property of any kind or character within the City or by burning same;
provided however, that nothing in this Article shall be construed to prohibit
the disposition of garbage or rubbish by burying or disposing of same in an
incinerator approved by the Board of Health and provided for by the State
Statutes.
Section 245.040. Duty of Owner To Provide Containers. [R.O. 2009
§50.04; CC 1981 §13-4; Ord. No. 93-122, 6-2-1993]
Each owner of any room, dwelling house, apartment or other building shall
provide, and renew when necessary, a sufficient number of containers to
hold the garbage or rubbish accumulating thereon.
A. All garbage and rubbish, as defined in Section 245.010, within the City
shall be collected, removed and disposed of by the City or an authorized
collector in accordance with and subject to the provisions of this
Article; provided however, that nothing in this Article shall be construed
as prohibiting duly authorized and licensed haulers from collecting and
removing garbage and rubbish from business establishments as defined
in Section 245.010. All such collections shall be made between the
hours of 7:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M.
B. The owner of any room, dwelling house, apartment or other building
shall dispose of the garbage and rubbish in the manner required by this
Article.
C. It shall be unlawful for the owner or possessor of any room, dwelling
house, apartment or other building operated or used as a residential,
commercial or industrial use to not maintain garbage and rubbish
disposal service.
206. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §245.450.
Section
245.010
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
245.050
100:524
Section 245.050. Containers Specifications and Contents.207 [R.O.
2009 §50.05; CC 1981 §13-5; Ord. No. 3705, 11-6-1969; Ord. No.
73-31, 5-23-1973; Ord. No. 80-85, 7-23-1980; Ord. No. 80-106,
9-3-1980; Ord. No. 84-26, 3-22-1984; Ord. No. 88-178, 9-21-1988;
Ord. No. 91-146, 8-7-1991]
Section 245.060. Location of Containers.208 [R.O. 2009 §50.06; CC
1981 §13-6; Ord. No. 91-46, 3-8-1991; Ord. No. 99-355, 10-12-1999;
Ord. No. 03-122, 5-27-2003]
A. Garbage and rubbish shall be placed in containers equipped with tightfitting
covers and constructed of rigid materials such as galvanized
metal, polyurethane or other materials capable of being a freestanding
container. All containers shall be equipped with strong handles on the
outside and shall be water-tight. Each container shall have a capacity of
not less than five (5) gallons nor more than one hundred (100) gallons
and, within these limits, shall be of sufficient capacity to hold all
garbage and rubbish accumulating on the premises between
collections. The contents thereof shall be kept in such condition that
they can at all times be readily and fully removed by the City or its
authorized collector. Large, heavy-duty plastic bags may be used in lieu
of the containers specified above.
B. The use of household service carts is not mandatory, but shall be
encouraged. Nothing herein shall prohibit the use of containers which
are larger than those specified above where such containers are
designed for automated dumping by the City's authorized collector.
C. Recyclables may be placed in recycling containers as designated by the
authorized collector.
A. It shall be unlawful to place or keep garbage or rubbish containers or
containers for recyclables on any public street or alley, except on
private property; provided however, that such containers may be placed
on designated locations on public streets or alleys on collection days for
a sufficient length of time to permit the City or its authorized collector
to make collection of such garbage or rubbish.
B. Containers for garbage, rubbish or recyclables shall be placed and at all
times kept on private property in either the rear yard or the side yard
behind the front building line; provided however, that on collection days
such containers shall be placed in plain view of the rear of the premises
when the premises are adjacent to the alley and collection is done from
the alley. When the premises are not adjacent to the alley and the
collection is done from a street, then such containers shall, on
collection days, be placed in plain view adjacent to the curb in front of
such premises. No container may be placed for collection prior to 5:00
P.M. of the day before the scheduled pickup. At no time shall containers
207. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §245.450.
208. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §245.450.
Section
245.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
245.060
100:525
Section 245.070. Maintenance of Containers.209 [R.O. 2009 §50.07;
CC 1981 §13-7; Ord. No. 84-26, 3-22-1984]
All garbage and rubbish containers shall be maintained in a good and
sanitary condition by the owner thereof. Household service carts which are
rented or leased by the authorized collector shall be maintained by the
authorized collector; provided however, that the authorized collector shall
not be required to maintain or repair any containers which are damaged as
the result of vandalism, fire, burning or melting or impact with vehicles of
the owner of the household unit.
be stored in the front yard, a porch or in front of a garage; provided,
however, upon a showing of undue hardship the Director of
Administration may exempt a residence from the storage requirement.
[Ord. No. 15-121 §5, 6-2-2015]
C. It shall be the duty of the householder or person in charge of the
premises to remove containers from the premises adjacent to the street
curb not later than Midnight of the day of pickup. If more than one (1)
container is necessary to hold the garbage, rubbish or recyclables
accumulating on the premises or if more than one (1) container is used
for the garbage, rubbish or recyclables from any building, all containers
shall be placed at the same location for collection.
D. In a mobile home park as defined in Section 400.050, the following shall
apply to garbage or rubbish containers and containers for recycling:
[Ord. No. 15-298 §1, 12-15-2015]
1. When a mobile home is located on a lot so that the main door does
not face the street, trash and recycling containers shall either be
screened from street view by a solid fence or enclosure at least four
(4) feet in height or the containers shall be stored against the
mobile home no closer to the street than the main door.
2. When a mobile home is located on a lot so that the main door faces
the street, trash and recycling containers must either be screened
from view by a solid fence or enclosure at least four (4) feet in
height or the containers shall be kept behind and against the
mobile home.
3. On collection days, trash, rubbish and recycling containers shall be
placed in plain view adjacent to the street in front of the mobile
home. No container may be placed for collection prior to 5:00 P.M.
of the day before the scheduled pickup.
209. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §245.450.
Section
245.060
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
245.080
100:526
Section 245.080. Placing Unauthorized Materials in Containers.210
[R.O. 2009 §50.08; CC 1981 §13-8; Ord. No. 3124, 7-24-1963]
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit in a container from which
garbage or rubbish is to be removed by the City or its authorized collector
any material other than garbage and rubbish as defined in this Article. If
any such container contains any material other than garbage or rubbish,
neither the City nor its authorized collector shall be obligated to remove the
contents of such container.
Section 245.090. Provision and Use of Containers At Certain
Construction Sites. [R.O. 2009 §50.09; CC 1981 §13-9; Ord. No.
74-32, 7-24-1974]
Section 245.100. Frequency and Time of Collection — Schedule.
[R.O. 2009 §50.10; CC 1981 §13-10; Ord. No. 3410, 8-10-1966; Ord.
No. 3705, 11-6-1969; Ord. No. 78-64, 9-27-1978; Ord. No. 88-178,
9-21-1988; Ord. No. 91-146, 8-7-1991]
A. The owner or contractor for the construction or building of a
commercial building, industrial building or apartment building with
four (4) or more units shall provide a trash container on the site with a
capacity of not less than one (1) cubic yard.
B. The owner or contractor for the construction or building of residential
buildings having three (3) units or less shall provide a trash container
on the site with a capacity of not less than one (1) cubic yard; provided
that when an owner or contractor is constructing or building on not
more than three (3) abutting lots, he/she shall not be required to
provide more than one (1) trash container.
C. The owner or contractor shall cause all debris, trash, rubbish, wastes,
paper and all other like materials to be deposited in the trash container
daily.
D. The owner or contractor shall cause the trash container to be emptied
at sufficient intervals to insure that the container does not overflow.
E. The Community Development Department and the Police Department
shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this
Section and all officers and employees of the City shall report any
violations to these departments.
F. Before approval of any inspection of any stage of construction or work
is given, the Inspector shall insure that the provisions of this Section
are complied with.
A. The City or its authorized collector shall collect and remove garbage
and rubbish from each household unit according to the terms and
provisions of this Article and the City or its authorized collector shall
210. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §245.450.
Section
245.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
245.100
100:527
Section 245.110. Scavenging and Unauthorized Collections.211 [R.O.
2009 §50.11; CC 1981 §13-11; Ord. No. 91-146, 8-7-1991]
Section 245.120. Vehicles Used For Collection.212 [R.O. 2009 §50.12;
CC 1981 §13-12; Ord. No. 91-146, 8-7-1991; Ord. No. 01-201,
9-5-2001]
The City or its authorized collectors shall, in the collection of garbage,
rubbish and recyclables, use only vehicles that are mechanically safe at all
times, in clean and sanitary condition at all times; provided that the vehicles
used in the moving of garbage shall be of steel covered and leak-proof
construction.
Section 245.130. Service Provided — Notice of New Customers.
[R.O. 2009 §50.13; CC 1981 §13-13; Ord. No. 3705, 11-6-1969; Ord.
No. 80-85, 7-23-1980]
The contractor shall provide the service of garbage removal to all household
units within the City except business establishments. The Water
Department shall notify the contractor of all new customers within the City
once each month.
furnish such owners or occupants with a schedule of collection and
removal of garbage and rubbish from the premises. If the regular day
of collection, as provided within the schedule, should be a holiday, the
schedule of collection shall provide for the collection and removal of
garbage and rubbish from such premises on such a holiday with the
exception that there shall be no pickups on New Year's Day, Memorial
Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas
Day. In the event a listed holiday falls on a scheduled collection day,
residential units shall be serviced on the next day that residential
service is provided anywhere in the City.
B. Bundles of brush shall be a maximum of four (4) feet long and one and
one-half (1½) feet in diameter.
A. No person shall, without authorization from the City, collect or pick up
or cause to be collected or picked up any recyclable materials placed at
curbside for collection or in any recycling receptacle placed by the City
or its authorized collector.
B. Nothing in this Section is intended to prevent anyone from donating or
selling recyclable materials from their own rubbish.
211. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §245.450.
212. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §245.450.
Section
245.100
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
245.140
100:528
Section 245.140. Unauthorized Collection or Removal.213 [R.O. 2009
§50.15; CC 1981 §13-15]
The collection and removal of garbage and rubbish by trucks or other
vehicles in the City or the holding out or solicitation of such business by any
person who does not have a contract with or who is not duly authorized and
licensed by the City for the collection, removal and disposal of garbage and
rubbish shall be unlawful.
Section 245.150. Exemption From Charges. [R.O. 2009 §50.16; CC
1981 §§13-19—13-21; Ord. No. 78-34, 5-31-1978]
Section 245.160. Revocation of Exemption. [R.O. 2009 §50.17; CC
1981 §13-22; Ord. No. 78-34, 5-31-1978]
Any exemption granted by the Mayor pursuant to Section 245.150 may be
revoked upon a finding that such undue hardship no longer exists.
Section 245.170. (Reserved)
A. When Authorized. A household unit may be exempt from the obligation
to pay for garbage and rubbish removal upon a showing of undue
hardship.
B. Investigation Of Application. Upon application for exemption from
payment of the garbage and rubbish removal fee, the Mayor shall cause
an investigation to be made to determine if such undue hardship exists.
C. Grant Of Exemption. Upon affirmative recommendation of the Mayor, a
household may be exempt from payment of the garbage and rubbish
removal fee, however, the City's authorized collector shall continue to
collect garbage and rubbish from the exempted household unit.
213. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §245.450.
Section
245.140
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
245.170
100:529

ARTICLE II
Collection Standards
Section 245.180. Obstruction of Access To Mailboxes By Placement
of Containers Prohibited. [R.O. 2009 §50.18; Ord. No. 09-51,
4-9-2009]
It shall be unlawful for an authorized collector to obstruct access to a
mailbox by the placement of a solid waste, recycling or yard waste
container.
Section
245.180
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
245.180
100:531

ARTICLE III
Contents For Collection
Section 245.190. Monthly Collection By City. [R.O. 2009 §50.30; CC
1981 §13-34]
The City may provide, by contract, for the collection of garbage and rubbish
within the City for the removal therefrom and disposal thereof on the basis
of a fixed sum per month from each household unit.
Section 245.200. Bidding Conditions and Requirements.214 [R.O.
2009 §50.31; CC 1981 §§13-35, 13-37, 13-39—13-40; Ord. No. 3124,
7-24-1963; Ord. No. 78-64, 9-27-1978; Ord. No. 84-26, 3-22-1984;
Ord. No. 88-178, 9-21-1988; Ord. No. 08-178, 9-3-2008]
A. To Be Let To Lowest And Best Bidder And The Like. All contracts for
collecting, removing and disposing of garbage and rubbish under the
provisions of this Article shall be let to the lowest and best bidder, the
right being reserved to reject any and all bids; provided that if no bids
are received or all are rejected, the City may proceed to let the contract
as if no bids had been sought or received by advertising for new bids;
provided however, that nothing herein shall prohibit the City from
extending or modifying the contract of an authorized collector during
the term thereof.
B. Advertisement For Bids. The City shall advertise for sealed bids, for any
work to be done by contract under the provisions of this Article, by
publication for two (2) consecutive weeks in a newspaper published
daily or having general distribution in the City.
C. Bids—To Be Accompanied By Bidder's Deposit. All bids submitted under
the provisions of this Article shall be accompanied by a surety in the
form of a bid bond, cash or a certified or cashier's check or money order
in the sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) as a guarantee that the
successful bidder will, upon the award being made, enter into the
contract provided for by this Article. The cash or checks of unsuccessful
bidders shall be returned to them.
D. Bidders To Furnish Statement Of Financial Condition, Nature Of
Equipment And The Like. Each bidder under the provisions of this
Article shall, if requested, submit to the City a written statement
showing in detail the kind, character and nature of the equipment he/
she proposed to use, a statement of his/her financial condition and such
other information requested as will bear upon his/her ability to comply
with his/her contract during its entire term.
214. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §245.450.
Section
245.190
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
245.210
100:533
Section 245.210. Contract and Bond Filed By Successful Bidder.215
[R.O. 2009 §50.32; CC 1981 §13-41; Ord. No. 78-64, 9-27-1978; Ord.
No. 88-178, 9-21-1988; Ord. No. 08-178, 9-3-2008]
Upon the award of a contract under the provisions of this Article being
made, the successful bidder shall, within ten (10) days, file with the City
Clerk a contract duly executed by it for the performance of the work
provided for by this Article and within such ten (10) days shall likewise
file with the City Clerk a bond in the amount that is equal to the cost of
providing contracted services to single-family dwelling units for a period
of twelve (12) months plus five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00)
for service to multi-family dwelling units, with securities to be approved
by the Mayor, conditioned that it will faithfully perform all the terms and
conditions of the contract, will comply with all of the laws, ordinances,
rulings and orders of the United States, the State, the County and the City;
that it will make payment to all persons to whom it may become indebted
by reason of this contract; and that it will pay all damages to the City that
may arise from injury to person or property as the result of any negligence
on its part in the doing of the work and should the bidder fail to execute
such contract or to file such bond as herein provided, within the time
specified, the deposit of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) as referred to in
Section 245.200(C) shall be forfeited to the City as liquidated damages and
deposited to the General Fund of the City.
Upon filing the contract and bond as herein provided, the amount
accompanying its bid shall be returned to it.
Section 245.220. Conditions of Contract — Period.216 [R.O. 2009
§50.33; CC 1981 §§13-42—13-43; Ord. No. 88-178, 9-21-1988; Ord.
No. 03-122, 5-27-2003]
A. Conditions Of Contract. The contract to be entered into under the
provisions of this Article shall provide that the contractor furnish the
necessary vehicles and trucks, which shall be of the type required
under the provisions of Section 245.120, for the collection, removal and
disposal of garbage and rubbish. Such contract shall further provide
that the contractor shall furnish the necessary labor, which labor shall
be able-bodied, neat in appearance and of good moral character and all
of such labor shall be employees qualified in accordance with the laws
of the State and make collections as often as may be designated by the
City in Section 245.100 and such collections shall be made from the
rear of premises or from the curb or other accessible place designated
according to Section 245.060. Such contract shall also provide that the
contractor shall not permit garbage or rubbish to be placed or scattered
upon any public or private street, alley, drive or public place. Such
contract shall also provide that the contractor shall replace any
garbage or rubbish receptacle, can, container or lid damaged by
215. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §245.450.
216. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §245.450.
Section
245.210
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
245.220
100:534
Section 245.230. Insurance Required of Contractor.217 [R.O. 2009
§50.34; CC 1981 §13-44; Ord. No. 78-64, 9-27-1978; Ord. No.
88-178, 9-21-1988; Ord. No. 91-146, 8-7-1991; Ord. No. 08-178,
9-3-2008]
Contracts entered into under the provisions of this Article shall provide that
the contractor will obtain and keep in force during the life of such contract
Workers' Compensation insurance and a policy of liability insurance
indemnifying both the contractor and the City from liability that may be
incurred in the performance of this contract by the contractor with an
insurance company approved by the City for one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) per person and five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) per
occurrence for personal injury and for property damage, the premiums
therefor to be paid by the contractor. The contractor shall, as evidence of
such insurance contract, file with the City a copy of such insurance policy
or policies.
himself/herself or his/her agents or employees; that he/she shall remove
paper placed in the receptacle, can or container so as to leave the
premises in a neat and clean condition. Such contract shall also provide
that all garbage and rubbish collected within the City shall be
immediately removed by the contractor and disposed of by the
contractor in a manner and by a method both lawful under and
permitted by the laws of the State including, but not limited to, the
rules and regulations of the Board of Health. In addition to the
stipulations enumerated herein, such contract shall contain such other
provisions not inconsistent with this Article as shall, in the judgment of
the officers of the City, best protect the City.
B. Period. The published notice required by this Article will call for sealed
bids for a contract period of three (3) years with the option of the City
for renewal for an additional three (3) years.
217. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §245.450.
Section
245.220
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
245.230
100:535

ARTICLE IV
Sanitary Landfills
Section 245.240. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §50.45; CC 1981 §13-101;
Ord. No. 91-187, 9-18-1991]
For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
AQUIFER — A subsurface water-bearing bed or stratum of sand, gravel
or bedrock which stores or transmits water in recoverable quantities or is
capable of yielding water to wells or springs.
BEDROCK — The solid rock stratum underlying solid and unconsolidated
service materials.
BULKY WASTE — Non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of waste
materials from dwelling units and commercial, industrial, institutional or
agricultural establishments which are either too large or too heavy to be
safely and conveniently loaded in waste transportation vehicles by waste
haulers with the equipment available therefor. Bulky residential waste is
bulky waste generated on residential premises other than automobiles and
construction and demolition materials. Bulky waste does not include
automobiles or demolition or construction waste.
CELL — Compacted waste in a sanitary landfill that is enclosed on all sides
by cover material.
CLAY SOIL — Soil as defined by the American Society for Testing and
Material (ASTM) Standard Test Method D2487-85, Classification of Soils for
Engineering Purposes.
CLEAN FILL — Uncontaminated soil, rock, sand, gravel, concrete, asphaltic
concrete, cinderblocks, brick, minimal amounts of wood and metal, and
inert solids as approved by rule or policy of the State Department of Natural
Resources for fill, reclamation or other beneficial use.
COMBUSTIBLE WASTE — All waste substances capable of incineration or
burning, but excluding explosive or highly flammable material.
DAILY COVER — Clay soil with a minimum thickness of six (6) inches
placed over waste in a landfill at the end of the day or completion of a cell,
whichever comes first.
DEMOLITION AND CONSTRUCTION WASTE — Waste materials from the
demolition and construction of residential, industrial or commercial
structures and related improvements not including materials defined as
"clean fill" under this Section.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Community Development.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Community Development and the deputies,
assistants and employees of that department designated to perform
functions on his/her behalf.
Section
245.240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
245.240
100:537
FACILITY — With no modifying words appearing before it, used only in
Sections where a sanitary landfill is being discussed, means any sanitary
landfill which is the subject of such Section.
FINAL COVER — Compacted clay soil with a minimum thickness of three (3)
feet placed over waste in a sanitary landfill which is more substantial than
a daily cover.
FINANCIAL ASSURANCE INSTRUMENT — An instrument or instruments
including, but not limited to, cash or surety bond, letters of credit, corporate
guarantee or secured trust fund. The form and content of the financial
assurance instrument shall meet or exceed the requirements of the Director
of Community Development. The instrument shall be reviewed and
approved or disapproved by the City Attorney.
FLOOD PLAIN — The area designated as the 500-year special flood hazard
and floodway on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and Flood
Insurance Rate Maps approved by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
FREE LIQUID — Liquid that will drain freely by gravity from solid materials.
GARBAGE — All animal and vegetable waste and all putrescible matter.
HAZARDOUS AND DANGEROUS RESIDUES — Residues that are toxic
or poisonous, corrosive, irritating or sensitizing, radioactive, biologically
infectious, explosive or flammable or that present a significant hazard to
human health and the environment.
INTERMEDIATE COVER — The cover material placed over waste, which is
in areas that have been idle for more than sixty (60) days, in a layer not less
than two (2) feet after compaction.
LANDFILL — A waste disposal site in which waste is deposited.
LEACHATE — Liquid that has percolated through waste and contains
extracted, dissolved or suspended materials from the waste.
NON-COMBUSTIBLE WASTE — All waste substances not capable of
incineration or burning, including ashes, glass, metal, earthenware and the
like.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, City, County, other political subdivision, authority, State agency
or institution, or Federal agency or institution.
PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY — Something fitting or suited to
the public need.
REFUSE — All waste substances including garbage as well as combustible
and non-combustible wastes.
SANITARY LANDFILL — A solid waste disposal area which accepts
commercial and residential solid waste.
SLUDGE — The accumulated semi-solid suspension of settled solids
deposited from wastewaters or other fluids in tanks or basins.
Section
245.240
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
245.240
100:538
SOIL — Unconsolidated material above the bedrock.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials including,
but not limited to, solid and semi-solid waste materials resulting from
industrial, commercial, agricultural, governmental and domestic activities,
but not including hazardous waste, recovered materials, overburden, rock
tailings, matte, slag or other waste material resulting from mining, milling
or smelting.
VECTOR — Any animal, bird or an organism that is capable of transmitting
a pathogen from one organism to another.
WASTE — Garbage, offal, refuse and other discarded materials, including
liquid, gaseous, solid and semi-solid materials, resulting from industrial,
commercial, agricultural and domestic activities.
WORKING FACE — That portion of the sanitary landfill where wastes are
discharged and are spread and compacted prior to the placement of cover
material.
Section 245.250. Quarries As Sanitary Landfills.218 [R.O. 2009
§50.46; CC 1981 §13-102; Ord. No. 91-187, 9-18-1991]
No person shall permit the disposing of any refuse in any quarry in the City
unless the same is operated as a sanitary landfill in accordance with this
Article.
Section 245.260. Dumping On Property Without Permit
Prohibited.219 [R.O. 2009 §50.47; CC 1981 §13-103; Ord. No. 91-187,
9-18-1991]
No person, including a person hauling or disposing of waste for a fee, shall
deposit or dispose or cause to be deposited or disposed of any waste on any
property in the City not operated under a permit issued by the City Council.
Nothing in this Article shall prohibit or prevent the owner or operator of a
farm engaged in the raising and feeding of swine from disposing of garbage
for the feeding of swine owned by that person so long as such disposal shall
not constitute a nuisance or a health hazard to the people of the City or
contrary to the health regulations of the City. The feeding of swine shall
be subject to the laws of the State, including Sections 266.410 through
266.460, RSMo.
Section 245.270. Regulations For Operating Sanitary Landfills.220
[R.O. 2009 §50.48; CC 1981 §13-104; Ord. No. 91-187, 9-18-1991;
Ord. No. 03-122, 5-27-2003; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
A. Any person to whom a permit is issued for operating a sanitary landfill
shall comply with the following provisions:
218. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §245.450.
219. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §245.450.
220. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §245.450.
Section
245.240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
245.270
100:539
1. Operations at a sanitary landfill permitted under this Article shall
not be conducted between the hours of 6:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M.
2. Each sanitary landfill shall display a prominent sign containing the
words "Approved Sanitary Landfill operated by permission of the
City Council of the City of Saint Charles, Missouri".
3. Waste shall be spread in layers not to exceed two (2) feet in
thickness and compacted to reduce it to the smallest practical
volume.
4. Following compaction, waste shall be confined to the smallest
practical area on the working face.
5. A responsible supervisor shall be present at the sanitary landfill at
all times when the area is open to receive waste and shall monitor
the receipt of waste to assure that waste not permitted at the
sanitary landfill is in fact not received.
6. At the conclusion of each day, the waste received and compacted
that day shall be covered with a layer of material "daily cover"
which shall be not less than six (6) inches compacted in thickness.
Cover material shall consist of compacted clay soil. Cover shall be
applied more frequently than daily if necessary to prevent blowing
garbage, waste and other refuse. Daily cover must be applied
regardless of weather. The material used as daily cover material
must be available in all weather and a minimum fifteen (15) day
stockpile of such cover must be maintained on the site of the
sanitary landfill.
7. Bulky waste, including furniture, shall be crushed on solid ground
and pushed into the working face near the bottom of the cell.
8. Water treatment plant sludges containing no free liquid and
digested wastewater treatment plant sludges containing no free
liquid shall be placed on the working face along with solid wastes
and covered with garbage or other refuse immediately.
9. Incinerator and air pollution control residues shall be incorporated
into the working face and covered at such intervals as necessary so
that the residues will not become airborne. Hazardous and
dangerous residues shall not be placed in a sanitary landfill.
10. Surface water and runoff from around the sanitary landfill shall be
diverted so that it does not run into the sanitary landfill. Sanitary
landfill construction and operation shall include grading to
promote rapid surface water runoff without excessive erosion. The
grade shall not exceed thirty-three and one-third percent (33 1/
3%). Surface watercourses shall be constructed and runoff shall be
controlled to handle a twenty (20) year frequency, thirty (30)
minute duration rainfall.
Section
245.270
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
245.270
100:540
11. Leachate collection and treatment systems shall be used to protect
ground and surface water resources.
12. Ground and off-site surface water will be controlled and diverted in
order to minimize, and eliminate if reasonably possible, contact
with waste.
13. No burning shall be permitted.
14. A decomposition gas control plan shall be implemented to prevent
danger to occupants of adjacent property.
15. Gases shall be controlled to prohibit explosive or toxic
accumulation of gas.
16. Vector control programs shall be implemented to prevent or rectify
vector control problems.
17. A landscaped greenbelt at least two hundred (200) feet in width
shall be provided and maintained along the perimeter of the
sanitary landfill.
18. Litter control devices (such as fences and vegetation) shall be used
near the working face and elsewhere to prevent blowing and
accumulation of litter. Litter shall be collected from fences and the
ground surface each day and shall be incorporated into the daily
cell at the end of each day or placed in a secure container. An
opaque fence, at least six (6) feet tall, shall be placed and
maintained within the landscaped greenbelt along the entire
perimeter of the sanitary landfill. Gates shall be opaque.
19. Garbage and litter refuse easily moved by wind shall be covered
promptly to prevent such matter from becoming airborne and
scattered.
20. Vegetation and natural windbreaks shall be used to improve
appearance and operation of the sanitary landfill.
21. Adequate equipment shall be maintained on the site of the sanitary
landfill and preventive maintenance shall be performed to assure
that the pushing, compaction and covering required by this Article
can be continuously performed.
22. Fire extinguishers shall be provided on all equipment.
23. Provisions shall be made for extinguishing fires in waste,
equipment and structures on the sanitary landfill site.
24. Communications equipment shall always be available and operable
on the sanitary landfill site in order that fire and police services
may be quickly summoned in the event of an emergency.
25. The sanitary landfill operator shall not permit persons to scavenge
in the sanitary landfill.
Section
245.270
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
245.270
100:541
26. Access to the sanitary landfill site shall be limited to established
roadways and limited to hours when operating personnel are on
duty.
27. Traffic arriving to deposit waste at the sanitary landfill shall be
directed to designated disposing points near the active face.
28. Dust on the sanitary landfill site shall be controlled for safety
purposes and to prevent nuisances.
29. Intermediate clay cover must be applied to all areas idle for more
than sixty (60) days in a layer not less than one (1) foot after
compaction.
30. Final clay cover shall be applied on each area immediately as
completed in a layer not less than two (2) feet after compaction.
31. Vegetation shall be planted as soon as reasonably possible
following placing of final cover and shall be planted so as to
maximize surface water runoff.
32. Records to be maintained.
a. Records shall be maintained on site covering the following
matters:
(1) Problems and complaints regarding operation of the
sanitary landfill.
(2) Monitoring of leachate sampling and analysis; gas
sampling and analysis; and ground and surface water
analysis.
(3) Records of vector control efforts.
(4) Records of dust and litter control efforts.
(5) Records of quantity of waste handled.
b. Such records shall be made contemporaneously with the
occurrence of the matters recorded.
33. The sanitary landfill operator shall annually seek samples of all
drinking water sources within one-half (½) mile of the sanitary
landfill. The samples will be tested for contaminants by the
operator. All samples shall be collected and tested by a certified
laboratory in accordance with the methods and procedures
established by the Missouri Department of Natural Resources,
Division of Environmental Quality, as approved or recognized by
the Environmental Protection Agency. All samples shall comply
with the Missouri public drinking water regulation. The Director
may require testing for specific organics/priority pollutants if
deemed appropriate by the Director. The operator will maintain
records of the efforts to contact owners or operators of all drinking
Section
245.270
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
245.270
100:542
water sources within one-half (½) mile, including the reasons for
not gaining access to the sources not tested.
34. The operator of the sanitary landfill shall provide an exit wheel
wash which will remove mud, dirt, litter and other sticky
substances from the wheels of the trash hauling vehicles which
have deposited waste in the sanitary landfill, before the trash
hauling vehicles return to drive upon streets.
35. At the direction of the Director of Community Development, the
permittee shall remove waste, dirt, litter or foreign matter of any
kind carried into or deposited upon any public street or public
sidewalk of the City within one-half (½) mile of the sanitary landfill
or returning from the sanitary landfill operated by the permittee.
The permittee shall perform such removal within twenty-four (24)
hours of receiving direction from the Director of Community
Development.
36. A triple-layered liner with monitoring system shall be installed on
the sanitary landfill bottom and on all sides and surfaces which
touch any existing soil or rock surface. The liners shall be designed
and constructed so that each of the three (3) liners are inert and
liquid-tight. The liner system shall be designed and constructed in
order to allow chemical monitoring and sampling from between the
three (3) layers. The monitoring system shall be capable of
obtaining samples from the lowest elevation in the sanitary landfill.
B. Any exception to the above operating provisions may be granted by the
Director of Community Development only upon the approval of a
majority of the full City Council. Requests for exceptions to the
operating provisions shall be made to the Director of Community
Development and the requests shall be presented to the City Council by
the Mayor within thirty (30) days. A hearing on the requested exception
shall be held by the City Council within thirty (30) days of its
presentation to the City Council. A decision by the Council must be
rendered within fifteen (15) days of that hearing.
C. The Director may impose additional requirements subject to specific
site conditions. The Mayor shall advise the City Council of the
additional requirements imposed upon a sanitary landfill at the next
regular City Council meeting after the additional requirements are
imposed. The operator of the sanitary landfill may appeal any decision
of the Director of Community Development under this Subsection to the
City Council within five (5) days of the decision. Any appeal by the
operator must be heard within thirty (30) days of the filing of the appeal
and a decision by the Council must be rendered within fifteen (15) days
of that hearing.
Section
245.270
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
245.280
100:543
Section 245.280. Permit Required.221 [R.O. 2009 §50.49; CC 1981
§13-105; Ord. No. 91-187, 9-18-1991]
It is unlawful for any person to use any land, premises or property within
the City for the dumping or disposal of any refuse or waste materials of any
kind without first securing a permit to do so.
Section 245.290. Application.222 [R.O. 2009 §50.50; CC 1981
§13-106; Ord. No. 91-187, 9-18-1991]
A. The application for a permit to operate a sanitary landfill shall be filed
with the Director of Community Development. With the application the
applicant shall deliver to the Director of Community Development a
non-refundable application fee of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
Upon the completion of the City's evaluation of the application, but
before receiving a permit, the applicant shall reimburse the department
for all reasonable costs of evaluation incurred by the City above five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The application shall contain a written
request for the issuance of a permit for the construction and operation
of a sanitary landfill and shall include a waste facility plan for the
construction, operation and closure of the sanitary landfill, which waste
facility plan shall be consistent with the provisions of this Chapter
pertaining to construction, operation and closure of a sanitary landfill
and shall include the following:
1. The type of waste, if any, including chemical and biological
characteristics, if other than garbage and other refuse is to be
disposed of in the sanitary landfill.
2. A metes and bounds description of the site proposed for
development of the sanitary landfill signed, sealed and dated by a
Missouri professional engineer.
3. A map signed, sealed and dated by a Missouri registered
professional engineer showing the proposed site with existing and
proposed topography at contour intervals of five (5) feet or less.
4. A map signed, sealed and dated by a Missouri registered
professional engineer showing:
a. Actual land use and zoning within one-half (½) mile of the site,
including location of all residences, buildings, public and
private wells, watercourses, springs, lakes, rock outcroppings,
caves, sinkholes and soil or rock borings.
b. Easements for electric, gas, water, sewer and other utility
easements or lines that are located on, under or over the
disposal site.
221. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §245.450.
222. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §245.450.
Section
245.280
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
245.290
100:544
c. The public roads and access roads within a two (2) mile radius
to be used for delivery of garbage and other refuse to and
within the sanitary landfill.
5. A plan prepared or approved by a Missouri registered professional
engineer for the construction and operation of the sanitary landfill
which includes:
a. A description of the place where waste is to be placed on the
site.
b. A description and discussion of the geology and hydrology of
the site and a description of how the entire sanitary landfill
plan for construction and operation minimizes the impact on
surface water and ground water resources. Such description
shall include:
(1) Current and projected use of water resources within onehalf
(½) mile of the facility.
(2) Ground water elevation and proposed separation between
the lowest point of the lowest cell and the predicted
maximum water table elevation.
(3) Background and initial quality of water resources within
one (1) mile of the facility.
(4) Provisions for surface water runoff control to minimize
infiltration and erosion of cover material. On-site drainage
structures and channels should be designed for at least a
twenty (20) year frequency, thirty (30) minute duration
rainfall.
(5) Potential of leachate generation and proposed control
systems for the protection of ground and surface water
resources. Plans shall include an operation and
maintenance program including the administration and
financing of the leachate treatment system during and
following the facility's operation.
(6) A map showing proposed location and design of
observation wells, sampling stations and testing programs
planned.
(7) A map and description of soil and bedrock to a depth
adequate to allow evaluation of the water quality
protection provided by the soil and bedrock.
(8) If the sanitary landfill is to be located in a flood plain, then
plans shall show the protection planned against at least
the 500-year flood frequency flood plain elevation plus
three (3) feet freeboard by impervious levees and other
appropriate means to prevent the floodwaters from
Section
245.290
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
245.290
100:545
contacting garbage and other refuse. Also, a volumetric
and conveyance evaluation must be provided describing
the potential problems created by any restriction of the
flood flow due to the location of the sanitary landfill.
(9) Descriptions of all private and public drinking water
sources (such as wells and springs) within one-half (½)
mile of the site. The operator shall seek samples from all
private and public drinking water sources within one-half
(½) mile of the site and shall make a baseline water quality
study on all such private and public drinking water
sources. The operator will maintain records of the efforts
to contact owners or operators of all private and public
drinking water sources within one-half (½) mile, including
the reasons for not gaining access to the sources not
tested.
c. A discussion of the effect of precipitation, evapotranspiration
and climatological conditions on the operation of the sanitary
landfill and the affected environment.
d. A description of characteristics of on-site soils with respect to
their effect on sanitary landfill operations, such as daily cover,
dusting, vehicle maneuverability and mud tracking by vehicles.
e. A discussion of potential inter-relationship of the sanitary
landfill, local aquifers and surface waters based on applicable
records or other sources of information.
f. Description of an effective dust control program.
g. Description of the liner (bottom and sides) which will minimize
the migration of leachate from the sanitary landfill.
h. Assessment of the need for decomposition gas control and
indication of any collection wells, vents, barriers or other
control or processing measures to be provided. Plans for the
control of decomposition gases shall be for on-site control; and
decomposition gases shall be collected and processed or
vented to the atmosphere directly through the cover material,
cut-off trenches or ventilation system in such a way that they
do not accumulate in explosive or toxic concentrations.
i. Description of contingency programs for vector control.
j. Plans for effectively covering and protecting waste, including:
(1) Cover material sources, quantities and soil classifications
as defined by the American Society for Testing and
Materials (ASTM) Standard Test Method D2487-85,
Classification of Soils for Engineering Purposes.
Section
245.290
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
245.290
100:546
(2) The capability of the cover material to cover waste at least
as well as soil, minimize fire hazards, infiltration of
precipitation, odors and blowing litter, control gas venting
and vectors, discourage scavenging, provide a pleasing
appearance and to compact and not be blown by the wind.
(3) Surface grades and side slopes needed to promote
maximum runoff, without excessive erosion, to minimize
infiltration.
(4) Procedures to maintain a cover material integrity such as
regarding and recovering.
(5) Procedures to promote vegetative growth as promptly as
possible to combat erosion and improve appearance of idle
and completed areas.
6. A description of the equipment proposed to be used to compact the
garbage and other refuse and cover material, preserving land
resources and minimizing moisture infiltration and settlement.
7. A description of the arrangements to be made whereby substitute
equipment will be made available to provide uninterrupted service
during routine maintenance periods or equipment breakdowns.
8. The period of time the applicant is seeking to operate the sanitary
landfill and the daily hours of operation.
9. A description of a plan for closure, including:
a. Conformity with any applicable zoning approval.
b. Final elevations and contours.
c. Vegetation establishment.
d. Erosion control.
e. Air pollution control (methane).
f. Settling correction.
g. Final cover source, depth, compaction.
h. Safety considerations.
i. Access to the site for inspections and subsequent use of the
site.
j. Surface water control.
k. Monitoring wells with a maximum spacing of two hundred
(200) feet apart which are down gradient of the sanitary
landfill and at least two (2) wells which are up gradient of the
sanitary landfill to be used as background wells.
Section
245.290
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
245.290
100:547
l. Leachate control and monitoring.
m. Ground water and surface water sampling.
n. A description of how and when the landfill will be closed and, if
applicable, a description of plans for closing portions of the
landfill during the operational life of the landfill.
o. A written estimate, in current dollars, of the cost of closure of
the landfill and, if applicable, an estimate of the cost of closing
portions of the landfill during the operational life of the landfill.
The estimate shall equal the cost of closure at the time in the
landfill's life when the extent and manner of its operation
would make closure the most expensive unless the closure plan
demonstrates that the most expensive closure can be avoided,
in which case the estimate shall equal the lesser cost.
10. A description of the projected use of the completed sanitary
landfill, including:
a. Maintenance programs and provisions, where necessary, for
monitoring and controlling decomposition gases, leachate and
water.
b. Provisions for an additional depth of cover material to allow
cultivation and to support vegetation in addition to that
required for final cover.
c. A description of the types of structures anticipated to be
constructed on or near the completed sanitary landfill. Major
structures should not be planned for location on the completed
sanitary landfill.
11. A statement that an application for zoning approval, if necessary,
has been applied for, is concurrently being applied for with the
filing of the sanitary landfill application or will be applied for within
seven (7) days of the filing of this application.
12. A schedule for the construction and completion of the sanitary
landfill stated with respect to the time of the issuance of a permit
for construction and operation of the sanitary landfill.
13. Other information as required by the Director of Community
Development. The applicant may appeal any requirement for other
information issued by the Director of Community Development
under this Section to the City Council within five (5) days of the
Director's decision. Any appeal by the applicant must be heard
within thirty (30) days of the filing of the appeal and a decision by
the Council must be rendered within fifteen (15) days of that
hearing.
Section
245.290
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
245.300
100:548
Section 245.300. Investigations and Reports.223 [R.O. 2009 §50.51;
CC 1981 §13-107; Ord. No. 91-187, 9-18-1991]
Section 245.310. Granting Permit — Fee — Bond.224 [R.O. 2009
§50.52; CC 1981 §13-108; Ord. No. 91-187, 9-18-1991]
A. The Director of Community Development shall review the application to
determine whether the granting of the permit to the applicant would
provide for the safe and adequate management of solid waste. In
reviewing the application, the Director of Community Development may
confer with any other department head of the City and they shall advise
him/her regarding the application. The Director of Community
Development shall inspect the site of the proposed sanitary landfill with
the Director of Public Works or his/her designee. The Director of
Community Development shall make a report giving his/her
recommendations to the City Council. The applicant shall receive a copy
of the report.
B. The Director of Community Development shall include in the report an
analysis of the applicant's estimate of the cost of closure. The Director
of Community Development shall determine if the applicant's estimate
of the cost of closure is adequate and will actually cover the cost of
closure; if the submitted estimate is deemed to be inadequate, the
application will be returned to the applicant as incomplete. The
applicant may appeal the determination of the Director of Community
Development concerning the adequacy of the applicant's estimate of
the cost of closure to the City Council within five (5) days of the
Director's report to the City Council. Any appeal by the applicant must
be heard within thirty (30) days of the filing of the appeal and a decision
by the Council must be rendered within fifteen (15) days of that
hearing. The City Council shall publish findings of fact and conclusions
of law which shall include a determination of the cost of closure.
C. The application may be resubmitted, if returned as incomplete, with an
estimate equal to an amount which, in the opinion of the Director of
Community Development, is adequate to cover the cost of closure; or if
the determination has been appealed under the provisions of
Subsection (B) above, the application may be resubmitted including an
estimate equal to the determination of the City Council after its hearing
of the appeal.
A. Upon receipt of the report and recommendation of the Director of
Community Development, the City Council shall decide whether to
approve or deny the application. If the City Council finds that the
granting of the permit to the applicant would provide for the safe and
adequate management of solid waste, the City Council shall approve
the waste facility plan, as it may be modified by the City Council, and
223. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §245.450.
224. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §245.450.
Section
245.300
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
245.310
100:549
approve the permit. If the permit is denied, the City Clerk shall notify
the applicant.
B. After approval by the City Council, such permit shall be issued by the
Director of Finance upon payment of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00)
to the City by the applicant. This payment shall be the annual permit fee
for the first (1st) year of the operation of the sanitary landfill. The fee
shall cover the costs related to inspections and report analysis. In
addition, the applicant shall deliver to the City a cash bond, corporate
bond or other financial assurance instrument equal to the estimated
cost of closure contained in Section 245.290 (9)(o). The cash or
corporate bond or other financial instrument shall run to the City and
shall be conditioned as follows:
1. The permittee, its agent and servants will comply with all the
terms, conditions, provisions, requirements and specifications
contained in this Article and comply with the laws and regulations
of all governments having jurisdiction.
2. The permittee, its agents and servants will faithfully operate the
sanitary landfill for which the permit is issued in accordance with
the provisions of this Article and the approved waste facility plan.
3. The permittee, its agents and servants will save harmless the City
from any expense incurred through the failure of the permittee, its
agents and servants to operate and maintain the sanitary landfill as
required by this Article and the waste facility plan, including any
expense the City may incur for correcting any condition or violation
of this Article by the City's own labor and equipment.
4. Approval by certain officials before acceptance.
a. Before acceptance all bonds shall be approved by the City
Attorney. If a corporate bond is offered, it shall be executed by
a surety or guaranty company qualified to transact business in
the State. If a cash bond is offered, it shall be deposited with
the Director of Finance who shall give his/her official receipt
therefor, reciting that cash has been deposited in compliance
with and subject to the provisions of this Article.
b. In addition, no permit for the construction and operation of a
sanitary landfill shall be issued nor shall such a facility be
operated until and unless the applicant acquires public liability
insurance approved by the Director of Community
Development governing all proposed operations of the
applicant pertaining to the business of constructing and
operating a sanitary landfill and covering all vehicles to be
operated in the conduct thereof. The insurance shall be with an
insurer acceptable to the Director and shall include coverage
in one (1) policy or multiple policies for any contractors or
subcontractors engaged by the insured for such business.
Evidence of such insurance shall be filed with the Director of
Section
245.310
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
245.310
100:550
Section 245.320. Financial Assurance Instrument Required For
Closure and Post-Closure.225 [R.O. 2009 §50.53; CC 1981
§§13-109—13-110; Ord. No. 91-187, 9-18-1991]
Section 245.330. Existing Sanitary Landfills. [R.O. 2009 §50.54; CC
1981 §13-111; Ord. No. 91-187, 9-18-1991]
Sanitary landfills which operated or were permitted to be constructed
or operate pursuant to Statutes, orders or rules in effect prior to the
effective date of this Article or that operated or were permitted to be
constructed or operate pursuant to Statutes, orders or rules before the
sanitary landfills were annexed into the City limits are exempted from the
requirements of presenting an initial waste facilities plan. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, however, a person operating a sanitary landfill shall within
thirty (30) days of the effective date of this Article, or within thirty (30)
days of the annexation of the sanitary landfill site into the City, file with the
Director of Community Development a copy of the sanitary landfill's plans
which were originally approved by the Missouri Department of Natural
Resources pursuant to Chapter 260, RSMo., and as may be thereafter
amended or supplemented. In addition, the person operating the sanitary
landfill shall submit a verified statement that the operation of the sanitary
landfill is in compliance with the plans submitted to the Department of
Natural Resources and shall submit a plan for closure in compliance with
the closure requirements of this Article imposed upon applicants for new
facilities. Thereafter, within thirty (30) days of the filing of the aforesaid
plans and statement of compliance by the operator of the sanitary landfill,
the Director of Community Development shall, if the operator is found to be
Finance. Such insurance will provide coverage for each person
up to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) with an
overall limit as to all persons for each accident of one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) and one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) for property damage. The above described
public liability insurance shall be maintained at all times
during operation of the sanitary landfill. Notice of the
cancellation of any of the aforementioned coverage shall be
made to the Director of Finance ten (10) days before the
cancellation.
A. Closure—Financial Assurance Instrument. No person shall construct or
operate a sanitary landfill without providing a financial assurance
instrument required for closure imposed pursuant to Section 260.226,
RSMo.
B. Post-Closure—Financial Assurance Instrument. No person shall operate
a sanitary landfill which does not provide the financial assurance
instrument required for post-closure maintenance as described in or as
may be imposed pursuant to Section 260.227, RSMo.
225. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §245.450.
Section
245.310
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
245.330
100:551
in compliance with the plans submitted and with the ordinances of the City
relating to the operation of sanitary landfills, issue the operator a permit
upon payment of the fees set forth in Section 245.310 of this Article. With
the exception of the matters discussed above, sanitary landfills existing at
the effective date of this Article must comply with all other provisions of this
Article.
Section 245.340. Permit Renewed Annually.226 [R.O. 2009 §50.55;
CC 1981 §13-112; Ord. No. 91-187, 9-18-1991]
A. The operator of each facility permitted under this Article shall apply to
renew such permit annually for each year beginning with each
anniversary date of the issuance of the initial permit, whether the
construction of the facility is completed or not. The renewal application
shall be delivered to the Director of Community Development at least
thirty (30) days prior to each anniversary date of the initial permit and
shall request that a renewal permit be issued for a period of one (1)
year and contain the following information:
1. Any changes in the waste facility plan which must be made to
reflect actual usage or condition.
2. Any changes in operating plans, area design or closure costs
affecting the plan for closure.
3. Total waste received at the facility during the previous year.
4. Water quality sampling results of monitoring wells and drinking
water sources within one-half (½) mile.
5. Leachate sampling results, methane treatment, gas control and/or
other monitoring system result.
6. Equipment replaced or changed or anticipated to be replaced or
changed.
7. A report indicating the infrastructures which have been put in
place.
8. If the facility is still under construction, whether the construction is
proceeding according to the schedule shown in the waste facility
plan.
B. Upon receipt of the renewal application described above and the
payment of the annual licensing fee as set forth below, the Director of
Community Development shall issue a renewal permit for the sanitary
landfill. The Director shall not issue the renewal permit if the permit
has been revoked pursuant to this Article. The annual permit fee shall
be ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). The cash bond, corporate bond or
other financial assurance instrument shall be renewed at an amount
226. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §245.450.
Section
245.330
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
245.340
100:552
Section 245.350. Notice of Intent of Close — Closure.227 [R.O. 2009
§50.56; CC 1981 §§13-113—13-114; Ord. No. 91-187, 9-18-1991]
Section 245.360. Authority To Enforce — Inspections. [R.O. 2009
§50.57; CC 1981 §13-115; Ord. No. 91-187, 9-18-1991]
which reflects any changes in operating plans, landfill design or closure
costs affecting the plan for closure.
A. Notification Of Intent To Close Sanitary Landfill. The operator shall
notify the Director of Community Development six (6) months prior to
permanent or planned closure of its intent to close a sanitary landfill.
B. Closure Of Sanitary Landfills. In addition to the provisions of the waste
facility plan covering the closure of a sanitary landfill, the following
criteria shall be complied with:
1. Three (3) feet of compacted final cover plus six (6) inches of topsoil,
mulch, compost or other material capable of supporting vegetation
is required. An additional one (1) foot of compacted final cover (for
a total of three (3) feet compacted final cover) may be substituted
by the operator for the six (6) inches of topsoil, provided that
adequate vegetation cover can be established.
2. Vegetative cover shall be established as soon as possible following
closure. Repeated seedings shall be undertaken, if required.
3. The sanitary landfill operator shall annually seek samples of all
drinking water sources within one-half (½) mile of the sanitary
landfill. Public and private water wells within one-half (½) mile of
the sanitary landfill shall be sampled for the contaminants specified
by the Director annually for twenty (20) years after closure and as
specified in the approved plan for closure. The samples will be
tested for contaminants by the operator. The operator will maintain
records of the efforts to contact owners or operators of all drinking
water sources within one-half (½) mile, including the reasons for
not gaining access to the sources not tested.
4. On-site downstream gradient ground water monitoring wells shall
be sampled quarterly for indicator contaminants and annually for
twenty (20) years for all contaminants as specified by the Director.
5. The operator shall file with the St. Charles County Recorder of
Deeds, within two (2) months of closure, a metes and bounds
description and licensed surveyor's plat which includes the types of
waste disposed of at the site, the location of wastes, depth of the fill
and location and description of any leachate, gas control or other
monitoring systems which are to be maintained and a designation
of who will maintain such systems.
227. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §245.450.
Section
245.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
245.360
100:553
Section 245.370. Permit Suspended or Revoked.228 [R.O. 2009
§50.58; CC 1981 §13-116; Ord. No. 91-187, 9-18-1991]
A. The officer responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this
Article shall be the Director of Community Development. The Director
shall provide adequate and frequent inspections of all sanitary landfills.
The Director shall notify any person operating a sanitary landfill who is
violating the provisions of this Article of the specific manner in which
this Article is being violated.
B. The notice shall:
1. Be in writing;
2. Include a description of the sanitary landfill site sufficient for
identification;
3. Include a statement of the reason or reasons why it is being issued;
4. Include a correction statement, specifying what is to be done and
allowing a reasonable period for compliance.
A. A permit shall be immediately suspended and activity shall cease if the
permittee fails to maintain the public liability insurance required under
this Article. If the permittee fails to maintain the public liability
insurance required under this Article for a period of thirty (30) days, the
permit shall be revoked. The permittee of the sanitary landfill may
appeal the revocation or suspension under this Section to the City
Council within five (5) days of the revocation or suspension. Any appeal
by the permittee must be heard within thirty (30) days of the filing of
the appeal and a decision by the Council must be rendered within
fifteen (15) days of that hearing. The permit shall remain suspended or
revoked during the appeal process.
B. A permit for operation of a sanitary landfill shall be immediately
suspended or revoked if the sanitary landfill is operated in a manner
causing an immediate danger to the public health and welfare of the
residents of the City or the persons operating and using the sanitary
landfill. The permittee of the sanitary landfill may appeal the revocation
or suspension under this Section to the City Council within five (5) days
of the revocation or suspension. Any appeal by the permittee must be
heard within thirty (30) days of the filing of the appeal and a decision by
the Council must be rendered within fifteen (15) days of that hearing.
The permit shall remain suspended or revoked during the appeal
process.
C. Reasons For Suspension/Revocation—Notice.
228. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §245.450.
Section
245.360
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
245.370
100:554
Section 245.380. Compliance With Plan and Other Requirements.229
[R.O. 2009 §50.59; CC 1981 §13-117; Ord. No. 91-187, 9-18-1991]
Section 245.390. Right of Entry For Inspection. [R.O. 2009 §50.60;
CC 1981 §13-118; Ord. No. 91-187, 9-18-1991]
1. A permit for operation of a sanitary landfill may be suspended or
revoked, following a hearing before the City Council, for any one
(1) or more of the following reasons:
a. Failure to comply with the provisions of the waste facility plan.
b. Failure to comply with the provisions of this Chapter applicable
to the sanitary landfill.
c. Willful misstatement of facts contained in any application or
renewal application.
d. When a sanitary landfill which has previously been opened and
has accepted waste, but has not received any waste for a
twelve (12) month period. In such event, the operator shall
immediately begin the closure procedure established by the
waste facility plan.
2. The City Clerk shall provide at least ten (10) calendar days' notice
to the operator of the hearing to be held to consider the suspension
or revocation of the permit to operate a sanitary landfill. The
hearing shall be open to the public. A decision by the Council must
be rendered within fifteen (15) days of that hearing.
A. No person shall operate a sanitary landfill in a manner that does not
comply with the approved waste facility plan for such facility and which
does not comply with the requirements of this Chapter pertaining to
operation of such facility. Failure to comply with the waste facility plan
or the requirements of this Article pertaining to operating a sanitary
landfill shall be a violation by the person in whose name the permit is
issued, as well as every agent, employer or contractor assigned to
construct or operate the facility who:
1. Performs acts precluded by the waste facility plan or this Article;
2. Fails to perform acts required by the waste facility plan or this
Chapter;
3. Fails to maintain conditions required by the waste facility plan or
this Chapter; or
4. Maintains conditions prohibited by the waste facility plan or this
Article.
229. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §245.450.
Section
245.370
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
245.390
100:555
A. The Director of Community Development is authorized to enter and
inspect sanitary landfill premises at any time to ensure that the sanitary
landfill is being operated consistently with the waste facility plan, this
Article and in the interests of the health and welfare of the residents of
the City. Routine inspections shall be made during normal operational
hours of the facility. Where there is a suspected hazard, entry may be
made at any time.
B. If any person operating a sanitary landfill licensed under this Chapter
refuses to allow the lawful entry and inspection of the sanitary landfill,
the City Attorney or Prosecuting Attorney or a designated assistant may
make application for the issuance of a search warrant pursuant to
Section 135.100. Any area used by a sanitary landfill licensed under this
Chapter shall be considered a "business premise".
Section
245.390
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
245.390
100:556
ARTICLE V
Solid Waste Hauler or Collector Licensing
Section 245.400. Haulers or Collectors of Garbage, Rubbish, Yard
Waste or Recyclables Shall Be Licensed. [R.O. 2009 §50.70; Ord. No.
01-201, 9-5-2001]
In addition to any and all other licenses and permits required by this City,
no person shall engage in the business of hauling or collecting garbage,
rubbish, yard waste or recyclables from business establishments,
residences or any other locations unless such person shall first have secured
from the Finance Director a hauler's license and a hauler's vehicle license
for each individual motor vehicle under the provisions of this Article. No
person shall operate a motor vehicle and engage in the aforementioned
activities unless said person shall have first secured from the Finance
Director a hauler's driver license for each individual driver under the
provisions of this Article. Nothing contained in this Article shall be
construed to allow a licensed hauler to collect from those locations for
which a franchise is required under Sections 245.190 through 245.230
without first obtaining a franchise.
Section 245.410. Requirements For Hauler's License To Issue —
Term. [R.O. 2009 §50.71; Ord. No. 01-201, 9-5-2001; Ord. No.
08-178, 9-3-2008]
A. Application to be a licensed hauler shall be made in writing, signed and
sworn by the hauler applicant or by its duly authorized agent, upon
forms provided by the Finance Director. The application shall contain
the full name and residence address of the applicant, place of business
and the business telephone number of the applicant.
B. Every licensed hauler shall carry public liability and property damage
insurance and Workers' Compensation insurance for its employees with
solvent and responsible insurers authorized to transact such insurance
in the State and qualified to assume the risk or the amounts hereinafter
set forth under the laws of the State, to secure payment of any loss or
damage resulting from any occurrence arising out of or caused by the
operations of the licensee or use of any of the licensee's vehicles. The
public liability and property damage insurance policies shall contain a
minimum limit at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per person
and five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) per occurrence and shall be
maintained throughout the period of licensure. Should any policy be
canceled, the City shall be notified in writing of such cancellation at
least ten (10) days before the effective cancellation date. Each hauler
licensed under this Article shall pay a license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00)
as provided in Section 605.160.
C. If the hauler's license application has been properly executed and proof
of the required insurance has been presented, the Finance Director
Section
245.400
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
245.410
100:557
Section 245.420. Requirements For Hauler's Driver License To
Issue — Term. [R.O. 2009 §50.72; Ord. No. 01-201, 9-5-2001]
Section 245.430. Requirements For Hauler's Motor Vehicle License
To Issue — Term. [R.O. 2009 §50.73; Ord. No. 01-201, 9-5-2001]
shall issue to the applicant a hauler's license upon payment of the
applicable fee.
D. A hauler's license shall be for a term of one (1) year and shall be
renewable annually upon payment of the fee set forth in Subsection (B).
E. A licensed hauler shall retain in each vehicle licensed pursuant to
Section 245.430 a preprinted statement which shall contain the
following information:
1. The full name and address of the licensed hauler and the number of
the hauler's license.
2. The license number or the vehicle identification number of the
vehicle.
3. A listing of any and all violations of this Chapter for which the
hauler or the individual driver has been convicted within the
twenty-four (24) months preceding the issuance of the current
hauler's license.
A. Application for a hauler's driver license shall be made in writing, signed
and sworn by the hauler applicant, upon forms provided by the Finance
Director. The application shall contain the full name and residence
address of the applicant, place of business and the business telephone
number of the applicant.
B. There shall be no license fee charged for issuance of a hauler's driver
license.
C. If the hauler's driver license application has been properly executed,
the Finance Director shall issue to the applicant a hauler's driver
license upon payment of the applicable fee and presentation of a valid
driver's license issued to the applicant. The licensee shall carry the
hauler's driver license at all times while engaged in collection or
hauling.
D. A hauler's driver license shall be for a term of one (1) year and shall be
renewable annually upon payment of the fee set forth in Subsection (B).
A. Application for a hauler's motor vehicle license shall be made in
writing, signed and sworn by the hauler applicant, upon forms provided
by the Finance Director. The application shall contain the full name and
residence address of the applicant, place of business and the business
telephone number of the applicant and the vehicle identification
number.
Section
245.410
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
245.430
100:558
Section 245.440. Penalties For Violation — Suspension or
Revocation of Licenses. [R.O. 2009 §50.74; Ord. No. 01-201,
9-5-2001; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
Section 245.450. Penalty. [R.O. 2009 §50.99; CC 1981 §13-119; Ord.
No. 91-187, 9-18-1991]
B. For each hauler's motor vehicle licensed under this Article the applicant
shall pay a license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) as provided in Section
605.160.
C. If the hauler's motor vehicle license application has been properly
executed, the Finance Director shall issue to the applicant a hauler's
motor vehicle license upon payment of the applicable fee, which license
shall consist of a sticker emblem designating the year for which the
license is issued and a license number identical with the number of the
application. One (1) side of the emblem shall be of adhesive material of
such strength and composition that the emblem cannot be removed
from the surface to which it is applied without being mutilated or
destroyed. It shall be the duty of the licensee to affix such emblem in a
conspicuous place upon the vehicle for which the same was issued.
D. A hauler's motor vehicle license shall be for a term of one (1) year and
shall be renewable annually upon payment of the fee set forth in
Subsection (B).
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be
punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by
imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
B. In addition to the penalties set forth in Subsection (A), whenever the
Mayor, after due notice and hearing, shall find any licensee under this
Article has violated any of the provisions of this Chapter, the Mayor may
suspend the license for a period not to exceed six (6) months. If the
licensee shall have repeatedly suffered suspensions under the
provisions of this Chapter, the Mayor shall have the power to revoke the
license and the licensee shall not thereafter be qualified or eligible to
hold such a license for period of two (2) years from the date of
revocation. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit
prosecution in the Municipal Court for violation of any of the provisions
of this Chapter and proceedings under this Subsection and in the
Municipal Court may occur simultaneously.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter for which no
other penalty is set forth shall be subject to the penalty set forth in
Section 100.150.
B. Any person who violates any of the provisions of the Article set forth in
Sections 245.240 et seq., shall be punished by a fine of not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
Section
245.430
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
245.450
100:559
or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment.
Section
245.450
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
245.450
100:560
Chapter 250
CEMETERIES
State Law References—Authority to regulate cemeteries, §77.120, RSMo.;
cemeteries in general, §§214.010 through 214.410, RSMo.
Section
245.450
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
245.450
100:561

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 250.010. Improper Use or Conduct. [R.O. 2009 §93.01; CC
1981 §6-1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any cemetery, graveyard or burial
ground for any other purpose than as a burial ground or to be guilty of
any unseemly, offensive or lascivious conduct within or about any cemetery,
graveyard or burial ground. The provisions of Section shall apply to all
cemeteries, graveyards or burial grounds within this City and to all such
burial grounds within three (3) miles thereof belonging to this City.
Section 250.020. Disturbing Grave or Burial Site. [R.O. 2009
§93.02; CC 1981 §6-3; Ord. No. 83-72, 9-21-1983; Ord. No. 07-162,
6-11-2007]
It shall be unlawful for any person not acting pursuant to a burial permit
to knowingly disturb any grave or burial site, including prehistoric human
bones, unless the same be specifically authorized by the Mayor. Any person
who may be digging, including persons using tools, machines and
equipment, who shall observe bones, caskets or other indications of human
burial shall cease and stop work and notify the Mayor. The Mayor shall
cause the site to be investigated and shall determine whether such
constitute a human burial and whether reburial is required. The Mayor shall
be authorized to stop any work in which the disturbing of a grave or burial
site is likely and may permit work to proceed upon conditions reasonably
likely to preserve the human remains.
Section 250.030. Vandalizing Cemeteries and Property Therein.
[R.O. 2009 §93.03; Ord. No. 00-157, 6-9-2000]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to vandalize, destroy,
mutilate, disfigure, deface, injure or remove any tomb, monument or
gravestone or other structure placed in any cemetery or any fence,
railing or other work for the protection or ornamentation of any such
cemetery or place of burial of any human being or tomb, monument or
gravestone, memento or memorial or other structure aforesaid or of
any lot within such cemetery.
B. Pursuant to Section 214.010, RSMo., any person violating Subsection
(A) at or within a cemetery owned by the City of St. Charles shall be
subject to a mandatory penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for
each violation. Any person violating Subsection (A) at or within a
private cemetery shall be subject to a mandatory penalty of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. In addition to any other
penalty, the offender shall be ordered to pay restitution for the damage
or loss to the property.
C. Signs advising of the aforesaid one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) penalty
shall be posted at any cemetery owned by the City of St. Charles.
Section
250.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
250.030
100:563
Owners or operators of a private cemetery are encouraged, within their
complete discretion, to post signs advising of the aforesaid five hundred
dollar ($500.00) penalty.
Section
250.030
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
250.030
100:564
ARTICLE II
Oak Grove Cemetery Regulations
Section 250.040. Rule of Construction — Purpose. [R.O. 2009
§93.15; CC 1981 §§6-14—6-15]
Section 250.050. Purchase of Grave Space. [R.O. 2009 §93.16; CC
1981 §6-18; Ord. No. 76-12, 2-11-1976; Ord. No. 83-85, 10-5-1983;
Ord. No. 86-79, 4-18-1986; Ord. No. 88-232, 11-16-1988; Ord. No.
10-185 §1, 9-8-2010]
Section 250.060. Form and Execution of Deed. [R.O. 2009 §93.17;
CC 1981 §6-20; Ord. No. 86-79, 4-18-1986]
A. Definition. Whenever the words "the cemetery" shall appear in this
Article, they shall be construed to mean the Oak Grove Cemetery.
B. Purpose. The cemetery shall be for the purpose of affording persons of
all classes and conditions a place of burial.
A. Oak Grove Cemetery grave space may be purchased only by City
residents, former City residents, or by a spouse, son, daughter,
grandchild, parent, sibling, grandparent, aunt or uncle of a person
buried in the cemetery. Any person who is not a current resident or a
former resident and who desires to purchase grave space may do so
after providing proof to the Sexton that a relative is buried in the
cemetery.
B. Any person desiring to purchase grave space in the cemetery shall pay
to the Sexton the price set out in Section 250.070.
C. Any person who desires to sell or convey a grave space shall first
convey or offer to sell the same to the City at the current established
value. The City shall either repurchase or refuse to repurchase the
grave space within thirty (30) days of the offer to sell or convey the
grave space. The offer shall be directed to the Sexton.
D. If the City refuses to repurchase the grave space in accordance with
Subsection (C) of this Section, then the owner or the administrator of
owner's estate on the owner's behalf may sell the grave space to any
resident or former resident of the City or to a spouse, son, daughter,
grandchild, parent, sibling, grandparent, aunt or uncle of a person
buried in the City cemetery. The City shall be notified of the sale of the
grave space when it is sold or conveyed to someone other than the City.
A. The deed from the City for the cemetery lot, part of lot or grave space
paid for shall be made in the name of the City and shall be signed by the
Mayor, countersigned by the City Clerk and sealed with the corporate
Seal of the City and shall convey the lot, part of lot or grave space,
therein described, to the purchaser and his/her heirs and assigns
Section
250.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
250.060
100:565
Section 250.070. Schedule of Prices of Grave Spaces.230 [R.O. 2009
§93.18; CC 1981 §6-19; Ord. No. 3516, 9-20-1967; Ord. No. 76-12,
2-11-1976; Ord. No. 79-81, 8-29-1979; Ord. No. 82-12, 3-17-1982;
Ord. No. 87-102, 5-20-1987; Ord. No. 93-14, 1-21-1993; Ord. No.
94-311, 12-7-1994; Ord. No. 99-247, 7-22-1999; Ord. No. 03-254,
10-13-2003; Ord. No. 14-076 §1, 4-15-2014; Ord. No. 16-223 §1,
11-1-2016; Ord. No. 17-245, 11-21-2017231; Ord. No. 18-263,
12-4-2018232]
The prices for cemetery grave spaces in City cemeteries shall be as follows:
Infants (1.5 feet by 3 feet) (Price included in interment fee)
Regular (4 feet by 10 feet) $950.00
Cremation (3 feet by 3 feet) $550.00
Section 250.080. Burial Fees.233 [R.O. 2009 §93.19; CC 1981 §6-21;
Ord. No. 3643, 3-12-1969; Ord. No. 76-12, 2-11-1976; Ord. No.
79-81, 8-29-1979; Ord. No. 82-12, 3-17-1982; Ord. No. 86-238,
9-2-1986; Ord. No. 87-102, 5-20-1987; Ord. No. 88-242, 11-30-1988;
Ord. No. 93-14, 1-21-1993; Ord. No. 94-311, 12-7-1994; Ord. No.
97-49, 1-31-1997; Ord. No. 99-247, 7-22-1999; Ord. No. 03-254,
10-13-2003; Ord. No. 10-185 §1, 9-8-2010]
forever and shall recite the names of the grantee and the price of the
lot or space conveyed.
B. The restrictions contained in Section 250.050(C) and (D) shall also be
stated in the deed from the City.
A. The fees, except when otherwise ordered by the Mayor pursuant to
Section 250.140(E), for interment of a human body shall be as follows:
[Ord. No. 14-076 §2, 4-15-2014; Ord. No. 16-223 §2, 11-1-2016;
Ord. No. 17-245, 11-21-2017234; Ord. No. 18-263, 12-4-2018235]
Oak Grove Cemetery Fees
Burial Fees
Infant's Grave Including Grave Site
1. Burial day (completed before
closing)
Fee
Monday — Friday $565.00
Saturday $780.00
230. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
231. Editor’s Note: Section 5 also set an effective date of 1-1-2018.
232. Editor’s Note: Section 5 also set an effective date of 1-1-2019.
233. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
234. Editor’s Note: Section 5 also set an effective date of 1-1-2018.
235. Editor’s Note: Section 5 also set an effective date of 1-1-2019.
Section
250.060
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
250.080
100:566
Oak Grove Cemetery Fees
Burial Fees
Sunday $1,000.00
City holidays $1,000.00
2. Burial day (completed after
closing — 3:00 P.M.)
Fee
Monday — Friday $780.00
Saturday $1,000.00
Sunday $1,435.00
City holidays $1,435.00
Infant's Grave On Pre-Owned Grave Site
3. Burial day (completed before
closing)
Fee
Monday — Friday $245.00
Saturday $460.00
Sunday $685.00
City holidays $685.00
4. Burial day (completed after
closing — 3:00 P.M.)
Fee
Monday — Friday $460.00
Saturday $685.00
Sunday $1,120.00
City holidays $1,120.00
Single Depth Grave
5. Burial day (completed before
closing)
Fee
Monday — Friday $1,265.00
Saturday $1,500.00
Sunday $1,715.00
City holidays $1,715.00
6. Burial day (completed after
closing — 3:00 P.M.)
Fee
Monday — Friday $1,500.00
Saturday $1,715.00
Sunday $2,155.00
City holidays $2,155.00
Double Depth Grave
Section
250.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
250.080
100:567
Oak Grove Cemetery Fees
Burial Fees
7. Burial day (completed before
closing)
Fee
Monday — Friday $1,590.00
Saturday $1,810.00
Sunday $2,030.00
City holidays $2,030.00
8. Burial day (completed after
closing — 3:00 P.M.)
Fee
Monday — Friday $1,810.00
Saturday $2,030.00
Sunday $2,470.00
City holidays $2,470.00
Cremations Without A Service
9. Burial day (completed before
closing)
Fee
Monday — Friday $260.00
Saturday $530.00
Sunday $745.00
City holidays $745.00
10. Burial day (completed after
closing — 3:00 P.M.)
Fee
Monday — Friday $530.00
Saturday $745.00
Sunday $1,180.00
City holidays $1,180.00
Cremations With A Service
11. Burial day (completed before
closing)
Fee
Monday — Friday $530.00
Saturday $745.00
Sunday $1,140.00
City holidays $1,140.00
12. Burial day (completed after
closing — 3:00 P.M.)
Fee
Monday — Friday $745.00
Saturday $1,140.00
Section
250.080
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
250.080
100:568
Section 250.090. Disinterment Fees. [R.O. 2009 §93.20; CC 1981
§6-22; Ord. No. 10-185 §1, 9-8-2010; Ord. No. 16-223 §3, 11-1-2016;
Ord. No. 17-245, 11-21-2017236; Ord. No. 18-263, 12-4-2018237]
When an interment has been made in the cemetery and a disinterment is
desired for the purpose of moving the body to another grave in the cemetery
or to another cemetery, the person causing such disinterment shall pay the
Sexton the fees as follows:
1. Infant Grave Disinterment (completed before closing only)
Monday — Friday $390.00
2. Single Depth Grave Disinterment (completed before closing only)
Monday — Friday $1,430.00
3. Double Depth Grave Disinterment (completed before closing only)
Monday — Friday $1,735.00
4. Cremations Disinterment (completed before closing only)
Monday — Friday $400.00
Section 250.100. Cemetery Funds. [R.O. 2009 §93.21; CC 1981
§6-23; Ord. No. 86-78, 4-18-1986; Ord. No. 10-185 §1, 9-8-2010]
Oak Grove Cemetery Fees
Burial Fees
Sunday $1,410.00
City holidays $1,410.00
B. The fee herein prescribed shall be payable before burial and shall also
cover the services of the Sexton for registering the burial.
C. For each grave opening, the Sexton shall pay over to the Director of
Finance for deposit in the City Treasury to the credit of the General
Fund the total amount of funds collected for the opening and closing of
graves.
A. Three-fourths (¾) of the proceeds of the sale of the lots, half-lots, single
grave spaces or cremation spaces/niches in the cemetery shall become
and constitute a Perpetual Care Fund which shall be kept separate and
apart from any monies belonging to the City and no part of the principal
of the fund shall ever be used or expended for any purpose whatever,
but shall be loaned out by the City at the highest rate of interest
obtainable, to be secured by real estate security or invested in approved
Municipal, State or National Government Bonds, and the income and
interest therefrom arising shall be used under the direction of the City
Council in repairing, beautifying and improving the cemetery and in
236. Editor’s Note: Section 5 also set an effective date of 1-1-2018.
237. Editor’s Note: Section 5 also set an effective date of 1-1-2019.
Section
250.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
250.100
100:569
Section 250.110. Construction Requirements For Grave Sites.238
[R.O. 2009 §93.22; CC 1981 §§6-24—6-28; Ord. No. 10-185 §1,
9-8-2010]
Section 250.120. Persons Prohibited On Grounds At Night.239 [R.O.
2009 §93.23; CC 1981 §6-29; Ord. No. 81-82, 9-2-1981]
No person shall be allowed in Oak Grove Cemetery from one (1) hour after
sunset continuing to one (1) hour before sunrise without first obtaining
permission from the Sexton.
paying the expense necessary in the management of the fund and for
no other purposes.
B. The remaining one-fourth (¼) of the proceeds of the sale of the lots,
half-lots, single grave spaces or cremation spaces/niches in the
cemetery shall be deposited into a Lot Repurchase Fund which shall be
kept separate and apart from any monies belonging to the City and from
the Perpetual Care Fund, such money as shall accumulate in the fund
shall be used only to repurchase lots, half-lots, single grave spaces and
cremation spaces/niches which had previously been sold to persons.
This Section shall not be construed so as to require the repurchase of
any lot, half-lot, single grave space or cremation spaces/niches in the
cemetery.
A. Fences, Coping And Railing. No fences, coping or railing around lots or
graves in the cemetery shall hereafter be constructed.
B. Corner Or Line Markers. No markers or construction of any type
marking the corners or lines of any lot shall be constructed or allowed
unless the same shall be on or below the level of the ground surface.
C. Level Of Lots Filled In Or Graded. No lot in the cemetery shall be filled
in or graded to more than ten (10) inches above the level of the adjacent
walk or roadway.
D. Planting Trees And Shrubs. The planting of trees and shrubbery will not
be permitted in or about the cemetery, except as done or ordered by the
City staff.
E. Grave Stones And Markers—Monuments. No wooden grave markers
will be allowed. All gravestones and markers and lot and grave
monuments extending above the ground level shall have a four (4) inch
apron of concrete or stone on all sides thereof and such apron shall not
extend above the ground level. Foundations for monuments and grave
markers shall be constructed according to the specifications of the City
and such foundation work and apron work shall be done by or under the
supervision of the Sexton.
238. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
239. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
250.100
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
250.120
100:570
ARTICLE III
Administration
Section 250.130. Issuance of Deeds. [R.O. 2009 §93.35; CC 1981
§6-17; Ord. No. 88-232, 11-16-1988]
The City shall issue the deeds for all lots, half-lots and single grave spaces
sold by the Sexton and keep an accurate record and detailed account
showing the number of lots, half-lots and single grave spaces sold, to whom
sold, the location, date and at what price.
Section 250.140. Duties of Sexton. [R.O. 2009 §93.36; CC 1981
§§6-16, 6-41—6-44; Ord. No. 88-231, 11-16-1988; Ord. No. 88-232,
11-16-1988]
A. Sells Lots—Keep Plat Records.
1. It shall be the duty of the Sexton to sell lots, half-lots and single
grave spaces and report such sales for issuance of deeds.
2. The plat of the blocks, lots, avenues and walks of Oak Grove
Cemetery shall remain on file in the office of the Sexton. The
Sexton shall also be responsible for keeping the plat of the
cemetery up to date.
B. Deliver Monies And Fees To Director Of Finance. The Sexton shall
deliver to the Director of Finance all money received from the sale of
grave spaces and any other fees received by the Sexton.
C. Keep Burial Register. The Sexton shall also cause to be maintained at
such office a record of the owner of each burial lot or interment space
described in the current plat of the cemetery and a record of all dead
human remains buried or interred at the cemetery, which record shall
include the name of each deceased person buried or interred at the
cemetery, the date of burial or interment, the location of burial or
interment and, if known, the name and address of the funeral director
who provided the memorial service or other final arrangements for the
deceased person. The cemetery operator shall cause reasonable
assistance to be provided to burial lot or interment space owners in
locating their lots or spaces and to the family or other interested
persons in locating the place of burial or interment of deceased persons
whose remains are buried or interred in the cemetery.
D. Burial Dead Bodies. It shall be the duty of the Sexton to bury each dead
body that is to be interred in the cemetery.
E. Burial At Request Of Indigent Person. If any person desiring to bury any
corpse in the cemetery shall be unable to pay the Sexton the fee
therefor which the Sexton is required to collect for digging and filling
the grave and shall satisfy the Mayor that he/she is in fact unable to pay
it, the Mayor is authorized to direct the Sexton to render such service
without any fee therefor.
Section
250.130
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
250.140
100:571
Chapter 255
PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
250.140
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
250.140
100:572
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 255.010. Definitions.240 [R.O. 2009 §99.01; CC 1981 §21-40;
Ord. No. 77-23, 6-1-1977; Ord. No. 81-41, 5-6-1981]
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
BOARD — The St. Charles Public Park Board.
DIRECTOR — Any person immediately in charge of any park area and its
activities, to whom all park attendants of such areas are responsible.
PARK — A park reservation, playground, recreation center, building or any
other area owned or used by the City and devoted to active or passive
recreation.
PARK RANGER, PARK PATROL, PARK SECURITY, PARK POLICE, PARK
SUPERVISORY EMPLOYEE OR ATTENDANT — Any person employed by
the City or the Board.
POLICE — A person authorized and commissioned by the City as a Law
Enforcement Officer.
VEHICLE — Any wheeled or tracked conveyance, whether motor-powered,
animal-drawn or self-propelled. The term shall include any trailer in tow of
any size, kind or description. Exception is made for vehicles in the service
of the City parks.
Section 255.020. Hours of Operation. [R.O. 2009 §99.02; CC 1981
§21-48; Ord. No. 77-23, 6-1-1977]
Section 255.030. Closed Areas. [R.O. 2009 §99.03; CC 1981 §21-49;
Ord. No. 77-23, 6-1-1977]
Any section or part of any park or entire park may be declared closed to
vehicles or the public by the Board, the Police, the Director, park security,
park police, park patrol, Park Ranger and any supervisory park employee
or attendant at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily
or at regular and stated intervals, daily or otherwise and either entirely or
merely to certain uses as the Board, the Director, the Police, Park Security,
A. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be open to
the public every day of the year during designated hours. The opening
and closing hours for each individual park shall be posted therein for
public information or a public notice shall be posted every six (6)
months on the bulletin board in Blanchette Park advising of the closed
hours of all individual parks.
B. Any person authorized by permit of the Board or the Director may be in
any park or area during closed periods.
240. Cross Reference—As to rules of construction and definitions generally, §100.020.
Section
255.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
255.030
100:573
Park Police, Park Patrol, Park Ranger and any supervisory park employee or
attendant may find reasonably necessary to protect public property.
Section 255.040. Lost and Found Articles. [R.O. 2009 §99.04; CC
1981 §21-50; Ord. No. 77-23, 6-1-1977]
The finding of lost articles by park attendants shall be reported to the
Director who shall make every reasonable effort to locate the owners. The
Director shall make every reasonable effort to find articles reported as lost.
Section
255.030
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
255.040
100:574
ARTICLE II
Rules and Regulations
Section 255.050. Prohibitions Concerning Park Property.241 [R.O.
2009 §99.15; CC 1981 §21-41; Ord. No. 77-23, 6-1-1977; Ord. No.
82-60, 8-18-1982]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, while in or about any City park, to:
1. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or
remove any building, bridge, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings,
paving or paving materials, water lines or other public utilities or
parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether
temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other
boundary markers or other structures or equipment, facilities or
park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or
personal.
2. Fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a
neat and sanitary condition. No person over the age of six (6) years
shall use the restrooms and washrooms designated for the opposite
sex.
3. Dig or remove any rock, stones, trees, shrubs or plants; down
timber or other wood or materials; or make any excavation by tool,
equipment, blasting or other means or agency except on special
written permit as provided for in this Chapter.
4. Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind,
whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any
public service utility into, upon or across such lands, except on
special written permit as provided for in this Chapter.
5. Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or
injure the bark or pick the flowers of any tree or plant; nor shall any
person attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or
plant. A person shall not dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas or
in any other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness
of any area.
6. Climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases,
fountains, railings, fences or gun carriages or upon any other
property not designated or customarily used for such purposes.
7. Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw
missiles or projectiles of any kind or nature at any animal, reptile or
bird; nor shall any person remove or have in his/her possession the
young of any wild animal or the eggs or nest or young of any reptile
or bird; nor shall he/she collect, remove, have in his/her possession,
241. Cross References—As to offenses against property generally, §§215.010 et seq.; as to
alcohol in parks generally, §255.170; as to penalty, §100.150.
Section
255.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
255.050
100:575
Section 255.060. Traffic Regulations.242 [R.O. 2009 §99.16; CC 1981
§21-42; Ord. No. 77-23, 6-1-1977]
give away, sell or offer to sell or buy or offer to buy or accept
as a gift any specimen, alive or dead, of any of the group of tree
snails. Exception to the foregoing is made in that snakes known to
be deadly poisonous, such as rattle snakes, water moccasins, coral
snakes or other deadly reptiles, may be killed on sight.
8. Give or offer or attempt to give any animal or bird any tobaccos,
alcohol, drug or other known noxious substances.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, while in or about any City park, to:
1. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the
waters of any fountain, swimming pool, pond, lake, stream or any
other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary,
stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such waters any
substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result
in the pollution of such waters.
2. Bring into, dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes,
papers, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse or other
trash upon the grounds of any City park. Nor shall such refuse or
trash be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to bring into Frontier Park any
beverage containing alcohol in any percentage during the period of
special events occurring or scheduled to occur therein including the
Festival of the Little Hills, Fourth (4th) of July Celebration and the St.
Louis Symphony Concert. Licensed vendors shall be exempt from this
prohibition. No person shall have upon his/her person nor possess any
beverage containing alcohol in any percentage while leaving or
departing from Frontier Park during such period of special events.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, while in or about any City park, to:
1. Fail to comply with all applicable provisions of the State and City
motor vehicle traffic laws in regard to equipment and operation of
vehicles, together with such regulations as are contained in these
rules and any other provision of this Code and any other ordinance
of the City.
2. Fail to obey all traffic officers and park employees, such persons
being authorized and instructed to direct traffic whenever needed
in the parks in accordance with the provisions of such regulations
as may be issued by the Board or by the Director.
242. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
255.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
255.060
100:576
Section 255.070. Parking Regulations.243 [R.O. 2009 §99.17; CC
1981 §21-43; Ord. No. 77-23, 6-1-1977; Ord. No. 83-99, 11-2-1983]
3. Fail to observe all traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution,
stopping or parking and all others posted for proper control and to
safeguard life and property.
4. Drive or ride a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding fifteen (15)
miles per hour, except upon such roads as the Board or the Director
may designate, by posted signs, for faster travel.
5. Drive or park any vehicle on any park area except the paved park
roads or parking areas or such other areas as may on occasion be
specifically designated as temporary parking areas by the Board or
by the Director.
6. Drive or operate a vehicle in the opposite direction than what has
been designated.
7. Drive or ride a vehicle on a closed driveway past a barricade or
remove a barricade for the purpose of riding or driving a vehicle or
any other purpose onto a closed driveway or other area of a park.
a. The closing of park driveways or parks or any section of park
driveways or parks shall be at the direction of the Board, the
Police, Director or park supervisory employees.
b. The closing of park driveways or any section thereof shall be
accomplished by the erection of a suitable barrier across the
driveway.
c. The criteria for closing park driveways or any section thereof
shall be to promote public health, welfare and safety and to
protect public property.
8. Drive a truck upon the driveways, parking lots or any other areas,
except when making deliveries or operation or maintenance
supplies to the park or some social function operating under permit
of the Board or the Director. A panel or pickup truck shall be
permitted when used exclusively as a passenger vehicle.
9. Repair, service or maintain a vehicle; except, that this Subsection
(9) shall not apply to park vehicles and all workshops and garages
in the parks.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, while in or about any City park, to:
1. Park a vehicle in other than an established or designated area and
such use shall be in accordance with directions and instructions of
any attendant who may be present.
243. Cross Reference—As to alcohol prohibited or restricted in parks, §255.170.
Section
255.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
255.070
100:577
Section 255.080. Bicycle Regulations.244 [R.O. 2009 §99.18; CC 1981
§21-44; Ord. No. 77-23, 6-1-1977]
2. Park on a road or driveway at any time. No stopping or parking is
permitted on the left-hand side of any one-way road or driveway.
The only exception being by direction of the Director or officer in
charge when designated parking areas overflow.
3. Double park any vehicle on any road or parkway unless directed by
a park official.
4. Fail to use a muffler adequate to deaden the sound of the engine in
a motor vehicle.
B. All other parking restrictions are to be as posted by order of the Board,
the Director or the Police Department.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person while in or about any City park to
bring into or possess upon the paved portion of the roadway or within
any area for the designating of parking of automobiles any beverage
containing alcohol in any percent in an open container, open can or
bottle or to consume any alcoholic beverage upon the roads or driveway
or designated parking area.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, while in or about any City park, to:
1. Ride a bicycle on other than a paved vehicular road or path
designated for that purpose. A bicyclist shall be permitted to wheel
or push a bicycle by hand over any grassy area or wooded trail or
on any paved area reserved for pedestrian use.
2. Ride a bicycle other than on the right-hand side of the road paving
as close as conditions permit; bicycles shall be kept in single file
when two (2) or more are operating as a group. Bicyclists shall at
all times operate their machines with reasonable regard to the
safety of others and shall signal all turns and stops.
3. Ride any other person on a bicycle.
4. Leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack when such rack
is provided and there is space available.
5. Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or paving or set against trees or
in any place or position where other persons may trip over or be
injured by such bicycle.
6. Ride a bicycle on any road thirty (30) minutes after sunset or before
thirty (30) minutes before sunrise without an attached headlight
plainly visible at least two hundred (200) feet in front of such
bicycle and without a red taillight or red reflector plainly visible
from at least one hundred (100) feet from the rear of such bicycle.
244. Cross References—As to bicycles generally, §§365.010 et seq.; as to penalty, §100.150.
Section
255.070
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
255.090
100:578
Section 255.090. Bathing and Swimming.245 [R.O. 2009 §99.19; CC
1981 §21-45(a); Ord. No. 77-23, 6-1-1977; Ord. No. 81-41, 5-6-1981]
Section 255.100. Hunting and Firearms.246 [R.O. 2009 §99.20; CC
1981 §21-45(b); Ord. No. 77-23, 6-1-1977; Ord. No. 81-41, 5-6-1981;
Ord. No. 86-214, 8-13-1986]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, while in or about any City park, to:
1. Swim, wade, bathe or wash in any waters or waterways in or
adjacent to any park, except in such waters and at such places as
are provided therefor and in compliance with such regulations as
are herein set forth or may be hereafter adopted. Nor shall any
person frequent any waters or places customarily designated for
the purpose of swimming or bathing or congregate thereat when
such activity is prohibited by the Director upon a finding that such
use of the water would be dangerous or otherwise inadvisable.
2. Frequent any swimming pool, bathhouse, waters or places
designated for the purpose of swimming or bathing or congregate
thereat, except between such hours of the day as shall be
designated by the Director for such purposes for each individual
area.
3. Allow himself/herself to be so covered with a bathing suit as to
indecently expose his/her person. No person shall appear in
bathing costume at any place in the parks except within the limits
of designated bathing places or areas.
4. Dress or undress on any area or in any vehicle, toilet or other
places, except in such bathing houses or structures as may be
provided for that purpose.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, while in or about any City park, to
hunt, trap or pursue wildlife at any time. No person shall use, carry or
possess firearms of any description or air pistols, spring guns, bows and
arrows, slings or any other forms of weapons potentially inimical to
wildlife and dangerous to human safety or any instrument that can be
loaded with fire blank cartridges or any kind of trapping device.
Shooting into park areas from beyond park boundaries is forbidden.
The carrying, possession or use of firearms of any description or air
rifles, air pistols, spring guns, bows and arrows, slings or any other
forms of weapons shall be permissible while such weapons are being
carried to and from a designated area of use of the aforementioned
weapons. All such weapons shall be carried in an unloaded and in
carrying cases or broken down.
245. Cross References—As to bathing while insufficiently clothed, §215.710; as to penalty,
§100.150.
246. Cross References—As to weapons regulations, §§215.950 et seq.; as to penalty, §100.150.
Section
255.090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
255.100
100:579
Section 255.110. Picnic Area Use.247 [R.O. 2009 §99.21; CC 1981
§21-45(c); Ord. No. 77-23, 6-1-1977; Ord. No. 81-41, 5-6-1981]
Section 255.120. Camping.248 [R.O. 2009 §99.22; CC 1981 §21-45(d);
Ord. No. 77-23, 6-1-1977; Ord. No. 81-41, 5-6-1981]
It shall be unlawful for any person, while in or about any City park, to camp
in other than the day camp area of McNair Park, which area shall only
be available for organized camping and used by persons under adequate
supervision and at the direction and permission of the Director, which
permission shall only be granted to bona fide camping organizations. No
B. Any civic, fraternal, benevolent or other organization may make
application to the Director of the Park Department for a permit to hold a
"black powder shoot", using muzzle-loaders, as a part of major festivals
and celebrations held in Frontier Park. The application shall specify the
types of muzzle-loaders to be used, the types of powder and projectiles
and the time and place of the use. The Director, after consultation with
the Chief of Police, may issue the permit if, in the Director's opinion, the
use of muzzle-loaders will not endanger the public peace or public
safety.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, while in or about any City park, to:
1. Picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated for that
purpose. Attendants shall have the authority to regulate the
activities in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion and
to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all.
Visitors shall comply with any directions given to achieve this end.
2. Violate the regulation that use of the individual fireplaces together
with tables and benches follows generally the rule of "first come,
first served".
3. Use any portion of the picnic areas, tables or any building or
structure therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion
of other persons, nor shall any person use such area and facilities
for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded.
4. Have exclusive use of any area unless granted such permission by
the Director.
5. Leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished and
before all trash in the nature of boxes, papers, cans, bottles,
garbage and other refuse is placed in the disposal receptacles
where provided. If no such trash receptacles are available, then
refuse and trash shall be carried away from the park area by the
picnicker to be properly disposed of elsewhere.
247. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
248. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
255.100
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
255.120
100:580
person shall set up a shack or any other temporary shelter, other than tents,
for the purpose of overnight camping; nor shall any movable structure or
special vehicle be used for such purposes, such as house trailers, camp
trailers, camp wagons or the like.
Section 255.130. Games.249 [R.O. 2009 §99.23; CC 1981 §21-45(e);
Ord. No. 77-23, 6-1-1977; Ord. No. 81-41, 5-6-1981; Ord. No. 04-71,
3-26-2004]
Section 255.140. Horseback Riding.250 [R.O. 2009 §99.24; CC 1981
§21-45(f); Ord. No. 77-23, 6-1-1977; Ord. No. 81-41, 5-6-1981]
It shall be unlawful for any person, while in or about any City park, to ride
a horse or pony or allow to run at large a horse, pony or other similar
animal, except in conjunction with a civic parade sponsored by a bona fide
organization of the City with the permission of the Director. Such horseback
riding shall be confined to the driveways of the park. When permitted in
parades, horses shall be thoroughly broken, properly restrained, ridden
with due care and shall not be allowed to graze or go unattended, nor shall
they be hitched to any rock, tree or shrub.
Section 255.150. Tennis Courts. [R.O. 2009 §99.25; CC 1981
§21-45(g); Ord. No. 77-23, 6-1-1977; Ord. No. 81-41, 5-6-1981]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, while in or about any City park, to:
1. Take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown or
otherwise propelled objects such as balls, golf, horseshoes, stones,
arrows, javelins or use of any radio controlled model planes or
radio controlled model boats, except in areas set apart for such
forms of recreation. The playing of games involving frisbees, wiffle
ball, nerf ball, volleyball and badminton will be allowed except in
parking lots and areas of public congestion.
2. Participate in organized football and soccer practice and games
before August thirtieth (30th) of any year in any park under the
control of the Board; provided however, that football and soccer
practice and games can be participated in on a year-round basis at
the St. Charles Sports Complex.
3. Play so-called beer contests of all descriptions in any park under
the control of the Board with the exception of Ed Bales Park and
Elm Park.
A. Players shall limit play to one (1) hour for singles or doubles when other
tennis players are waiting to play.
1. Players must wear tennis shoes.
249. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
250. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
255.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
255.150
100:581
Section 255.160. Musical Instruments and Sound Equipment.251
[R.O. 2009 §99.26; CC 1981 §21-45(h); Ord. No. 77-23, 6-1-1977;
Ord. No. 81-41, 5-6-1981]
Section 255.170. Alcohol or Drugs Prohibited in Park.252 [R.O. 2009
§99.27; CC 1981 §21-46(1—7); Ord. No. 80-4, 1-16-1980; Ord. No.
81-41, 5-6-1981; Ord. No. 82-9, 3-17-1982; Ord. No. 82-59,
2. Persons sixteen (16) years of age and older and who are residents
of the City will have priority to use tennis courts after 6:00 P.M.
3. Tennis courts may be reserved by the Park Department for
practices, games, lessons or tournaments for a definite period of
time as determined by the Board, Director or supervisory park
employees.
4. Players or spectators shall not sit or stand on the ends of the
courts.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, while in or about any City park, to
operate or play any musical instrument, radio, mechanical record or
tape player, loudspeaker, public address system or sound amplifying
equipment of any kind within the boundaries of any park in such a
manner as to cause the sound emanating therefrom to exceed a
loudness of seventy-five (75) decibels when measured on the seventy
(70) decibel scale at a distance of fifteen (15) feet from the sound
source, without a written permit issued by the Board or the Director.
B. In the event the operation or playing of any musical instrument, radio,
mechanical record or tape player, loudspeaker, public address system
or sound amplifying equipment shall unduly disturb other park
occupants or persons living near the parks, the Director, Police, Park
Security, Park Police, Park Patrol, Park Ranger and any supervisory
park employee or attendant shall have the authority to order the person
responsible for such disturbances to reduce the level of sound to a
sound level that will not unduly disturb other park occupants or persons
living near any park, regardless of any permit or sound levels.
C. In the event the person responsible for disturbing other park occupants
or persons living near any park, by operating or playing any musical
instrument, radio, mechanical record or tape player, loudspeaker,
public address system or sound amplifying equipment of any
description, refuses to reduce the sound level as directed by the
Director, Police, Park Security, Park Police, Park Patrol, Park Ranger or
any security service personnel employed by the Board and any
supervisory park employee or attendant, such person shall be subject to
arrest and/or ejection from the park, regardless of any permit.
251. Cross References—As to noise control, ch. 230; as to penalty, §100.150.
252. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
255.150
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
255.170
100:582
8-18-1982; Ord. No. 86-213, 8-13-1986; Ord. No. 97-249, 8-14-1997;
Ord. No. 02-191, 7-26-2002; Ord. No. 06-152, 6-27-2006]
Section 255.180. Other Prohibited Behavior.253 [R.O. 2009 §99.28;
CC 1981 §21-46(8—19); Ord. No. 77-23, 6-1-1977; Ord. No. 80-4,
1-16-1980; Ord. No. 81-41, 5-6-1981; Ord. No. 82-9, 3-17-1982; Ord.
No. 82-59, 8-28-1983; Ord. No. 86-213, 8-13-1986; Ord. No. 13-005
§1, 1-11-2013]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, while in or about any City park, to:
1. Alcohol generally. Possess intoxicating beverages or to drink
intoxicating beverages when said beverages have an alcohol
content in excess of fourteen percent (14%) by weight, except that
the foregoing shall not apply to functions in Memorial Hall.
Functions in areas or facilities in which the alcohol content of
intoxicating beverages is not in excess of fourteen percent (14%) by
weight is allowed under permits issued by the Park Board; or to
sales made by the Parks Department or by vendors licensed to
make such sales by the Park Board.
2. Keg or draught beer. Have or cause to be brought in keg or draught
beer of any kind, with the exception of the Ed Bales Area in Point
DuSable Park and Schneider/Kiwanis Park, except that the
foregoing shall not apply to the licensed sale of intoxicating
beverages sold under the supervision of the Director, nor shall it
apply to the licensed sale of five percent (5%) keg or draught beer
by a bona fide organization of the City operating under the
permission of the Public Park Board.
3. Beverage coolers. Have a beverage cooler with beer in it on the
athletic fields or in the spectator areas of the athletic fields of any
park under the control of the Board.
4. Beverage cooler capacity. Have or cause to be brought in beverage
in larger than three (3) case capacity.
5. Drunkenness. Have entered or be under the influence of
intoxicating liquor.
6. Alcohol consumption by minors. Drink or consume alcoholic
beverages who has not attained the age of twenty-one (21) years.
7. Drugs. Be under the influence of drugs, consume or use drugs or
possess drugs of any kind, type or description unless prescribed by
a doctor of medicine.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, while in or about any City park, to:
253. Cross References—As to alcohol in frontier park, §255.050(C); as to penalty, §100.150.
Section
255.170
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
255.180
100:583
1. Explosives and the like. Bring or have in his/her possession or set
off, except in designated areas, or otherwise cause to explode or
discharge or burn any firecrackers, torpedoes, rockets or other
fireworks or explosives of inflammable material or discharge them
or throw them into any such area from land or highway adjacent
thereto. This prohibition includes any substances or compound that
would be dangerous from any of the foregoing standpoints. The
area in Bales Park, that is north of the treatment plant, is to be
designated as a model rocket launching site for rockets that
conform to the specifications of the National Association of
Rocketry and which are not more than one-half (½) pound in
weight.
2. Domestic animals. Be responsible for the entry of a dog or other
domestic animal, unless such animal shall be restrained at all times
on adequate leashes not greater than six (6) feet in length. No
person shall be responsible for the entry of a dog or other domestic
animal whether or not restrained by a leash during the period of
special events at the Frontier Park including the Festival of the
Little Hills, Fourth (4th) of July Celebration and the St. Louis
Symphony Concert. The prohibition shall not apply to service
animals, K-9 Corps dogs or to parade animals and horses being
ridden as part of crowd control at special events. For purposes of
this Section, the words "service animals" mean dogs that are
individually trained to do work or perform tasks for people with
disabilities as those words are defined in the regulations or any
amendment thereto implementing the Americans with Disabilities
Act.
3. Reserved fields and the like. Occupy any seat or bench, baseball
diamond, building, football field, soccer field, tennis court,
horseshoe court or enter into or loiter or remain in any pavilion or
other park structure or grounds or section thereof which may be
reserved and designated by the Board or the Director for use by a
person.
4. Attire. Appear at any place in other than proper clothing, with the
exception of restricted bathing areas.
5. Soliciting. Solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether
public or private.
6. Fires. Build or attempt to build a fire on the ground, paving or any
other areas except under such regulations as may be designated by
the Director.
7. Closed areas. Enter an area posted as "Closed To The Public"; nor
shall any person use or abet the use of any area in violation of
posted notices.
8. Ice skating. Go onto ice on any waters, except such areas as are
designated as skating fields; provided a safety signal is displayed.
Section
255.180
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
255.180
100:584
Section 255.190. Advertising in Park.254 [R.O. 2009 §99.29; CC 1981
§21-47; Ord. No. 77-23, 6-1-1977; Ord. No. 06-191, 7-28-2006]
Section 255.200. Camping Prohibited On Non-Park Property. [R.O.
2009 §99.30; Ord. No. 06-261, 9-22-2006; Ord. No. 07-162,
6-11-2007]
No person shall camp, set up a tent or temporary shelter for the purpose
of overnight camping; nor shall any movable structure or special vehicle,
such as house trailers, camp trailers, camp wagons or recreational vehicle,
9. Loitering, disorderly conduct and the like. Sit or lounge on vehicles
without the permission of the owners; or engage in loud,
boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language; or
engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a breach of
the public peace; or create a nuisance.
10. Permits. Fail to produce and exhibit any permit from the Director
he/she claims to have, upon request of any authorized person who
shall desire to inspect the same for the purpose of enforcing
compliance with any ordinance or rule.
11. Disturbing, and the like, others. Disturb or interfere unreasonably
with any person or party occupying any area or participating in any
activity under the authority of a permit.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, while in or about any City park, to:
1. Expose or offer for sale any article or thing or to station or place
any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of
any such article or thing. Exception here made as to any regularly
licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority and
regulation of the Board or the Director.
2. Announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way to any
article or service for sale or hire.
3. Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement
or inscription whatever on any public land, building, wall, fence,
tree, post or highway or road adjacent to a park, except as
permitted by Section 400.1630(4).
4. Pass out handbills, newspapers, pamphlets, newsletters, literature
or pictures, designed to promote the sale of any item or thing,
without the written permission of the Board or the Director.
5. The provision of this Section relating to merchandising, advertising
and signs shall not apply to regularly licensed concessionaires or
organizations acting under authority and regulation of the Board,
the Director or in Memorial Hall as approved by the Director.
254. Cross References—As to signs, generally, §§400.1370 et seq.
Section
255.180
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
255.200
100:585
be used for such purposes on any non-park property. The Mayor shall have
the authority to waive the prohibition of this Section.
Section
255.200
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
255.200
100:586
ARTICLE III
Administration and Enforcement
Section 255.210. Permits Required For Certain Activities. [R.O.
2009 §99.40; CC 1981 §21-51; Ord. No. 77-23, 6-1-1977]
A. Required. A permit shall be obtained from the Board or the Director by
any person before participating in the following park activities:
sponsorship of a public picnic, public celebration or event or concert;
organized use of picnic grounds by persons, schools, companies and the
like, baseball or softball fields, tennis courts, soccer fields, football
fields and any other areas or fields to be used for scheduled practice,
league play, games or tournament play.
B. Application. A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file
an application with the appropriate Director. The application shall
state:
1. The name and address of the applicant.
2. The name and address of the person sponsoring the activity.
3. The day and hours for which the permit is desired.
4. The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired.
5. An estimate of anticipated attendance.
6. Any other information which the Director shall find reasonably
necessary for a fair determination as to whether a permit should be
issued.
C. Standards For Issuance.
1. The Director shall issue a permit when he/she finds:
a. The proposed activity of use of the park will not reasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of
the park.
b. The proposed activity and use will not reasonably interfere
with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare,
safety and recreation.
c. The proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to
incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
d. The proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or
burdensome expense or Police operation by the City.
e. The facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at
the day and hour required in the application.
Section
255.210
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
255.210
100:587
Section 255.220. Enforcement of Park Rules and Regulations. [R.O.
2009 §99.41; CC 1981 §21-52; Ord. No. 77-23, 6-1-1977; Ord. No.
88-147, 7-20-1988; Ord. No. 90-168, 6-21-1990]
2. In the event the Director finds he/she is unable to issue a permit
due to the circumstances involved, he/she is to submit the request
to the Board for determination.
D. Appeal. Within thirty (30) days after receipt of an application, the
Director shall apprise an applicant in writing of his/her reasons for
refusing a permit and any aggrieved person shall have the right to
appeal in writing within ten (10) days to the Board which shall consider
the application under the standards set forth in Subsection (B) of this
Section and sustain or override the Director's decision within thirty (30)
days or at the next regular meeting of the Board. The decision of the
Board shall be final.
E. Effect Of Permit. A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and
regulations and all applicable provisions of this Code and any other
ordinance of the City fully as though such were inserted in such permit.
The permittee agrees that all persons involved in the presentation of
the event will observe the terms and conditions of the permit, when
issued, and will comply with requests of park officials concerning traffic
arrangements, crowd control measures, use of park facilities and sound
that may unduly disturb other patrons of the park or citizens of the City.
F. Liability Of Permittee. The person to whom a permit is issued shall be
liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whatever
by reason of the negligence of the person to whom such a permit shall
have been issued.
G. Revocation. The Board or the Director shall have authority to revoke a
permit upon finding of violation of any rule, code or ordinance provision
or upon good cause shown.
A. Enforcement Officials. The Director, Police, Park Security, Park Police,
Park Patrol, Park Ranger or any security service personnel employed by
the Board and any supervisory park employee or attendant shall, in
connection with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the rules
and regulations.
B. Arrest Or Ejection. The Director, Police, Park Security, Park Police, Park
Patrol, Park Ranger or any security service personnel employed by the
Board and any supervisory park employee or attendant shall have the
authority to have arrested or to eject from the park any person acting in
violation of park rules and regulations or any code or ordinance
provision governing the parks of the City.
C. Seizure Of Property. The Director, Police, Park Security, Park Patrol,
Park Ranger or any security service personnel employed by the Board
and any supervisory park employee or attendant shall have the
Section
255.210
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
255.220
100:588
authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing, animal or device
in the park used in violation of these rules and regulations.
Section
255.220
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
255.220
100:589
Chapter 260
SMOKING AND NON-SMOKING ESTABLISHMENT SIGN
REGULATIONS
Section 260.010. Title. [Ord. No. 13-188 §1, 10-1-2013255]
This Chapter shall be known as "Smoking and Non-Smoking Establishment
Sign Regulations."
Section 260.020. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 13-188 §1, 10-1-2013]
Section 260.030. Definitions. [Ord. No. 13-188 §1, 10-1-2013]
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this Chapter, shall be
construed as defined in this Section:
BUSINESS — A sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation
or other business entity, either for-profit or not-for-profit, including retail
establishments where goods or services are sold; professional corporations
and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural
or other professional services are delivered; and private clubs.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT — An area under the control of a public or
private employer that employees normally frequent during the course of
employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, private offices,
employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms,
classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways and vehicles. A private residence
is not a "place of employment" unless it is used as a licensed child-care,
licensed adult day-care or licensed health-care facility.
PUBLIC PLACE — An enclosed area to which the public is invited or in
which the public is permitted, including, but not limited to, banks, bars,
educational facilities, gaming facilities, health-care facilities, hotels and
motels, laundromats, public transportation vehicles and facilities, reception
areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments,
retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, sports arenas,
theaters and waiting rooms. A private residence is not a "public place"
unless it is used as a licensed child-care, licensed adult day-care or licensed
health-care facility.
RESTAURANT — An eating establishment, including, but not limited to,
coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands and private and public school
cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests or
employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is
prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term "restaurant"
shall include a bar area within the restaurant and outdoor seating areas.
SMOKING — Inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any ignited, lighted
or heated cigar, cigarette, pipe or other smoking product, equipment or
255. Editor's Note: Section 4 of this ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2014.
Section
255.220
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
260.030
100:590
apparatus involving tobacco or other plant material or nicotine in any form,
except shall not include a vapor product.[Ord. No. 15-051 §1, 3-17-2015;
Ord. No. 15-105 §1, 5-19-2015]
VAPOR PRODUCT — Any non-combustible product containing nicotine that
employs a heating element, power source, electronic circuit, or other
electronic, chemical or mechanical means, regardless of shape or size,
that can be used to produce vapor from nicotine in a solution or other
form. Vapor product includes any electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device and any
vapor cartridge or other container of nicotine in a solution or other form
that is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic
cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device.
Vapor product does not include any non-combustible product containing
nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether chewed,
absorbed, dissolved, or ingested by any other means and does not include
any vapor product, tobacco product or any product regulated as a drug or
device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter
V of the United States Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act or any substance
containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe
tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, or dipping tobacco.[Ord. No. 15-105§1,
5-19-2015]
Section 260.040. Declaration of Establishment As Smoking or Non-
Smoking. [Ord. No. 13-188 §1, 10-1-2013; Ord. No. 15-105§2,
5-19-2015]
An owner, operator, manager or other person in control of a business, place
of employment, public place and restaurant shall post a sign conforming
to the requirements of Section 260.050 that identifies the entire business,
place of employment, public place or restaurant as a place where smoking
or the use of vapor products is prohibited or smoking or the use of vapor
products is permitted.
Section 260.050. Posting of Signs. [Ord. No. 13-188 §1, 10-1-2013;
Ord. No. 14-084 §1, 4-15-2014; Ord. No. 15-105§3, 5-19-2015]
Every business, place of employment, public place or restaurant shall be
clearly and conspicuously posted at every entrance with a sign clearly
stating that smoking or the use of vapor products is prohibited or that
smoking or the use of vapor products is permitted. For establishments
that prohibit smoking or the use of vapor products in certain areas of
the establishment and permit smoking or the use of vapor products in
certain areas of the establishment, each area of the establishment shall
be clearly and conspicuously posted at every entrance to the area where
smoking or the use of vapor products is prohibited or smoking or the use
of vapor products is permitted with a sign clearly stating that smoking or
the use of vapor products is prohibited or that smoking or the use of vapor
products is permitted. An establishment may, at its own discretion, permit
or prohibit smoking while at the same time permitting or prohibiting the use
Section
260.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
260.050
100:591
of vapor products, so long as appropriate signage is posted. Such signage
shall consist of letters not less than one (1) inch in height or the universal
smoking or no-smoking symbol, or similar symbols permitting or prohibiting
the use of vapor products, not less than two and one-half (2.5) inches by two
and one-half (2.5) inches when squared off.
Section 260.060. Other Applicable Laws. [Ord. No. 13-188 §1,
10-1-2013]
Section 260.070. Penalty. [Ord. No. 13-188 §1, 10-1-2013]
Violation of this Chapter is punishable under Section 100.150.
Section 260.080. Severability. [Ord. No. 13-188 §1, 10-1-2013]
If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this Chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid,
that invalidity shall not affect the other provisions of this Chapter which can
be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end
the provisions of this Chapter are declared to be severable.
Chapter 300
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Cross References—As to general penalty, §100.150; as to abandoned
vehicles, ch. 375; as to parades, ch. 370; as to streets and sidewalks, ch.
505; as to vehicles for hire, ch. 645.
Section 300.010. Definitions.256 [R.O. 2009 §70.01; CC 1981 §18-1;
Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975; Ord. No. 75-41, 8-6-1975; Ord. No. 87-97,
5-13-1987; Ord. No. 89-25, 2-8-1989; Ord. No. 91-51, 3-8-1991; Ord.
No. 96-49, 2-21-1996; Ord. No. 97-70, 3-5-1997; Ord. No. 01-212,
9-21-2001; Ord. No. 03-131, 6-4-2003]
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ALLEY OR ALLEYWAY — Any street with a roadway of less than twenty (20)
feet in width.
A. This Chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking
where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws.
B. The sign-posting requirements of this Chapter shall be exempt from the
requirements of Chapter 400, Article XVI, Sign Regulations, and Article
II, District Regulations, Division 2, "SD" Superimposed District
Regulations, Sections 400.300 through 400.380.
256. State Law References—Similar provisions, §§300.010, 301.010(10), RSMo.
Section
260.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
300.010
100:592
BUSINESS DISTRICT — The territory contiguous to and including a
highway when within any six hundred (600) feet along the highway there
are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes including, but not
limited to, hotels, banks or office buildings, railroad stations and public
buildings which occupy at least three hundred (300) feet of frontage on
one (1) side or three hundred (300) feet collectively on both sides of the
highway.
CENTRAL BUSINESS (OR TRAFFIC) DISTRICT — All streets and portions
of streets within the area described by City ordinance as such.
CLASS I BICYCLE ROUTE — A completely separated right-of-way
designated exclusively for bicycles and used for recreational travel.
CLASS II BICYCLE ROUTE — A restricted right-of-way for preferential use
by bicycles.
CLASS III BICYCLE ROUTE — A roadway that is officially designated as a
bicycle route, but shared by motorized vehicles and bicycles.
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE — A motor vehicle designed or regularly
used for carrying freight and merchandise, or more than eight (8)
passengers but not including vanpools or shuttle buses.
CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY — Every highway, street or roadway in
respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons
have no legal right of access to or from the same except at such points only
and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having
jurisdiction over the highway, street or roadway.
CROSSWALK —
CURB LOADING ZONE — A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or
materials.
DE FACTO PUBLIC STREETS — The following are de facto public streets:
Ami Court
Avignon Court
Avignon Parkway
Bayonne Drive
Beau Court
Bel Rae Court
The part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the
edges of the traversable roadway;
1.
Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the
surface.
2.
Section
300.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
300.010
100:593
Diekamp Lane
Duclair Parkway
Fleur Drive
Hillcrest Place
King Drive (Rosewall to Forest Hills)
Kircher Drive
DRIVER — Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE — A self-balancing,
two- non-tandem wheeled device designed to transport only one (1) person,
with an electric propulsion system with an average power of seven hundred
fifty (750) watts (one (1) horsepower), whose maximum speed on a paved
level surface, when powered solely by such a propulsion system while
ridden by an operator who weighs one hundred seventy (170) pounds, is
less than twenty (20) miles per hour.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — A vehicle of any of the following types:
A vehicle operated by the State Highway Patrol, the State Water Patrol,
the Missouri Capitol Police, a Conservation Agent or a State Park
Ranger, those vehicles operated by enforcement personnel of the State
Highways and Transportation Commission, Police or Fire Department,
Sheriff, Constable or Deputy Sheriff, Federal Law Enforcement Officer
authorized to carry firearms and to make arrests for violations of the
laws of the United States, Traffic Officer or Coroner or by a privately
owned emergency vehicle company;
1.
A vehicle operated as an ambulance or operated commercially for the
purpose of transporting emergency medical supplies or organs;
2.
Any vehicle qualifying as an emergency vehicle pursuant to Section
305.030 of this Title;
3.
Any wrecker or tow truck or a vehicle owned and operated by a public
utility or public service corporation while performing emergency
service;
4.
Any vehicle transporting equipment designed to extricate human
beings from the wreckage of a motor vehicle;
5.
Any vehicle designated to perform emergency functions for a civil
defense or emergency management agency established pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 44, RSMo.;
6.
Any vehicle operated by an authorized employee of the Department of
Corrections who, as part of the employee's official duties, is responding
to a riot, disturbance, hostage incident, escape or other critical
situation where there is the threat of serious physical injury or death,
responding to mutual-aid call from another criminal justice agency, or
7.
Section
300.010
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
300.010
100:594
FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE — A space adjacent to a curb for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight (or
passengers).
HIGHWAY — See "STREET OR HIGHWAY".
IMPROVED HIGHWAY — Any highway which has been paved with gravel,
macadam, concrete, brick or asphalt or surfaced in such manner that it has
a hard, smooth surface.
INTERSECTION —
LANED ROADWAY — A roadway which is divided into two (2) or more
clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
LIVE LOAD — The weight of the cargo or passengers of a commercial motor
vehicle in addition to that of the chassis and body of the vehicle.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any self-propelled vehicle not operated exclusively
upon tracks, except farm tractors and motorized bicycles.
MOTORCYCLE — Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use
of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in
contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor.
MOTORIZED BICYCLE — Any two-wheeled or three-wheeled device having
an automatic transmission and a motor with a cylinder capacity of not more
than fifty (50) cubic centimeters, which produces less than three (3) gross
brake horsepower and is capable of propelling the device at a maximum
speed of not more than thirty (30) miles per hour on level ground.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD — Whenever certain hours are named herein,
they shall mean standard time or daylight-saving time as may be in current
use in the City.
in accompanying an ambulance which is transporting an offender to a
medical facility;
Any vehicle designated to perform hazardous substance emergency
functions established pursuant to the provisions of Sections 260.500 to
260.550, RSMo.
8.
The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral
curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways
of two (2) highways which join one another at, or approximately at,
right angles or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict;
1.
Where a highway includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more
apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by
an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
In the event such intersecting highway also includes two (2) roadways
thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways
of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
2.
Section
300.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
300.010
100:595
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES — All signs, signals, markings and
devices not inconsistent with this Chapter placed or erected by authority of
a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic.
OWNER — Any person, firm, corporation or association who holds the legal
title of a vehicle or in the event a vehicle is the subject of an agreement
for the conditional sale or lease thereof with the right of purchase upon
performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and with an
immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee or
in the event a mortgagor of a vehicle is entitled to possession, then such
conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner for
the purpose of this Chapter.
PARK OR PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE — A place adjacent to a curb reserved
for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of
passengers.
PEDESTRIAN — Any person afoot.
PERSON — Every natural person, firm, co-partnership, association or
corporation.
POLICE OFFICER — Every officer of the Police Department of the City or
any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for
violations of traffic regulations.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY — Every way or place in private ownership
and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or
implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
PROVISIONAL STREET — Any street which is contiguous only to singlefamily
residential property and which has been accepted by the City in
accordance with Section 505.330.
RAILROAD — A carrier of persons or property upon cars operated upon
stationary rails.
RAILROAD TRAIN — A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Any unit primarily designed as temporary
living quarters for recreation, camping or travel use which either contains
its own motive power as in the case of, but not limited to, motor homes,
motor coaches, mini-motor homes or recreational vans or is permanently
mounted on a vehicle such as, but not limited to, a truck camper or pickup
camper.
RESIDENCE DISTRICT — The territory contiguous to and including a
highway not comprising a business district when the property on such
highway for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is in the main
improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business.
Section
300.010
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
300.010
100:596
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a
lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching
under such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise
to danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the other.
ROADWAY — That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a
highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term "roadway",
as used herein, shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all
such roadways collectively.
SAFETY ZONE — The area or space officially set apart within a roadway
for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked
or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone.
SCOOTER — A device with two (2) wheels, a footboard between and steered
by a handlebar.
SIDEWALK — The portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for use of
pedestrians.
SKATEBOARD — A single platform mounted on wheels, which is propelled
solely by human power and which is steered by a set of trucks or other
devices which aid in controlling the movement or direction of the platform.
STAND OR STANDING — The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving
or discharging passengers.
STATE HIGHWAY — A highway maintained by the State as a part of the
State highway system.
STOP — When required, complete cessation from movement.
STOP OR STOPPING — When prohibited, any halting even momentarily of
a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a Police Officer or
traffic control sign or signal.
STREET OR HIGHWAY — The entire width between the lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the uses of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel, the entire width between the lines of de
facto public streets and the entire width between the lines of provisional
streets.
THROUGH HIGHWAY — Every highway or portion thereof on which
vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way and at the entrances to
which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to
yield right-of-way to vehicles on such through highway in obedience to
either a stop sign or a yield sign, when such signs are erected as provided
in this Chapter.
Section
300.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
300.010
100:597
TRAFFIC — Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and
other conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for
purposes of travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL — Any device, whether manually, electrically
or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and
to proceed.
VEHICLE — Any mechanical device on wheels designed primarily for use or
used on streets, except motorized bicycles, vehicles propelled or drawn by
horses or human power or vehicles used exclusively on fixed rails or tracks
or cotton trailers or motorized wheelchairs operated by physically disabled
persons.
Chapter 305
OBEDIENCE TO AND EFFECT OF TRAFFIC LAWS
Section 305.010. Public Employees To Obey Traffic Regulations.257
[R.O. 2009 §70.10; CC 1981 §18-3; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned
by or used in the service of the United States Government, this State,
County or City and it shall be unlawful for any driver to violate any of the
provisions of this Chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this Chapter.
Section 305.020. Persons Propelling Pushcarts or Riding
Animals.258 [R.O. 2009 §70.11; CC 1981 §18-4; Ord. No. 75-35,
8-6-1975]
Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an animal upon a roadway
and every person driving any animal-driven vehicle shall be subject to the
provisions of this Chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except
those provisions of this Chapter which by their very nature can have no
application.
Section 305.030. Authorized Emergency Vehicles.259 [R.O. 2009
§70.12; CC 1981 §18-5; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
A. The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator
of the law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire
alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this Section, but subject
to the conditions herein stated.
B. The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
257. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.095, RSMo.
258. Cross Reference—As to animals and fowl, ch. 210. State Law Reference—Similar
provisions, §300.085, RSMo.
259. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.100, RSMo.
Section
300.010
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
305.030
100:598
Section 305.040. Obedience To Police and Fire Officials.260 [R.O.
2009 §70.13; CC 1981 §18-22; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
No person shall knowingly fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of a Police Officer or Fire Department official.
Section 305.050. License Required For Operation of Motorized
Bicycle. [R.O. 2009 §70.14; Ord. No. 03-131, 6-4-2003]
No person shall operate a motorized bicycle on any street in the City unless
the person has a valid license to operate a motor vehicle.
Chapter 310
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES, SIGNS, SIGNALS AND
MARKINGS
Section 310.010. Authority To Install Traffic Control Devices.261
[R.O. 2009 §70.25; CC 1981 §18-360; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
The City Traffic Engineer shall place and maintain traffic control signs,
signals and devices when and as required under this Title and any other
traffic ordinance of the City to make effective the applicable provisions of
this Title and any ordinance of the City and may place and maintain such
1. Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this Chapter;
2. Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
3. Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he/she does not
endanger life or property;
4. Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning
in specified directions.
C. The exemptions granted to an emergency vehicle pursuant to
Subsection (B) of this Section shall apply only when the driver of any
such vehicle while in motion sounds audible signal by bell, siren, or
exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle
is equipped with at least one (1) lighted lamp displaying a red light or
blue light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance
of five hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle.
D. The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety
of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his/her reckless disregard for the safety of others.
260. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.080, RSMo.
261. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.130, RSMo.
Section
305.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
310.010
100:599
additional traffic control devices as he/she may deem necessary to regulate
traffic under this Traffic Code and any other applicable ordinance of the City
or under State law or to guide or warn traffic.
Section 310.020. Manual and Specifications For Traffic Control
Devices.262 [R.O. 2009 §70.26; CC 1981 §18-361; Ord. No. 75-35,
8-6-1975]
All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual
and specifications approved by the State Highway Commission or resolution
adopted by the City Council. All signs or signals required hereunder for
a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and
location throughout the City. All traffic control devices so erected and not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Title shall be official traffic control
devices.
Section 310.030. Obedience To Traffic Control Devices.263 [R.O.
2009 §70.27; CC 1981 §18-362]
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic
control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the provisions
of this Title, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or Police Officer, subject
to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in
this Title.
Section 310.040. Official Traffic Control Devices.264 [R.O. 2009
§70.28; CC 1981 §18-363; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
No provision of this Title for which official traffic control devices are
required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and
place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper position and
sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinary observant person. Whenever
a particular Section does not state that official traffic control devices are
required, such Section shall be effective even though no devices are erected
or in place.
Section 310.050. Presumption of Legality. [R.O. 2009 §70.29; CC
1981 §18-364; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
A. Whenever official traffic control devices are placed in position
approximately conforming to the requirements of this Title, such
devices shall be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or
direction of lawful authority, unless the contrary shall be established by
competent evidence.
B. Any official traffic control device placed pursuant to the provisions of
this Title and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements
262. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.135, RSMo.
263. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.140, RSMo.
264. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.145, RSMo.
Section
310.010
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
310.050
100:600
Section 310.060. Traffic Control Signal Legend.265 [R.O. 2009
§70.30; CC 1981 §18-365; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
pertaining to such devices shall be presumed to comply with the
requirements of this Title, unless the contrary shall be established by
competent evidence.
A. Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting
different colored lights or colored lighted arrows successively one (1) at
a time or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall be
used, except for special pedestrian signals carrying a work legend and
said lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and
pedestrians as follows:
1. Green indication.
a. Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed
straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place
prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including
vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to
other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the
intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is
exhibited;
b. Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in
combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such
arrow or such other movement as is permitted by other
indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic shall
yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an
adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the
intersection;
c. Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as
provided in Section 310.070, pedestrians facing any green
signal, except when the sole green signal is a turn arrow, may
proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked
crosswalk.
2. Steady yellow indication.
a. Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby
warned that the related green movement is being terminated
or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately
thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the
intersection;
b. Pedestrians facing a steady yellow signal, unless otherwise
directed by a pedestrian control signal as provided in Section
265. Cross References—As to pedestrians, §§345.010 et seq. State Law Reference—Similar
provisions, §300.155, RSMo.
Section
310.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
310.060
100:601
Section 310.070. Pedestrian Control Signals.266 [R.O. 2009 §70.31;
CC 1981 §18-367; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
310.070, are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to
cross the roadway before a red indication is shown and no
pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway.
3. Steady red indication.
a. Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal alone shall stop
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection
and shall remain standing until a green indication is shown.
b. The driver of a vehicle which is stopped as close as practicable
at the entrance to the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, if none, then at the entrance to the intersection
in obedience to a red signal may cautiously enter the
intersection to make a right turn but shall yield the right-ofway
to pedestrians and other traffic proceeding as directed by
the signal at the intersection, except that the State Highway
Commission, with reference to an intersection involving a
State highway and local authorities with reference to an
intersection involving other highways under their jurisdiction,
may prohibit any such right turn against a red signal at any
intersection where safety conditions so require, the prohibition
shall be effective when a sign is erected at such intersection
giving notice thereof.
c. Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as
provided in Section 310.070, pedestrians facing a steady red
signal alone shall not enter the roadway.
d. In the event an official traffic control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions
of this Section shall be applicable except as to those provisions
which, by their nature, can have no application. Any stop
required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement
indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of
any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.
A. Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words
"Walk" or "Don't Walk" are in place, such signals shall indicate as
follows:
1. Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the
roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the rightof-
way by the drivers of all vehicles.
266. Cross References—As to pedestrians, §§345.010 et seq. State Law Reference—Similar
provisions, §300.160, RSMo.
Section
310.060
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
310.070
100:602
Section 310.080. Flashing Signals.267 [R.O. 2009 §70.32; CC 1981
§18-368; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
Section 310.090. Lane Direction Control Signals.268 [R.O. 2009
§70.33; CC 1981 §18-369; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
When lane direction control signals are placed over the individual lanes of
a street or highway, vehicular traffic may travel in any lane over which a
green signal is shown, but shall not enter or travel in any lane over which a
red signal is shown.
Section 310.100. Unauthorized Signs, Signals or Markings.269 [R.O.
2009 §70.34; CC 1981 §18-370; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
2. Wait, don't walk or appropriate symbols. No pedestrian shall start
to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal, but any
pedestrian who has partially completed his/her crossing on the
walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the
wait signal is showing.
A. Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic
sign or signal, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
1. Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering
the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when
marked or, if none, then before entering the intersection and the
right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after
making a stop at a stop sign.
2. Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed
through the intersection or pass such signal only with caution.
3. This Section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of
drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be
governed by the rules as set forth in Section 335.090 of this Code of
Ordinances.
A. No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any
highway an unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which
purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic
control device or railroad sign or signal or which attempts to direct the
movement of traffic or which hides from view or interferes with the
effectiveness of any official traffic control devices or any railroad sign
or signal and no person shall place and maintain, nor shall the City
Council permit on any street, alley or highway in the City, any traffic
267. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.165, RSMo.
268. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.170, RSMo.
269. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.175, RSMo.
Section
310.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
310.100
100:603
Section 310.110. Interference With Traffic Control or Railroad
Devices.270 [R.O. 2009 §70.35; CC 1981 §18-371; Ord. No. 75-35,
8-6-1975]
No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface,
injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device or any
railroad sign or signal or inscription, shield or insignia thereon or any other
part thereof.
Section 310.120. Traffic Engineer To Designate Crosswalks and
Establish Safety Zones.271 [R.O. 2009 §70.36; CC 1981 §18-372; Ord.
No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
Section 310.130. Traffic Lanes.272 [R.O. 2009 §70.37; CC 1981
§18-373; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
control sign, signal or marking bearing thereon any commercial
advertising. This Section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection
on private property adjacent thereto of signs giving useful information
and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs; provided that
such signs do not hide from view the effectiveness of any official traffic
control signs, signals, markings or devices or railroad signs and signals.
B. Every such prohibited sign, signal, marking, device or other obstruction
to expeditious traffic movement is declared a public nuisance.
A. The City Traffic Engineer is authorized:
1. To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines
upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where,
in his/her opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians
crossing the roadway and at such other places as he/she may deem
necessary;
2. To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such
places as he/she may deem necessary for the protection of
pedestrians.
A. The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the
roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is
necessary.
B. Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the
boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another
vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.
270. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.180, RSMo.
271. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.195, RSMo.
272. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.200, RSMo.
Section
310.100
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
310.130
100:604
Chapter 315
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section 315.010. Authority of Police and Fire Department
Officials.273 [R.O. 2009 §70.50; CC 1981 §18-21; Ord. No. 75-35,
8-6-1975]
Section 315.020. Records of Traffic Violations.274 [R.O. 2009 §70.51;
CC 1981 §18-23; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
Section 315.030. Driver Files To Be Maintained.275 [R.O. 2009
§70.52; CC 1981 §18-24; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
The Police Department shall maintain a suitable record of all traffic
accidents, warnings, arrests, convictions and complaints reported for each
driver, which shall be filed alphabetically under the name of the driver
concerned.
A. It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department or such
officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police to enforce all street traffic
laws of the City and all of the State vehicle laws applicable to street
traffic in the City.
B. Officers of the Police Department or such officers as are assigned by the
Chief of Police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or
signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided that in the event of a
fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the Police Department may direct traffic as
conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic
laws.
C. Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct
or assist the Police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity.
A. The Police Department shall keep a record of all violations of this Code
and any other traffic ordinance of the City or of the State vehicle laws of
which any person has been charged, together with a record of the final
disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record shall be so
maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of each.
B. All such records and reports shall be public records unless otherwise
required by law.
273. Cross References—As to fire department, ch. 205; as to police department, ch. 200. State
Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.075, RSMo.
274. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.025, RSMo.
275. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.045, RSMo.
Section
310.130
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
315.040
100:605
Section 315.040. Annual Traffic Safety Reports.276 [R.O. 2009
§70.54; CC 1981 §18-26; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
Section 315.050. Emergency and Experimental Regulations.277 [R.O.
2009 §70.55; CC 1981 §18-72; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
Section 315.060. Temporary Traffic Control. [R.O. 2009 §70.56; CC
1981 §18-27.1; Ord. No. 89-38, 2-23-1989; Ord. No. 07-162,
6-11-2007; Ord. No. 18-021, 2-6-2018278]
A. The Police Department shall annually prepare a traffic report which
shall be filed with the Mayor. Such report shall contain information on
traffic matters in the City as follows:
1. The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the
number of persons injured and other pertinent traffic accident
data;
2. The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent
data on the safety activities of the Police;
3. The plans and recommendations of the Police Department for
future traffic safety activities.
A. The Chief of Police, by and with the approval of the City Traffic
Engineer, is empowered to make regulations necessary to make
effective the provisions of the Traffic Code and any other traffic
ordinance of the City and to make and enforce temporary or
experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions.
No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for
more than ninety (90) days.
B. The City Traffic Engineer may test traffic control devices under actual
conditions of traffic.
A. The Mayor or designee may authorize the temporary closing of streets,
the temporary prohibition of parking and temporary direction of traffic
for public safety purposes or during the Festival of the Little Hills, the
Riverfest, the Oktoberfest, the Lewis and Clark Rendezvous Days or
other special events. It shall be unlawful, when appropriate signs have
been installed, to operate a vehicle upon or park a vehicle on a
temporarily closed street.
B. The Chief of Police is authorized to close Main Street to vehicular traffic
for public safety purposes.
276. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.050, RSMo.
277. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.065, RSMo.
278. Editor’s Note: Ord. No. 18-021 also changed the title of this by deleting “During Special
Events” from the title.
Section
315.040
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
315.070
100:606
Section 315.070. Traffic Engineer.279 [R.O. 2009 §70.58; CC 1981
§18-53; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
Chapter 320
MOTOR VEHICLE OFFENSES
A. The office of City Traffic Engineer is established. The City Engineer or
other designated City Official shall serve as City Traffic Engineer in
addition to his/her other functions and shall exercise the powers and
duties with respect to traffic as provided in this Title.
B. The City Traffic Engineer shall determine the installation and proper
timing and maintenance of traffic control devices, conduct engineering
analyses of traffic accidents and devise remedial measures, conduct
engineering investigation of traffic conditions, plan the operation of
traffic on the streets and highways of the City and cooperate with other
City Officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic
conditions and carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by
ordinances of the City.
279. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.060, RSMo.
Section
315.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
315.070
100:607

ARTICLE I
Accidents
Section 320.010. Leaving The Scene of An Accident.280
Section 320.020. Immediate Notice of Accident.281
The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death
of any person or total damage to all property to an apparent extent of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or more shall immediately by the quickest means
of communication give notice of such accident to the Police Department if
such accident occurs within the City.
Section 320.030. Written Report of Accident.282
The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident
resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or total property damage
to all property to an apparent extent of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
more shall, within five (5) days after such accident, forward a written report
of such accident to the Police Department. The provisions of this Section
shall not be applicable when the accident has been investigated at the scene
by a Police Officer while such driver was present thereat.
Section 320.040. When Driver Unable To Report.283 [R.O. 2009
§74.21; CC 1981 §18-105; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
A. A person commits the offense of leaving the scene of a motor vehicle
accident when, being the operator or driver of a vehicle on the
highways, streets or roads of the City or on any publicly or privately
owned parking lot or parking facility within the City generally open for
use by the public and knowing that an injury has been caused to a
person or damage has been caused to property due to his/her
culpability or to accident, he/she leaves the place of the injury, damage
or accident without stopping and giving his/her name, residence,
including City and street number, motor vehicle number and driver's
license number, if any, to the injured party or to a Police Officer, or if no
Police Officer is in the vicinity, then to the nearest Police station or
judicial officer.
B. For the purposes of this Section, all Peace Officers shall have
jurisdiction, when invited by an injured person, to enter the premises of
any such privately owned parking lot or parking facility for the purpose
of investigating an accident and performing all necessary duties
regarding such accident.
280. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §577.060, RSMo.
281. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.110, RSMo.
282. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.115, RSMo.
283. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.120, RSMo.
Section
320.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
320.040
100:609
A. Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving
immediate notice of an accident as required in Section 320.030 and
there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident
capable of doing so, such occupant shall give or cause to be given the
notice not given by the driver.
B. Whenever the driver is physically incapable of making a written report
of an accident as required in Section 320.030 and such driver is not the
owner of the vehicle, then the owner of the vehicle involved in such
accident shall, within five (5) days after the accident, make such report
not made by the driver.
Section
320.040
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
320.040
100:610
ARTICLE II
Driving While Intoxicated — Reckless Operation and Other Offenses
Section 320.050. Careless and Imprudent Driving. [R.O. 2009
§74.35; CC 1981 §18-174; Ord. No. 74-22, 5-22-1974 ; Ord. No.
98-397, 9-14-1998]
A. Every person operating a motor vehicle within the City shall operate or
drive such motor vehicle in a careful and prudent manner and in the
exercise of the highest degree of care.
1. A person is guilty of operating a motor vehicle in a careless and
imprudent manner whenever such a person operates a motor
vehicle in such a manner that there is likelihood of danger to
property of another or to the life or limb of any person, taking into
consideration the time of day, the amount of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, the condition of the street or highway, the
atmospheric conditions and the location with reference to
intersecting streets or highways, curves, residences or schools.
2. A person is guilty of operating a motor vehicle on a parking lot in a
careless and imprudent manner whenever such person operates a
motor vehicle on a public or private parking lot in such a manner
that there is likelihood of danger to property of another or to the
life or limb of any person, taking into consideration the time of day,
the amount of vehicular traffic and pedestrian traffic, the condition
of the parking lot, the atmospheric conditions and the location with
reference to adjacent streets, highways, residences or schools.
3. A prima facie case of careless and imprudent driving shall exist
whenever:
a. A person operating a motor vehicle is racing another person
operating a motor vehicle;
b. A violation of a traffic law results in an accident with another
vehicle;
c. A person operates a motor vehicle at a speed twice the speed
limit or at such a rate of speed so as to recklessly endanger the
property of another of the life or limb or any person;
d. A motor vehicle crosses a marked centerline so as to force a
motor vehicle traveling in the opposite direction to turn away
to avoid a collision; or
e. A person operates a motor vehicle in such a manner so as to
attempt to outrun, evade or outdistance a pursuing police
vehicle.
Section
320.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
320.060
100:611
Section 320.060. Driving While Intoxicated.284
A person commits the offense of "driving while intoxicated" if he/she
operates a motor vehicle while in an intoxicated or drugged condition.
Section 320.070. Driving With Certain Blood Alcohol Content.285
A person commits the offense of "driving with excessive blood alcohol
content" if such person operates a motor vehicle in this State with eighthundredths
of one percent (0.8%) or more by weight of alcohol in such
person's blood. As used in this Section, percent by weight of alcohol in the
blood shall be based upon grams of alcohol per one hundred (100) milliliters
of blood or two hundred ten (210) liters of breath and may be shown by
chemical analysis of the person's blood, breath, saliva or urine. For the
purposes of determining the alcoholic content of a person's blood under this
Section, the test shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of
Sections 577.020 to 577.041, RSMo.
Section 320.080. Driving On Parking Lots. [R.O. 2009 §74.38; CC
1981 §18-177; Ord. No. 3433, 10-5-1966; Ord. No. 80-104, 9-3-1980]
Section 320.090. Driving On Unpaved Property Prohibited. [R.O.
2009 §74.39; CC 1981 §§18.178—18-178.1; Ord. No. 75-19, 4-9-1975;
Ord. No. 86-107, 5-15-1986; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
A. Sections 320.010, 320.050, 320.060, 320.070, 355.030, 355.040 and
360.060 shall apply to and be in force on all publicly used parking lots,
drive-ins and all areas upon which the public is invited or permitted to
operate motor vehicles, whether such parking lots, drive-ins and other
publicly used areas are publicly or privately owned or held.
B. Anyone violating the provisions of this Section shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation and shall be subject to the penalties provided for in
Section 100.150 of this Code.
A. Driving On Unpaved Property Prohibited.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and without right
destroy, deface, injure or molest any yard, lawn, garden, courtyard
or any other unpaved portion of any parcel of ground owned by
another person by operating a motor vehicle thereupon.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and intentionally
operate a motor vehicle upon any unpaved portion of any parcel of
ground owned by another person without the express consent of
such owner.
3. In enforcing the provisions of this Section, there shall be a
rebuttable presumption that the owner of a vehicle involved in a
284. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §577.010, RSMo.
285. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §577.012, RSMo.
Section
320.060
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
320.090
100:612
violation of this Section was the operator of the vehicle at the time
such violation occurred. For purposes of this Section, the person in
whose name the vehicle is registered with the State Department of
Revenue shall be deemed to be the owner of the vehicle.
B. Reward For Information Used To Prosecute Persons Who Damage
Property By Driving On Unpaved Property.
1. A reward will be paid to any person supplying information which is
used in the prosecution of violations of Subsection (A) of this
Section, if the information supplied leads to the conviction of the
person charged with a violation of that Section. If two (2) or more
persons supply information correctly leading to the conviction, the
reward will be divided equally between the informants. Rewards
will be paid upon the conviction of the person charged. The exact
amount of the reward will be determined by the Mayor upon the
recommendations of the Chief of Police and Director of the Public
Works Department and shall be not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) and not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). The
recommendations shall be based upon the extent and severity of
the violation.
2. The City and its employees will keep confidential the identity of any
informant unless testimony of the informant is deemed necessary
for the successful prosecution of the offense or unless otherwise
ordered by a court.
3. Rewards shall be paid only from account number 01-026-7312 as
established in the City's budget. If payments for rewards exhaust
the amount appropriated for that purpose, no further rewards will
be paid unless authorized by supplemental appropriations.
Section
320.090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
320.090
100:613
Chapter 325
SPEED RESTRICTIONS
Section 325.010. Excessive Acceleration Prohibited.286 [R.O. 2009
§72.015; CC 1981 §18-183; Ord. No. 83-69, 9-8-1983]
Section 325.020. Speed Limit Zones.287 [R.O. 2009 §72.016; CC 1981
§18-239(a),(b)(1—3); Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975; Ord. No. 82-35,
5-19-1982; Ord. No. 84-5, 1-18-1984; Ord. No. 84-101, 8-23-1984;
Ord. No. 85-106, 8-8-1985; Ord. No. 85-177, 11-7-1985; Ord. No.
85-242, 12-20-1985; Ord. No. 86-290, 10-21-1986; Ord. No. 92-10,
1-23-1992; Ord. No. 92-295, 12-2-1992; Ord. No. 93-70, 4-21-1993;
Ord. No. 93-242, 10-20-1993; Ord. No. 97-217, 6-18-1997]
Section 325.030. Regulating Speed By Traffic Signals.288 [R.O. 2009
§72.017; CC 1981 §18-240; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic
signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe
manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, in operating a motor vehicle within
the City, to so accelerate the motor vehicle as to cause such motor
vehicle to:
1. Travel sideways in any manner;
2. Cause audible noise by the friction of the tire on the pavement; or
3. Cause the tires of such vehicle to leave skid marks upon the
pavement; except when such acceleration is reasonably necessary
to avoid a collision or occurs as a result of snow, water or gravel
upon the pavement.
A. The following speed limit zones are hereby created in which the
maximum vehicular speeds shall be as follows:
1. In all portions of the City, except as otherwise stated, the maximum
speed permitted shall be twenty-five (25) miles per hour.
2. In the congested districts, as designated, the maximum speed
permitted shall be fifteen (15) miles per hour.
3. No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a rate faster than fifteen
(15) miles per hour within a distance of two hundred (200) feet on
each side of any school property when school age children are
present on a street, alley, sidewalk or public right-of-way.
286. Cross References—As to speed regulations, sch. I; as to noise control, ch. 230.
287. Cross References—As to speed limits, sch. I.
288. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.210, RSMo.
Section
320.090
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
325.030
100:614
within the district or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs
giving notice thereof.
Section 325.040. Speed Meters and The Like. [R.O. 2009 §72.018;
CC 1981 §18-241]
The use of and results determined by any speed meter, machine or
mechanism which seeks to reduce the error of manual operation to a
minimum shall be acceptable as evidence where driving in excess of posted
speed limits is the cause of action; except that the use thereof shall not be
construed to exclude any competent evidence secured by any other manner
or means.
Section 325.050. Flashing School Zone Lights — Time For
Operation. [R.O. 2009 §72.019; Ord. No. 07-271, 10-18-2007; Ord.
No. 09-28, 2-5-2009]
Chapter 330
TURNING RESTRICTED - SIGNALS
Section 330.010. Required Position and Method of Turning At
Intersections, Parking Lots, Private Driveways and Private Streets —
Use of Turn Signals.289 [R.O. 2009 §72.045; CC 1981 §18-268; Ord.
No. 75-35, 8-6-1975; Ord. No. 98-252, 6-17-1998; Ord. No. 00-55,
2-16-2000]
A. Whenever illuminated, flashing school zone signals have been installed
to mark a school zone, the lights shall be in operation:
1. From thirty (30) minutes before the start of the first (1st) school
class until the first (1st) school class commences; and
2. From the dismissal of the last school class until thirty (30) minutes
following final dismissal.
A. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection, parking lot
entrance or exit, private driveway or private street shall do so as
follows:
1. Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn
shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge
of the roadway, except where multiple turn lanes have been
established.
2. Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is
permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the
intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that
portion of the right-half of the roadway nearest the centerline
289. State Law References—Similar provisions, §§300.215, 304.019, RSMo.
Section
325.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
330.010
100:615
thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it
enters the intersection and after entering the intersection the left
turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the
centerline of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable,
the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the
left of the center of the intersection.
3. Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection
where traffic is restricted to one (1) direction on one (1) or more of
the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any
such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme
left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of
travel of such vehicle and after entering the intersection the left
turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as
practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving
in such direction upon the roadway being entered, except where
multiple turn lanes have been established.
4. Designated two-way left turn lanes. Where a special lane for
making left turns by drivers proceeding in opposite directions have
been indicated by official traffic control devices:
a. A left turn shall not be made from any other lane.
b. A vehicle shall not be driven in the lane except when preparing
for or making a left turn from or into the roadway or when
preparing for or making a U-turn when otherwise permitted by
law.
c. A vehicle shall not be driven in the lane for a distance more
than five hundred (500) feet.
B. Hand And Mechanical Signals. No person shall stop or suddenly
decrease the speed of or turn a vehicle from a direct course or move
right or left upon a roadway unless and until such movement can be
made with reasonable safety and then only after the giving of an
appropriate signal in the manner provided herein.
1. An operator or driver when stopping or when checking the speed of
the operator's vehicle, if the movement of other vehicles may
reasonably be affected by such checking of speed, shall extend
such operator's arm at an angle below horizontal so that the same
may be seen in the rear of the vehicle.
2. An operator or driver intending to turn the operator's vehicle to the
right shall extend such operator's arm at an angle above horizontal
so that the same may be seen in front of and in the rear of the
vehicle and shall slow down and approach the intersecting highway
as near as practicable to the right side of the highway along which
such operator is proceeding before turning.
Section
330.010
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
330.010
100:616
Section 330.020. Authority To Place and Obedience To Turning
Markers.290 [R.O. 2009 §72.046; CC 1981 §18-269; Ord. No. 75-35,
8-6-1975]
3. An operator or driver intending to turn the operator's vehicle to the
left shall extend such operator's arm in a horizontal position so that
the same may be seen in the rear of the vehicle and shall slow down
and approach the intersecting highway so that the left side of the
vehicle shall be as near as practicable to the centerline of the
highway along which the operator is proceeding before turning.
4. The signals herein required shall be given either by means of the
hand and arm or by a signal light or signal device in good
mechanical condition of a type approved by the State Highway
Patrol; however, when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded that a
hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear
of such vehicle, then such signals shall be given by such light or
device. A vehicle shall be considered as so constructed or loaded
that a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front
and rear when the distance from the center of the top of the
steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab or load
exceeds twenty-four (24) inches or when the distance from the
center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or
load thereon exceeds fourteen (14) feet, which limit of fourteen
(14) feet shall apply to single vehicles or combinations of vehicles.
The provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to any trailer
which does not interfere with a clear view of the hand signals of the
operator or of the signaling device upon the vehicle pulling such
trailer; provided further, that the provisions of this Section as far as
mechanical devices on vehicles so constructed that a hand and arm
signal would not be visible both to the front and rear of such vehicle
as above provided shall only be applicable to new vehicles
registered within this State after the first (1st) day of January,
1954.
5. The driver of a vehicle shall use turn signals in executing a
maneuver set forth in Section 330.010(A).
A. The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to place markers, buttons or
signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections and such course to be
traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed
by law or ordinance.
B. When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed
within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles
turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of
such indications.
290. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.220, RSMo.
Section
330.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
330.030
100:617
Section 330.030. Limitations On U-Turns and The Like.291 [R.O.
2009 §72.047; CC 1981 §§18-270—18-271; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975;
Ord. No. 94-168, 7-6-1994; Ord. No. 06-92, 4-26-2006; Ord. No.
06-173, 6-30-2006; Ord. No. 07-23, 2-9-2007; Ord. No. 12-252 §1,
12-19-2012]
Section 330.040. Limitations On Turning Around.292 [R.O. 2009
§72.048; CC 1981 §18-272; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall not upon
any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in
safety and without interfering with other traffic.
Chapter 335
A. Authority To Place Restricted Turn Signs. The City Traffic Engineer is
authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles
shall not make a right, left or U-turn and shall place proper signs at
such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited
between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in
which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may
be removed when such turns are permitted.
B. Obedience To No-Turn Signs. Whenever authorized signs are erected
indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a
vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign.
C. When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall make a Uturn
on the following streets:
1. Traveling northbound on Fifth Street at the westbound 1-70 onramp.
2. First Capitol Drive and Cunningham.
3. Northbound Fifth Street and Bass Pro Drive.
D. When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall make a
left turn at the following location between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and
7:00 P.M.:
1. From the St. Charles Post Office driveway onto southbound North
Fifth Street.
E. When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no vehicle over eighteen
thousand (18,000) pounds shall make a left turn or right turn onto the
driveway located between 1753 and 1757 Doris Walters Lane from
Doris Walters Lane between the hours of 2:00 A.M. and 8:00 A.M.
291. State Law References—Similar provisions, §§300.225—300.230, RSMo.
292. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.235, RSMo.
Section
330.030
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
330.040
100:618
STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS
Section
330.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
330.040
100:619

ARTICLE I
Right-Of-Way
Section 335.010. Vehicles Approaching or Entering Intersections.
[R.O. 2009 §72.060; CC 1981 §18-179; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
The operator of a vehicle shall have the right-of-way over the operator
of another vehicle which is approaching from the left on an intersecting
highway and it shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to fail to yield
the right-of-way to the operator of another vehicle which is approaching
from the right on an intersecting highway.
Section 335.020. Use of Lights and Sirens — Right-Of-Way —
Stationary Vehicles, Procedure — Penalty. [Ord. No. 13-068 §1,
4-3-2013]
A. Upon the immediate approach of an emergency vehicle giving audible
signal by siren or while having at least one (1) lighted lamp exhibiting
red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance
of five hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle or a flashing blue
light authorized by Section 310.070 of this Chapter, the driver of every
other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to
a position parallel to, and as far as possible to the right of, the traveled
portion of the highway and thereupon stop and remain in such position
until such emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise
directed by a Police or Traffic Officer.
B. Upon approaching a stationary emergency vehicle displaying lighted
red or red and blue lights, or a stationary vehicle owned by the State
Highway and Transportation Commission and operated by an
authorized employee of the Department of Transportation displaying
lighted amber or amber and white lights, the driver of every motor
vehicle shall:
1. Proceed with caution and yield the right-of-way, if possible with due
regard to safety and traffic conditions, by making a lane change
into a lane not adjacent to that of the stationary vehicle, if on a
roadway having at least four (4) lanes with not less than two (2)
lanes proceeding in the same direction as the approaching vehicle;
or
2. Proceed with due caution and reduce the speed of the vehicle,
maintaining a safe speed for road conditions, if changing lanes
would be unsafe or impossible.
C. Responsibilities Of Driver Of Emergency Vehicle.
1. The driver of any "emergency vehicle" defined in Section 300.010
of this Code shall not sound the siren thereon or have the front red
lights or blue lights on except when such vehicle is responding to
Section
335.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
335.020
100:621
Section 335.030. Vehicles Entering Stop Intersection.293 [R.O. 2009
§72.062; CC 1981 §18-261; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
Except when directed to proceed by a Police Officer or traffic control signal,
every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop
sign shall stop as required by Section 335.070(B) and after having stopped
shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection
from another highway or which is approaching so closely on the highway
as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time which such driver is
moving across or within the intersection.
Section 335.035. Vehicles Entering Yield Intersection.294 [R.O. 2009
§72.063; CC 1981 §18-262; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in obedience to such
sign slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and shall
yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on
another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during
the time such driver is moving across or within the intersection; provided
an emergency call, or when in pursuit of an actual or suspected law
violator, or when responding to, but not upon returning from, a fire.
2. The driver of an emergency vehicle may:
a. Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of Sections 304.014
to 304.025, RSMo., and the provisions of this Code;
b. Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
c. Exceed the prima facie speed limit so long as the driver does
not endanger life or property;
d. Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or
turning in specified directions.
3. The exemptions granted to an emergency vehicle pursuant to
Subsection (C)(2) of this Section shall apply only when the driver of
any such vehicle while in motion sounds audible signal by bell,
siren or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when
the vehicle is equipped with at least one (1) lighted lamp displaying
a red light or blue light visible under normal atmospheric
conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of
such vehicle.
D. No person shall purchase an emergency light as described in this
Section without furnishing the seller of such light an affidavit stating
that the light will be used exclusively for emergency vehicle purposes.
293. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.275, RSMo.
294. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.280, RSMo.
Section
335.020
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
335.035
100:622
however, that if such a driver is involved in a collision with a vehicle in the
intersection, after driving past a yield sign without stopping, such collision
shall be deemed prima facie evidence of his/her failure to yield right-of-way.
Section 335.040. Emerging From Alley, Driveway or Building.295
[R.O. 2009 §72.064; CC 1981 §18-263; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging
from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior
to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway or driveway and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as
may be necessary to avoid collision and upon entering the roadway shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway.
295. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.285, RSMo.
Section
335.035
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
335.040
100:623

ARTICLE II
Stop and Yield Intersections
Section 335.050. Stop Signs Required. [R.O. 2009 §72.075; Ord. No.
04-120, 6-29-2004]
Whenever any ordinance of the City designates and describes a street
location, it shall be the duty of the City Traffic Engineer to place and
maintain a stop sign at such location.
Section 335.060. Other Intersections Where Stop or Yield
Required.296
The City Engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate
intersections where particular hazard exists upon other than through
streets and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one (1) or more
entrances to any such intersection in which event he/she shall cause to be
erected a stop sign at every such place where a stop is required, or whether
vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a different street at such
intersection as prescribed in Section 335.035 in which event he/she shall
cause to be erected a yield sign at every place where obedience thereto is
required. The City Engineer shall cause to be erected a stop sign at every
location where the erection of a stop sign is authorized by a duly adopted
ordinance.
Section 335.070. Stop and Yield Signs.297 [R.O. 2009 §72.077; CC
1981 §18-260; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
A. The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if required for safety to
stop shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked
stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting
roadway.
B. Except when directed to proceed by a Police Officer or traffic control
signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection
indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall
stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest
the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching
traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection.
296. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.265, RSMo.
297. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.270, RSMo.
Section
335.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
335.080
100:625
Section 335.080. Stop When Traffic Obstructed.298 [R.O. 2009
§72.078; CC 1981 §18-264; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there
is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he/she is operating without obstructing the
passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control
signal indication to proceed.
Section 335.090. Obedience To Signal Indicating Approach of
Train.299 [R.O. 2009 §72.079; CC 1981 §18-265; Ord. No. 75-35,
8-6-1975]
Section 335.100. Turnable or Movable Stop Signs. [R.O. 2009
§72.080; CC 1981 §18-266; Ord. No. 82-36, 5-19-1982; Ord. No.
98-399, 9-14-1998]
A. Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade
crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this Section, the
driver of such vehicle shall stop within fifty (50) feet, but not less than
fifteen (15) feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and shall not
proceed until he/she can do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall
apply when:
1. A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning
of the immediate approach of a railroad train;
2. A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or
continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad
train;
3. An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous
proximity to such crossing.
B. No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier
is closed or is being opened or closed.
A. Except when directed to proceed by a Police Officer, every driver of a
vehicle approaching a turnable or movable stop sign shall stop within
the roadway before passing upon any portion of the roadway
perpendicular to the curb line at the location of such sign. This
provision shall be enforced only on school days between the hours of
7:00 A.M. and 4:30 P.M. when stop signs are plainly visible to the driver
of such vehicle.
B. Turnable Or Movable Stop Sign Locations. Except when directed to
proceed by a Police Officer, every driver of a vehicle approaching a
turnable or movable stop sign shall stop within the roadway before
298. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.290, RSMo.
299. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.295, RSMo.
Section
335.080
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
335.100
100:626
passing upon any portion of the roadway perpendicular to the curb
line at the location of such sign at locations determined by the Traffic
Commission.
Section
335.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
335.100
100:627
Chapter 340
MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
335.100
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
335.100
100:628
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 340.010. Soliciting Occupants of Motor Vehicles. [R.O.
2009 §72.002; CC 1981 §18-423; Ord. No. 88-46, 3-25-1988]
Section 340.020. Obstructing Public Thoroughfare — Solicitation.
[R.O. 2009 §72.003; CC 1981 §20-119; Ord. No. 3499, 8-19-1967;
Ord. No. 3894, 12-7-1971; Ord. No. 73-38, 6-20-1973; Ord. No.
80-13, 2-6-1980; Ord. No. 82-2, 1-6-1982; Ord. No. 88-46,
3-25-1988]
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this Section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
ROADWAY — The portion of a street or highway improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
"Roadway" includes lanes commonly used for parking.
SIDEWALK — The portion of a street between the curb lines or the
lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for
use of pedestrians.
STREETS AND HIGHWAYS — The entire width between the boundary
lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to
the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
B. No person shall stand on a street or highway open to vehicular traffic
and solicit or attempt to solicit employment, business or contributions
from the occupants of any motor vehicle, except from the occupants of
parked motor vehicles located in the roadway and adjacent to a
sidewalk where the solicitor is on a sidewalk.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Obstruct in any manner any public street, public highway, public
sidewalk or any other public place or building by hindering or
impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and
uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians.
2. Commit any act or place any object in or upon any public street,
public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or
building which is an obstruction or interference to the free and
uninterrupted use of such property or to any business lawfully
conducted by anyone in, upon, facing or fronting on any such public
street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or
building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress,
egress and regress, thereon and thereto.
3. Engage, directly or indirectly in the solicitation of money,
donations, property or financial assistance or sell, offer to sell or
distribute for any purpose any article, object or material of any kind
Section
340.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
340.020
100:629
or nature in or upon the travelled portion of any public street,
highway, alley or thoroughfare.
B. When any person causes or commits any of the conditions or acts
enumerated in Subsections (A)(1), (2) or (3) above, any Law
Enforcement Officer shall order such person to cease and desist in such
act or acts and to move on or to disperse. Any person who fails or
refuses to obey such an order shall be guilty of a violation of this
Section.
Section
340.020
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
340.020
100:630
ARTICLE II
Overtaking and Passing — Manner of Driving On Roadway
Section 340.030. Passing Regulations.300 [R.O. 2009 §72.030; CC
1981 §18-182]
A. The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction, subject to the limitations and
exceptions hereinafter stated:
1. The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass to the left side thereof at a safe distance
and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until
safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.
2. Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of
the overtaking vehicle and shall not increase the speed of such
driver's vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
B. The driver of a motor vehicle may overtake and pass to the right of
another vehicle only under the following conditions:
1. When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
2. Upon a highway, road or street with unobstructed pavement of
sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of vehicles in each
direction;
3. Upon a one-way street; or
4. Upon any highway, road or street with unobstructed pavement of
such width and clearly marked for four (4) or more lanes of traffic;
provided that the driver of a motor vehicle may overtake and pass
another vehicle upon the right under the foregoing conditions only
when such movement may be made in safety. In no event shall such
movement be made by driving off the paved or main-traveled
portion of the roadway; however, the provisions of this Subsection
(B)(4) shall not relieve a driver from the duty to drive as closely as
practicable to the right-hand edge of the roadway.
C. Except when a roadway has been divided into three (3) traffic lanes, no
vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the centerline of a roadway or
public road in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction, unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of
oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such
overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with
the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction or any vehicle overtaken.
300. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §304.016, RSMo.
Section
340.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
340.030
100:631
Section 340.040. Distance At Which Vehicle Must Follow. [Ord. No.
15-121 §3, 6-2-2015]
The driver of a vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than
is reasonably safe and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the roadway. Vehicles being
driven upon any roadway outside of a business or residence district in a
caravan or motorcade, whether or not towing other vehicles, shall be so
operated, except in a funeral procession or in a duly authorized parade, so
as to allow sufficient space between each such vehicle or combination of
vehicles as to enable any other vehicle to overtake or pass such vehicles
in safety. This Section shall in no manner affect Section 304.044, RSMo.,
relating to distance between trucks traveling on the highway.
Section 340.050. School Buses.301
D. No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left side of the roadway
under the following conditions:
1. When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve of the
highway where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance
as to create a hazard, in the event that another vehicle might
approach from the opposite direction;
2. When the view is obstructed upon approaching within one hundred
(100) feet of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel or when approaching
within one hundred (100) feet of or at any railroad grade crossing.
A. The driver of a vehicle upon a highway upon meeting or overtaking
from either direction any school bus which has stopped on the highway
for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school children and
whose driver has in the manner prescribed by law given the signal to
stop shall stop the vehicle before reaching such school bus and shall not
proceed until such school bus resumes motion or until signaled by its
driver to proceed.
B. Every bus used for the transportation of school children shall bear upon
the front and rear thereon a plainly visible sign containing the words
"School Bus" in letters not less than eight (8) inches in height. Each bus
shall have lettered on the rear in plain and distinct type the following:
"State Law: Stop While Bus is Loading and Unloading". Each school bus
subject to the provisions of Sections 304.050 to 304.070, RSMo., shall
be equipped with a mechanical and electrical signaling device approved
by the State Board of Education which will display a signal plainly
visible from the front and rear and indicating intention to stop.
C. Every school bus operated to transport students in the public school
system which has a gross vehicle weight rating of more than ten
thousand (10,000) pounds, which has the engine mounted entirely in
301. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §304.050, RSMo.
Section
340.030
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
340.050
100:632
front of the windshield and the entrance door behind the front wheels,
and which is used for the transportation of school children shall be
equipped with a crossing control arm. The crossing control arm, when
activated, shall extend a minimum of five (5) feet six (6) inches from the
face of the front bumper. The crossing control arm shall be attached on
the right side of the front bumper and shall be activated by the same
controls which activate the mechanical and electrical signaling devices
described in Subsection (B) of this Section. This Subsection may be
cited as "Jessica's Law" in commemoration of Jessica Leicht and all
other Missouri school children who have been injured or killed during
the operation of a school bus.
D. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, the driver of a school bus
in the process of loading or unloading students upon a street or
highway shall activate the mechanical and electrical signaling devices,
in the manner prescribed by the State Board of Education, to
communicate to drivers of other vehicles that students are loading or
unloading. A public school district has the authority pursuant to Section
304.050, RSMo., to adopt a policy which provides that the driver of a
school bus in the process of loading or unloading students upon a
divided highway of four (4) or more lanes may pull off of the main
roadway and load or unload students without activating the mechanical
and electrical signaling devices in a manner which gives the signal for
other drivers to stop and may use the amber signaling devices to alert
motorists that the school bus is slowing to a stop; provided that the
passengers are not required to cross any traffic lanes and also provided
that the emergency flashing signal lights are activated in a manner
which indicates that drivers should proceed with caution and, in such
case, the driver of a vehicle may proceed past the school bus with due
caution. No driver of a school bus shall take on or discharge passengers
at any location upon a highway consisting of four (4) or more lanes of
traffic, whether or not divided by a median or barrier, in such manner as
to require the passengers to cross more than two (2) lanes of traffic; nor
shall any passengers be taken on or discharged while the vehicle is
upon the road or highway proper unless the vehicle so stopped is
plainly visible for at least five hundred (500) feet in each direction to
drivers of other vehicles in the case of a highway with no shoulder and a
speed limit greater than sixty (60) miles per hour and at least three
hundred (300) feet in each direction to drivers of other vehicles upon
other highways, and on all highways, only for such time as is actually
necessary to take on and discharge passengers.
E. The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways need
not stop upon meeting or overtaking a school bus which is on a different
roadway, which is proceeding in the opposite direction on a highway
containing four (4) or more lanes of traffic, or which is stopped in a
loading zone constituting a part of, or adjacent to, a limited or
controlled access highway at a point where pedestrians are not
permitted to cross the roadway.
Section
340.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
340.060
100:633
Section 340.060. One-Way Streets and Alleys.302 [R.O. 2009 §72.034;
CC 1981 §§18-225—18-227; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
A. Authority To Sign One-Way Streets And Alleys. Whenever any provision
of this traffic code or ordinance of the City designates any one-way
street or alley, the City Traffic Engineer shall place and maintain signs
giving notice thereof and no such regulation shall be effective unless
such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic
movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of
traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.
B. One-Way Streets And Alleys. Upon those streets and parts of streets and
in those alleys described and designated by ordinance, vehicular traffic
shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the
direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection
where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited.
C. Authority To Restrict Direction Of Movement On Streets During Certain
Periods.
1. The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to determine and designate
streets, parts of streets or specific lanes thereon upon which
vehicular traffic shall proceed in one (1) direction during one (1)
period and the opposite direction during another period of the day
and shall place and maintain appropriate markings, signs, barriers
or other devices to give notice thereof. The City Traffic Engineer
may erect signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic
moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the
roadway.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in
violation of such markings, signs, barriers or other devices so
placed in accordance with this Section.
302. State Law References—Similar provisions, §§300.240—300.250, RSMo.
Section
340.060
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
340.060
100:634
ARTICLE III
Funeral Processions
Section 340.070. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §72.050; Ord. No. 99-357,
10-21-1999]
As used in this Article, the following terms mean:
FUNERAL DIRECTOR — A person licensed as a funeral director pursuant
to the provisions of Chapter 333, RSMo.
FUNERAL LEAD VEHICLE OR LEAD VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle
equipped with at least one (1) lighted circulating lamp exhibiting an amber
or purple light or lens or alternating flashing headlamps visible under
normal atmospheric conditions for a distance of five hundred (500) feet
from the front of the vehicle. A hearse or coach properly equipped may be a
lead vehicle.
ORGANIZED FUNERAL PROCESSION — Two (2) or more vehicles
accompanying the remains of a deceased person from a funeral
establishment, church, synagogue or other place where a funeral service
has taken place to a cemetery, crematory or other place of final disposition
or a funeral establishment, church, synagogue or other place where
additional funeral services will be performed, if directed by a licensed
funeral director from a licensed establishment.
Section 340.080. Right-Of-Way For Funeral Processions. [R.O. 2009
§72.051; Ord. No. 99-357, 10-21-1999]
Section 340.090. Operation of Funeral Processions. [R.O. 2009
§72.052; Ord. No. 99-357, 10-21-1999]
A. Except as otherwise provided for in this Subsection, pedestrians and
operators of all other vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle
which is a part of an organized funeral procession.
B. Notwithstanding any traffic control device or right-of-way provision
prescribed by State or local law, when the funeral lead vehicle in an
organized funeral procession lawfully enters an intersection, all
vehicles in the procession shall follow the lead vehicle through the
intersection. The operator of each vehicle in the procession shall
exercise the highest degree of care toward any other vehicle or
pedestrian on the roadway.
C. An organized funeral procession shall have the right-of-way at all
intersections regardless of any traffic control device at such
intersections, except that operators of vehicles in an organized funeral
procession shall yield the right-of-way to any approaching emergency
vehicle pursuant to the provisions of Section 304.022, RSMo., or when
directed to do so by a Law Enforcement Officer.
Section
340.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
340.090
100:635
Section 340.100. Violations Relating To Funeral Processions. [R.O.
2009 §72.053; Ord. 99-357, 10-21-99]
A. All vehicles in an organized funeral procession shall follow the
preceding vehicle in the procession as closely as is practical and safe
under the conditions.
B. No person shall operate any vehicle as part of an organized funeral
procession without the flashing emergency lights of such vehicle being
lighted.
C. Toll free passage shall be given on all toll bridges, tunnels and other toll
highways to all vehicles in an organized funeral procession.
A. Any person who is not an operator of a vehicle in an organized funeral
procession shall not:
1. Drive between the vehicles comprising an organized funeral
procession while such vehicles are in motion and have the flashing
emergency lights lighted pursuant to Section 340.090(B), except
when required to do so by a Law Enforcement Officer or when such
person is operating an emergency vehicle giving an audible or
visual signal;
2. Join a funeral procession for the purpose of securing the right-ofway
granted in Section 340.080; or
3. Attempt to pass any vehicle in an organized funeral procession,
except where a passing lane has been specifically provided.
B. When an organized funeral procession is proceeding through a red
signal light as permitted in Section 340.080, a vehicle not in the
organized funeral procession shall not enter the intersection unless
such vehicle may do so without crossing the path of the funeral
procession.
C. Any person violating the provisions of this Section is guilty of an
infraction which shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one
hundred dollars ($100.00).
Section
340.090
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
340.100
100:636
ARTICLE IV
Miscellaneous Prohibitions
Section 340.110. Clinging To or Hanging On Vehicles.303 [R.O. 2009
§72.110; CC 1981 §§18-7—18-8; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
Section 340.120. Cutting Through Private Property. [R.O. 2009
§72.111; CC 1981 §18-180; Ord. No. 82-68, 9-8-1982]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle through any
private property for the purpose of avoiding a traffic control device or street
intersection.
Section 340.130. Following Fire Apparatus.304
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow
any emergency vehicle traveling in response to an emergency call closer
than five hundred (500) feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the
block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
Section 340.140. Crossing Fire Hose.305 [R.O. 2009 §72.113; CC
1981 §18-191; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a Fire Department
when laid down on any street or private driveway, to be used at any fire
or alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department official in
command.
Section 340.150. Vehicles, Motorized Bicycles, Motorized Scooters,
Motorized Skateboards and Motorized Skates On Sidewalks or
Bicycle Paths.306 [R.O. 2009 §72.114; CC 1981 §18-197; Ord. No.
75-35, 8-6-1975; Ord. No. 95-132, 5-4-1995; Ord. No. 03-131,
6-4-2003]
A. No person riding upon any bicycle, motorized bicycle, coaster, roller
skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself/herself to
any vehicle upon a roadway. Neither shall the driver of a vehicle
knowingly pull a rider behind a vehicle.
B. Hanging On Vehicles Prohibited. No person shall hang onto or ride on
the outside or the rear end of any motor vehicle while moving upon a
roadway.
A. The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area or
bicycle path except as a permanent or temporary driveway.
303. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.350, RSMo.
304. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.300, RSMo.
305. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.305, RSMo.
306. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.330, RSMo.
Section
340.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
340.150
100:637
Section 340.160. Limitations On Backing.307 [R.O. 2009 §72.115; CC
1981 §18-198; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can
be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic.
Section 340.170. Opening and Closing Vehicle Doors.308 [R.O. 2009
§72.116; CC 1981 §18-199; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available
to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall
any person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to
moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers.
Section 340.180. Controlled Access.309 [R.O. 2009 §72.117; CC 1981
§18-201; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled access roadway
except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority.
Section 340.190. Railroad Trains Not To Block Streets.310 [R.O.
2009 §72.118; CC 1981 §§18-202, 20-57; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
B. The driver of a motor vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area
except on a permanent or temporary driveway. A designated bicycle
lane shall not be obstructed by a parked or standing motor vehicle or
other stationary object. A motor vehicle may be driven in a designated
bicycle lane only for the purpose of a lawful maneuver to cross the lane
or to provide for safe travel. In making an otherwise lawful maneuver
that requires traveling in or crossing a designated bicycle lane, the
driver of a motor vehicle shall yield to any bicycle in the lane. As used in
this Section, the term "designated bicycle lane" shall mean a portion of
the roadway or highway that has been designated by the Governing
Body having jurisdiction over such roadway or highway by striping with
signing or striping with pavement markings for the preferential or
exclusive use of bicycles.
A. It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any
railroad train to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such a
manner as to prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a
period of time longer than five (5) minutes; provided that this Section
shall not apply to a moving train or to one stopped because of an
emergency or for repairs necessary before it can proceed safely.
307. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.335, RSMo.
308. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.340, RSMo.
309. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.355, RSMo.
310. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.360, RSMo.
Section
340.150
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
340.190
100:638
Section 340.200. Driving Through Safety Zone.311 [R.O. 2009
§72.119; CC 1981 §18-203; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone.
Section 340.210. Streets Closed To Through Traffic. [R.O. 2009
§72.120; CC 1981 §18-214.1; Ord. No. 92-190, 8-19-1992]
Whenever the proper signs are posted indicating any street or part thereof
is closed to through traffic, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such
street or portion thereof, except for the purpose of going to or from a
residence within such closed area.
Section 340.220. Electric Personal Assistive Devices. [R.O. 2009
§72.121; Ord. No. 03-131, 6-4-2003]
Section 340.230. Limitations on Use of Hand-Held Electronic
Wireless Communication Devices for Persons 21 Years of Age or
Younger and Operators of Commercial Motor Vehicles. [Ord. No.
14-191 §1, 9-2-2014]
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to stand or leave any engine,
locomotive, car or train standing on any street or conduct or place the
same so as to obstruct the passage along or crossing of any street for a
period of time longer than five (5) minutes; except that this provision
shall not apply to trains or cars in motion other than those engaged in
switching.
A. An electric personal assistive mobility device may be operated upon a
street, sidewalk and bicycle path. Every person operating such a device
shall be granted all of the rights and be subject to all of the duties
applicable to a pedestrian pursuant to Chapter 304, RSMo.
B. Persons under sixteen (16) years of age shall not operate an electric
personal assistive mobility device, except for an operator with a
mobility-related disability.
C. An electric personal assistive mobility device shall be operated only on
roadways with a speed limit of forty-five (45) miles per hour or less. This
shall not prohibit the use of such device when crossing roadways with
speed limits in excess of forty-five (45) miles per hour.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, no person twenty-one (21)
years of age or younger operating a moving motor vehicle upon the
roads exclusively within the jurisdiction of the City of St. Charles,
Missouri, shall, by means of a hand-held electronic wireless
communications device, send, read, or write a text message or
electronic message.
311. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.365, RSMo.
Section
340.190
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
340.230
100:639
B. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, no person shall operate a
commercial motor vehicle while using a hand-held mobile telephone.
C. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, no person shall operate a
commercial motor vehicle while using a wireless communications
device to send, read, or write a text message or electronic message.
D. The provisions of Subsection (A) through Subsection (C) of this Section
shall not apply to a person operating:
1. An authorized emergency vehicle; or
2. A moving motor vehicle while using a hand-held electronic wireless
communications device to:
a. Report illegal activity;
b. Summon medical or other emergency help;
c. Prevent injury to a person or property; or
d. Relay information between a transit or for-hire operator and
that operator's dispatcher, in which the device is permanently
affixed to the vehicle.
E. Nothing in this Section shall be construed or interpreted as prohibiting
a person from making or taking part in a telephone call, by means of a
hand-held electronic wireless communications device, while operating
a non-commercial motor vehicle upon the roads exclusively within the
jurisdiction of the City of St. Charles.
F. As used in this Section, "electronic message" means a self-contained
piece of digital communication that is designed or intended to be
transmitted between hand-held electronic wireless communication
devices. "Electronic message" includes, but is not limited to, electronic
mail, a text message, an instant message, or a command or request to
access an Internet site.
G. As used in this Section, "hand-held electronic wireless communications
device" includes any hand-held cellular phone, palm pilot,
BlackBerry®, or other mobile electronic device used to communicate
verbally or by text or electronic messaging but shall not apply to any
device that is permanently embedded into the architecture and design
of the motor vehicle.
H. All used in this Section, "making or taking part in a telephone call"
means listening to or engaging in verbal communication through a
hand-held electronic wireless communication device.
I. As used in this Section, "send, read, or write a text message or
electronic message" means using a hand-held electronic wireless
telecommunications device to manually communicate with any person
by using an electronic message. Sending, reading, or writing a text
Section
340.230
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
340.230
100:640
Section 340.240. Limitations on Use of Hand-Held Electronic
Wireless Communication Devices for Persons Over 21 Years of Age
for Purposes of Public Safety. [Ord. No. 14-191 §2, 9-2-2014]
message or electronic message does not include reading, selecting, or
entering a phone number or name into a hand-held electronic wireless
communications device for the purpose of making a telephone call.
J. A violation of this Section shall be deemed an infraction and shall be
deemed a moving violation for purposes of point assessment under
Section 302.302 RSMo., as amended.
K. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to:
1. The operator of a vehicle that is lawfully parked or stopped;
2. Any of the following while in the performance of their official
duties: a law enforcement officer; a member of a fire department;
or the operator of a public or private ambulance;
3. The use of factory-installed or aftermarket global positioning
systems (GPS) or wireless communications devices used to
transmit or receive data as part of a digital system;
4. The use of voice-operated technology;
5. The use of two-way transmitters or receivers by a licensee of the
Federal Communications Commission in the amateur radio service.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, no person over twentyone
(21) years of age operating a moving motor vehicle upon the roads
exclusively within the jurisdiction of the City of St. Charles, Missouri,
shall, by means of a hand-held electronic wireless communications
device, send, read, or write a text message or electronic message
because it poses a serious health risk.
B. The provisions of Subsection (A) of this Section shall not apply to a
person operating:
1. An authorized emergency vehicle; or
2. A moving motor vehicle while using a hand-held electronic wireless
communications device to:
a. Report illegal activity;
b. Summon medical or other emergency help;
c. Prevent injury to a person or property; or
d. Relay information between a transit or for-hire operator and
that operator's dispatcher, in which the device is permanently
affixed to the vehicle.
Section
340.230
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
340.240
100:641
C. Nothing in this Section shall be construed or interpreted as prohibiting
a person from making or taking part in a telephone call, by means of a
hand-held electronic wireless communications device, while operating
a non-commercial motor vehicle upon the roads exclusively within the
jurisdiction of the City of St. Charles.
D. As used in this Section, "electronic message" means a self-contained
piece of digital communication that is designed or intended to be
transmitted between hand-held electronic wireless communication
devices. "Electronic message" includes, but is not limited to, electronic
mail, a text message, an instant message, or a command or request to
access an Internet site.
E. As used in this Section, "hand-held electronic wireless communications
device" includes any hand-held cellular phone, palm pilot,
BlackBerry®, or other mobile electronic device used to communicate
verbally or by text or electronic messaging but shall not apply to any
device that is permanently embedded into the architecture and design
of the motor vehicle.
F. As used in this Section, "making or taking part in a telephone call"
means listening to or engaging in verbal communication through a
hand-held electronic wireless communication device.
G. As used in this Section, "send, read, or write a text message or
electronic message" means using a hand-held electronic wireless
telecommunications device to manually communicate with any person
by using an electronic message. Sending, reading, or writing a text
message or electronic message does not include reading, selecting, or
entering a phone number or name into a hand-held electronic wireless
communications device for the purpose of making a telephone call.
H. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to:
1. The operator of a vehicle that is lawfully parked or stopped;
2. Any of the following while in the performance of their official
duties: a law enforcement officer; a member of a fire department;
or the operator of a public or private ambulance;
3. The use of factory-installed or aftermarket global positioning
systems (GPS) or wireless communications devices used to
transmit or receive data as part of a digital system;
4. The use of voice-operated technology;
5. The use of two-way transmitters or receivers by a licensee of the
Federal Communications Commission in the amateur radio service.
I. A violation of this Section is an offense against public safety, and,
notwithstanding any other provision of the Code of Ordinances, the fine
for the infraction of violation of public safety shall be set by the
Section
340.240
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
340.240
100:642
Municipal Court from time to time, but under no circumstances may a
person be imprisoned for such an infraction.
Section
340.240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
340.240
100:643
Chapter 345
PEDESTRIANS' RIGHTS AND DUTIES
Section 345.010. Subject To Traffic Control Devices.312 [R.O. 2009
§72.090; CC 1981 §18-414]
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals as heretofore declared
in Sections 310.060 and 310.070, but at all other places pedestrians shall
be granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in this
Chapter.
Section 345.020. Right-Of-Way in Crosswalk.313 [R.O. 2009 §72.091;
CC 1981 §18-415; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975; Ord. No. 82-69,
9-8-1982]
Section 345.030. Pedestrians To Use Right-Half of Crosswalk.314
[R.O. 2009 §72.092; CC 1981 §18-416; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right-half of
crosswalks.
A. The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian
crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk or within any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, except as otherwise provided in
this Chapter.
B. The provisions of this Section shall not relieve a pedestrian from the
duty of using due care for his/her safety. No pedestrian shall suddenly
leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a
vehicle which is so close as to constitute an immediate hazard.
C. The provisions of Subsection (B) shall not relieve a driver of a vehicle
from the duty of exercising due care for the safety of any pedestrian
within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an
intersection.
D. Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross
the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear
shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
312. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.370, RSMo.
313. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.375, RSMo.
314. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.380, RSMo.
Section
340.240
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
345.040
100:644
Section 345.040. Crossing At Right Angles.315 [R.O. 2009 §72.093;
CC 1981 §18-417; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at
right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except
in a crosswalk.
Section 345.050. When Pedestrians Shall Yield.316 [R.O. 2009
§72.094; CC 1981 §18-418; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
Section 345.060. Prohibited Crossing.317 [R.O. 2009 §72.095; CC
1981 §18-419; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
Section 345.070. Obedience To Bridge and Railroad Signals.318 [R.O.
2009 §72.096; CC 1981 §18-420; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
A. Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
B. Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the rightof-
way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
C. The foregoing rules in this Section have no application under the
conditions stated in Section 345.060 when pedestrians are prohibited
from crossing at certain designated places.
A. Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a
crosswalk.
B. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in any
business district.
C. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk upon any
street designated by ordinance.
D. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic control devices; and, when authorized to
cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the
official traffic control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.
A. No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach
thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate or barrier after a bridge
operation signal indication has been given.
315. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.385, RSMo.
316. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.390, RSMo.
317. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.395, RSMo.
318. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.400, RSMo.
Section
345.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
345.070
100:645
Section 345.080. Pedestrians Walking Along Roadways.319 [R.O.
2009 §72.097; CC 1981 §18-421; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
Section 345.090. Drivers To Exercise Highest Degree of Care.320
[R.O. 2009 §72.098; CC 1981 §18-422; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
Notwithstanding other provisions of this Chapter, every driver of a vehicle
shall exercise the highest degree of care to avoid colliding with any
pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn
when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any
child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway.
Section 345.100. Use of Coasters, Roller Skates and Similar Devices
Restricted. [R.O. 2009 §72.099; CC 1981 §18-6; Ord. No. 75-35,
8-6-1975]
No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing
a street on a crosswalk and when so crossing such person shall be granted
all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to
pedestrians. This Section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as
a play street as authorized by ordinance of the City.
Chapter 350
PARKING REGULATIONS
Cross References—As to off-street parking—general provisions, §§400.660
et seq.; as to off-street parking and loading, §§400.710 et seq.
B. No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing,
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while such gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
A. Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to
walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
B. Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the
roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the
opposite direction.
319. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.405, RSMo.
320. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.410, RSMo.
Section
345.070
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
345.100
100:646
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 350.010. Application — Regulations Not Exclusive.321 [R.O.
2009 §73.01; CC 1981 §§18-315—18-316; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
Section 350.020. Parking Signs Required.322 [R.O. 2009 §73.02; CC
1981 §18-320; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975; Ord. No. 17-111 § 1,
6-13-2017]
Section 350.030. Police May Remove Illegally Parked Vehicles.323
[R.O. 2009 §73.03; CC 1981 §18-87; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975; Ord.
No. 88-94, 6-10-1988; Ord. No. 88-118, 3-23-1988; Ord. No. 89-48,
3-22-1989; Ord. No. 90-128, 5-17-1990; Ord. No. 90-261, 10-4-1990;
Ord. No. 96-64, 3-6-1996]
A. Application. The provisions of this Chapter prohibiting the standing or
parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein
specified or as indicated on official signs except when it is necessary to
stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with
the directions of a Police Officer or official traffic control device.
B. Regulations Not Exclusive. The provisions of this Chapter imposing a
time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to
observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting
the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at
specified times.
A. Except as set forth in Subsection (B) of this Section, whenever any
parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on a public street
or public parking lot, signs shall be erected giving notice thereof, and
no such ordinance shall be effective unless such signs are erected and
in place at the time of any alleged offense.
B. During the Festival of the Little Hills, no sign shall be required to be
posted to prohibit the parking of a recreational vehicle, a trailer or a
van that is owned or operated by a vendor in the festival area as defined
in Code Section 125.820.
A. Members of the Police Department are authorized to remove a vehicle
from a street or highway to the nearest garage or other place of safety
or to a garage designated or maintained by the Police Department or
otherwise maintained by the City under the circumstances hereinafter
enumerated:
321. State Law References—Similar provisions, §§300.520—300.525, RSMo.
322. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.545, RSMo.
323. Cross Reference—As to abandoned vehicles, ch. 375. State Law Reference—Similar
provisions, §300.595, RSMo.
Section
350.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
350.030
100:647
1. When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct or
causeway or in any tube or tunnel where such vehicle constitutes
an obstruction to traffic.
2. When a vehicle upon a highway is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person in charge of the vehicle is by
reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be
unable to provide its custody or removal.
3. When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so parked
illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the
normal movement of traffic.
4. When any vehicle has been left unattended on the highway of
Interstate 70, Missouri Route 364 or Missouri Route 370 for more
than forty-eight (48) hours.
5. When any vehicle has been left unattended on the highway of
Missouri Route 94 from the intersection of Missouri Route 94 with
Interstate 70 to the south City limit for more than forty-eight (48)
hours.
6. Alleys. When any vehicle shall be parked in an alley under such
conditions as to leave available less than twelve (12) feet of the
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic.
7. When any vehicle shall be parked on a highway or on an alley so as
to obstruct a driveway.
8. Whenever a motor vehicle is parked upon any property owned or
operated by the City for the parking of motor vehicles for a longer
period of time than is lawfully permitted for a vehicle to remain
parked thereon, without regard to parking charges.
9. Whenever a motor vehicle is found unattended upon any property
owned or controlled by the City not devoted to the parking of motor
vehicles.
10. Whenever a vehicle is parked in a prohibited area that is so
designated by signs or other official markings.
11. When any vehicle has been left unattended on the highway of
Missouri Route 94 from the intersection of Missouri Route 94 and
Barthel Street and the north City limit for more than forty-eight
(48) hours.
B. Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street as authorized in
this Section and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the
registration records in the vehicle the name and address of the owner
thereof, the officer shall immediately give or cause to be given notice in
writing to the owner of the fact of the removal and the reasons therefor
and of the place to which the vehicle has been removed. In the event
Section
350.030
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
350.030
100:648
Section 350.040. Angle Parking.324 [R.O. 2009 §73.04; CC 1981
§§18-285—18-287; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975; Ord. 94-290, 11-2-94;
Ord. No. 94-327, 12-14-1994; Ord. No. 08-156, 8-18-2008]
any vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of the notice shall be
given to the proprietor of the garage.
C. Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street under this Section
and does not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner or
for any other reason is unable to give the notice to the owner as herein
before provided and in the event the vehicle is not returned to the
owner within a period of three (3) days, then and in that event the
officer shall immediately send or cause to be sent a written report of
such removal by mail to the State department whose duty it is to
register motor vehicles and shall file a copy of such notice with the
proprietor of any public garage in which the vehicle may be stored.
Such notice shall include a complete description of the vehicle, the
date, time and place from which removed, the reasons for such removal
and the name of the garage or place where the vehicle is stored.
D. Notwithstanding any other requirements of this Chapter, no signs shall
be required to be posted at any of the locations enumerated in this
Section for enforcement of this Section.
A. Signs Or Markings.
1. The City Traffic Engineer shall determine upon what streets angle
parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets but
such angle parking shall not be indicated upon any Federal aid or
State highway within the City unless the State Highway
Commission has determined by resolution or order entered in its
minutes that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle
parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic.
2. Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place
where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive
upon the left side of the street.
3. Forty-five degree (45°) angle parking is established along the east
side of Third Street between Washington and Jefferson Streets.
4. Ninety degree (90°) angle parking is established in the cul-de-sac
on Evergreen Drive.
B. Obedience To Signs Or Markers. On those streets which have been
signed or marked by the City Traffic Engineer for angle parking, no
person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb
or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings.
324. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §350.430. State Law References—Similar provisions,
§§300.420—300.430, RSMo.
Section
350.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
350.040
100:649
Section 350.050. Municipal Parking Lots and Garages.325 [R.O. 2009
§73.05; CC 1981 §§18-327, 18-330—18-331, 20-100; Ord. No. 80-99,
8-27-1980; Ord. No. 84-74, 6-21-1984; Ord. No. 92-36, 3-4-1992;
Ord. No. 92-276, 11-12-1992; Ord. No. 93-222, 9-22-1993; Ord. No.
93-253, 11-3-1993; Ord. No. 94-26, 2-1-1994; Ord. No. 94-37,
2-16-1994; Ord. No. 94-63, 3-15-1994; Ord. No. 94-125, 5-25-1994;
Ord. No. 94-155, 6-29-1994; Ord. No. 97-47, 1-22-1997; Ord. No.
98-46, 1-22-1998; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007; Ord. No. 19-076,
3-19-2019]
C. Permits For Loading Or Unloading To The Curb.
1. The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to issue special permits to
permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of
loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms
and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either
to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the
vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein
stated and authorized herein.
2. It shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any
of the special terms or conditions of any such permit.
A. Parking In Designated Spaces. All persons parking on the municipally
owned and operated parking lots and parking garage shall park only in
the properly designated parking spaces.
B. Unlawful Presence On Lots. It shall be unlawful for any person to be
upon or in any vehicles upon any parking lot in the municipal parking
system between the hours of 8:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M., except for that
period of time necessary to park or retrieve any vehicles being parked
upon such municipal parking lot.
C. Parking Garage.
1. No person shall park a vehicle in the City of Saint Charles' parking
garage located at the intersection of Monroe Street and Second
Street without either paying the prescribed fee set forth herein
each time the vehicle is parked or using a properly issued parking
card.
2. Schedule Of Fees.
a. Vehicles entering the garage on Monday through Friday
between 2:01 A.M. and 3:30 P.M. shall pay five dollars ($5.00).
b. Vehicles entering the garage on Monday through Friday
between 3:31 P.M. and 9:00 P.M. shall be no charge.
325. Cross References—As to penalty, §350.430; as to municipal parking lot, sch. IV.
Section
350.040
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
350.050
100:650
Section 350.060. Length of Parking Space For City Fire Trucks.
[R.O. 2009 §73.06; Ord. No. 95-22, 2-8-1995; Ord. No. 95-142,
5-17-1995; Ord. No. 07-06, 1-3-2007]
There is hereby established a sixty-six (66) foot parking space for the
parking of City fire trucks only on the east side of Second Street eighteen
(18) feet north of the north curb line of Jefferson Street. When signs are
erected giving plainly visible notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle
at this location.
c. Vehicles entering the garage on Monday through Saturday
between 9:01 P.M. and 2:00 A.M. the following day shall pay
five dollars ($5.00).
d. Vehicles entering the garage on Saturday between 2:01 A.M.
and 9:00 P.M., and Sunday from 2:01 A.M. through Monday
2:01 A.M., shall be no charge.
e. The monthly parking fee shall be forty dollars ($40.00). On
January 1, 2020, the monthly parking fee shall be fifty dollars
($50.00). On January 1, 2021, the monthly parking fee shall be
sixty dollars ($60.00).
f. All fees shall become effective May 1, 2019.
g. Any additional fee charged by an outside vendor associated
with the use of a credit card shall be in addition to the entrance
fee and paid for by the user.
3. Waivers of the fee and other restrictions contained in Subsection
(C)(2) above may be granted by the Mayor or the Mayor's designee
to City Officials performing official City business; to City employees
performing official City business; to lessees of space in the City
Hall, their employees, suppliers and customers; to festival
exhibitors and organizers; and to other similar persons. The Mayor
shall issue regulations concerning the applicability and procedures
for waiver of the provisions of Subsection (C)(2) above.
4. No person shall park any vehicle less than six (6) feet seven (7)
inches in height in any space marked "Parking for vehicles six (6)
feet seven (7) inches or more in height only" in the parking garage
located at the intersection of Monroe Street and Second Street.
5. No person shall park any vehicle in any space designated as "City
Employee Parking Only" in the parking garage located at the
intersection of Monroe Street and Second Street, unless a Cityissued
"Employee Parking" sticker is attached to the vehicle.
Section
350.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
350.060
100:651

ARTICLE II
Stopping, Standing and Parking
Section 350.070. Standing or Parking Close To Curb.326 [R.O. 2009
§73.15; CC 1981 §18-284; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975; Ord. No. 77-63,
1-4-1978]
Except as otherwise provided in Sections 350.050 and 350.080, every
vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs
shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle
parallel to and within eighteen (18) inches of the right-hand curb; provided
however, that such vehicle shall not be so stopped or parked with the wheels
beyond the back of the curb line.
Section 350.080. Lamps On Parked Vehicles.327 [R.O. 2009 §73.16;
CC 1981 §18-288; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
Section 350.090. Stopping, Standing and Parking Prohibitions.328
[R.O. 2009 §73.17; CC 1981 §18-289; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975; Ord.
A. Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked upon a street or highway during
the hours between a half-hour after sunset and a half-hour before
sunrise and in the event there is sufficient light to reveal any person or
object within a distance of five hundred (500) feet upon such street or
highway, no lights need be displayed upon such parked vehicle.
B. Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a roadway or shoulder
adjacent thereto, whether attended or unattended, during the hours
between a half-hour after sunset and a half-hour before sunrise and
there is not sufficient light to reveal any person or object within a
distance of five hundred (500) feet upon such highway, such vehicle so
parked or stopped shall be equipped with one (1) or more lamps
meeting the following requirements:
1. At least one (1) lamp shall display a white or amber light visible
from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of the vehicle
and the same lamp or at least one (1) other lamp shall display a red
light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear of
the vehicle and the location of the lamp or lamps shall always be
such that at least one (1) lamp or combination of lamps meeting the
requirements of this Section is installed as near as practicable to
the side of the vehicle which is closer to passing traffic. The
foregoing provisions shall not apply to a motor-driven cycle.
C. Any lighted head lamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or
dimmed.
326. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.415, RSMo.
327. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.435, RSMo.
328. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §350.430. State Law Reference—Similar provisions,
§300.440, RSMo.
Section
350.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
350.090
100:653
No. 95-132, 5-4-1995; Ord. No. 04-241, 10-1-2004; Ord. No. 04-259,
11-8-2004; Ord. No. 05-190, 7-13-2005; Ord. No. 07-124, 4-24-2007;
Ord. No. 10-231 §2, 11-10-2010; Ord. No. 11-133 §1, 7-8-2011; Ord.
No. 14-261 §1, 12-2-2014]
A. Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with law or the directions of a Police Officer or official
traffic control device, no person shall:
1. Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
a. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of a street;
b. On a sidewalk, except on the east side and in the cul-de-sac of
North Village Drive or in any residential driveway that is less
than twenty-two (22) feet in length, in which case enforcement
of the prohibition against stopping, standing or parking shall
not occur absent the receipt of a complaint;
c. Within an intersection;
d. On a crosswalk;
e. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty
(30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of
a safety zone, unless the traffic authority indicates a different
length by signs or markings;
f. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction
when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
g. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel;
h. On any railroad tracks;
i. At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
j. On a bicycle path.
2. Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers:
a. Within three (3) feet of a public or private driveway, provided
that enforcement of this restriction as to private driveways
shall only be initiated after receipt of a complaint;
b. Within ten (10) feet of a fire hydrant on the cul-de-sac at
Evergreen Drive, within fifteen (15) feet of all other fire
hydrants within the City, or within ten (10) feet of a mailbox,
provided that enforcement of this restriction as to mailboxes
shall only be initiated after receipt of a complaint;
Section
350.090
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
350.090
100:654
Section 350.100. Parking Not To Obstruct Traffic.329 [R.O. 2009
§73.18; CC 1981 §18-290; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such
a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10)
feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.
Section 350.110. Parking in Alleys.330 [R.O. 2009 §73.19; CC 1981
§18-291; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975; Ord. No. 88-105, 6-23-1988; Ord.
No. 89-48, 3-22-1989; Ord. No. 90-128, 5-17-1990; Ord. No. 90-261,
10-4-1990]
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under
such conditions as to leave available less than twelve (12) feet of the width
of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic and no person
c. Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
d. Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing
signal, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a
roadway;
e. Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any
fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of the entrance (when
properly signposted);
f. At any place where official signs prohibit standing;
g. To cause a site distance obstruction that creates a traffic
hazard. In such case the vehicle, at the Police Officer's
discretion, may be immediately towed.
3. Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading
merchandise or passengers:
a. Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
b. At any place where official signs prohibit parking;
c. Along any curb painted the color yellow and duly established
by City Code to prohibit parking.
B. No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his/her control into
any such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is
unlawful.
329. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §350.430. State Law Reference—Similar provisions,
§300.445, RSMo.
330. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §350.430. State Law Reference—Similar provisions,
§300.450, RSMo.
Section
350.090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
350.110
100:655
shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block
the driveway entrance to any abutting property.
Section 350.120. Parking For Certain Purposes Prohibited.331 [R.O.
2009 §73.20; CC 1981 §18-292; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
Section 350.130. Parking Adjacent To Schools.332 [R.O. 2009 §73.21;
CC 1981 §18-293; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
Section 350.140. Parking Prohibited On Narrow Streets.333 [R.O.
2009 §73.22; CC 1981 §18-294; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
Section 350.150. Standing or Parking On One-Way Streets or
Roadways.334 [R.O. 2009 §73.23; CC 1981 §§18-295—18-296; Ord. No.
75-35, 8-6-1975]
A. No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal
purpose of:
1. Displaying such vehicle for sale; or
2. Repair such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency.
A. The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no
parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school
property when such parking would, in his/her opinion, interfere with
traffic or create a hazardous situation.
B. When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side of
a street adjacent to any school property as authorized herein, no person
shall park a vehicle in any such designated place.
A. The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no
parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed
twenty (20) feet or upon one (1) side of a street as indicated by such
signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty (30) feet.
B. When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets
as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such
street in violation of any such sign.
A. Standing Or Parking On One-Way Streets. The City Traffic Engineer is
authorized to erect signs upon the left-hand side of any one-way street
to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles and when such signs are
331. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §350.430. State Law Reference—Similar provisions,
§300.455, RSMo.
332. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §350.430. State Law Reference—Similar provisions,
§300.460, RSMo.
333. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §350.430. State Law Reference—Similar provisions,
§300.465, RSMo.
334. Cross References—As to one-way streets and alleys, §§340.060 et seq. State Law
References—Similar provisions, §§300.470—300.475, RSMo.
Section
350.110
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
350.150
100:656
Section 350.160. Standing or Parking in Fire Lanes.335 [R.O. 2009
§73.24; CC 1981 §18-296.1(a); Ord. No. 81-37, 4-15-1981; Ord. No.
93-100, 5-5-1993]
Where signs have been erected indicating a public or private area to be
designated as a fire lane, no person shall stand or park a vehicle within the
area of the thirty (30) feet adjacent to such sign or impede in any way the
free movement of vehicular traffic within such area.
Section 350.170. Hazardous or Congested Places.336 [R.O. 2009
§73.25; CC 1981 §18-297; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
Section 350.180. Notice To Remove Vehicle.337 [R.O. 2009 §73.26;
CC 1981 §18-298]
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, whenever he/she has knowledge or
is informed that any vehicle is parked or placed in violation of the preceding
Section, to forthwith give a written notice to the owner or driver of such
vehicle or, if he/she is not able to ascertain the name and whereabouts of
such owner or driver, to place a written notice in a conspicuous place upon
such vehicle requiring that such vehicle be moved within a reasonable time,
which time shall be specified in such notice and shall not exceed fortyeight
(48) hours. Such notice may be served or placed upon or within such
vehicle by the Chief of Police or any Policeman of the City and a copy shall
be kept by the officer serving the same, who shall make his/her written
in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon such left-hand
side in violation of any such sign.
B. Standing Or Parking On One-Way Roadways. In the event a highway
includes two (2) or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to
one (1) direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park
a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs
are erected to permit such standing or parking. The City Traffic
Engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking may be
permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and to
erect signs giving notice thereof.
A. The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to determine and designate by
proper signs placed not exceeding one hundred (100) feet in length in
which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an
especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic.
B. When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as
authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any
such designated place.
335. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §350.430.
336. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §350.430. State Law Reference—Similar provisions,
§300.480, RSMo.
337. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §350.430.
Section
350.150
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
350.180
100:657
return thereon, setting out when and where served, on whom served and
such officer shall subscribe his/her name thereto. It shall be unlawful for the
owner or driver thereof to fail to remove any such vehicle within the time
specified in such notice.
Section 350.190. Parking Prohibited At All Times On Certain
Streets.338 [R.O. 2009 §73.28; CC 1981 §18-317; Ord. No. 75-35,
8-6-1975; Ord. No. 82-48, 6-16-1982; Ord. No. 99-275, 8-11-1999;
Ord. No. 99-334, 9-23-1999; Ord. No. 99-335, 9-23-1999; Ord. No.
99-336, 9-23-1999; Ord. No. 00-130, 5-19-2000]
Section 350.200. Stopping, Standing or Parking Prohibited During
Certain Hours.339 [R.O. 2009 §73.29; CC 1981 §§18-318—18-319;
Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
Section 350.210. Parking of Certain Vehicles and Trailers
Prohibited.340 [R.O. 2009 §73.30; CC 1981 §18-322; Ord. No. 84-99,
8-23-1984; Ord. No. 96-49, 2-21-1996; Ord. No. 98-443, 10-22-1998;
Ord. No. 04-125, 6-18-2004; Ord. No. 04-156, 7-23-2004; Ord. No.
05-03, 1-11-2005; Ord. No. 17-111 § 2, 6-13-2017]
A. When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a
vehicle at any time upon any of the streets described by ordinance.
B. All parking restrictions previously adopted by ordinance shall be
continued at the present locations thereof. Any addition or deletion of
parking restrictions from and after January 1, 1982, as authorized in
Subsection (A) above is included in Schedule III, Parking Restrictions of
this Title.
A. Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours On Certain Streets. When
signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall
park a vehicle between the hours specified by ordinance of any day
except Sunday and public holidays within the district or upon any of the
streets described by ordinance.
B. Stopping, Standing Or Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours On
Certain Streets. When signs are erected in each block giving notice
thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle between the hours
specified by ordinance of any day except Sundays and public holidays
within the district or upon any of the streets described by ordinance.
A. Definitions. For the purposes of this Section, the following terms shall
have these prescribed meanings:
338. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.530, RSMo.
339. State Law References—Similar provisions, §§300.535—300.540, RSMo.
340. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §350.430.
Section
350.180
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
350.210
100:658
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Every vehicle in excess of three-fourths (3/
4) ton gross vehicle weight designed, maintained or used primarily for
the transportation of property or more than eight (8) passengers.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — See Code Section 400.050 for definition.
TRAILER — Any vehicle without motive power designed for carrying
property or passengers on its own structure and for being drawn by
a self-propelled vehicle, except those running exclusively on tracks,
including a semi-trailer or vehicle of the trailer type so designed and
used in conjunction with a self-propelled vehicle that a considerable
part of its own weight rests upon and is carried by the towing vehicle.
B. Parking By Commercial Vehicles Prohibited Except For Certain
Purposes In Certain Districts — Exception. It shall be unlawful for any
person to encumber any public street, road, alley or highway within the
City by placing or parking or causing to be placed or parked thereon
any commercial vehicle, except when loading and unloading, in zoning
districts "R-1C", "R-1D", "R-1E", "R-2", "R-3A", "R-M". Special
permission may be granted for repairmen to park in such areas for
periods up to eight (8) hours by the Chief of Police.
C. Parking Of Motor Trucks, Trailers, Tractor Trailers And Truck Trailers.
1. No person shall park any licensed motor truck or trailer or trucktrailer
combination over twelve thousand (12,000) pounds gross
vehicle weight, manufacturer's rating, or any truck designed for
hauling a tractor-trailer upon any street, public parking lot or
public parking area for greater than one (1) hour between 5:00 P.M.
and 8:00 A.M.
2. Except when loading or unloading, no person shall park any
licensed motor truck or trailer or truck-trailer combination over
twelve thousand (12,000) pounds gross vehicle weight,
manufacturer's rating, or any truck designed for hauling a tractortrailer
upon any private parking lot, parking area or other private
property for greater than one (1) hour between 5:00 P.M. and 8:00
A.M. where signs are erected at the entrances of the parking lot,
parking area or a restricted or assigned parking area prohibiting
such parking and notifying that unauthorized parking is subject to
the issuance of a citation for illegal parking.
3. The signs described in Subsection (C)(2) shall be of dimensions not
less than seventeen (17) inches by twenty-two (22) inches, with
letters of a font size not less than one (1) inch in height.
D. Parking Of Trailers Prohibited Except For Certain Purposes In Certain
Districts. It shall be unlawful for any person to encumber any public
street, road, alley or highway within the City by placing or parking or
causing to be placed or parked thereon; any trailer, except when
loading and unloading, in zoning districts "HCD", "C-1", "C-2" or "C-3".
Section
350.210
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
350.210
100:659
Section 350.220. Parking On Riverside Drive During Festivals in
Frontier Park. [R.O. 2009 §73.31; Ord. No. 98-192, 4-23-1998; Ord.
No. 05-242, 9-16-2005]
During any City festival held in Frontier Park, no person shall park any
vehicle, except passenger cars, passenger vans and pickup trucks, in the
parking spaces on the west side of Riverside Drive from the Blanchette
Creek Bridge north to First Capitol Drive and on the east side of Riverside
Drive from First Capitol Drive north to Monroe Street.
Section 350.230. Number of Vehicles Permitted To Be Kept At
"R1-E" Zoned Properties. [R.O. 2009 §73.32; Ord. No. 05-288,
11-4-2005]
E. Parking Of Recreational Vehicles Prohibited. No person shall park any
recreational vehicle upon any City street except for no more than
twenty-four (24) consecutive hours for the purpose of loading and
unloading if the owner is present.
F. Festival Of The Little Hills; Parking Of Recreational Vehicles, Vans And
Trailers By Vendors Prohibited. No person who is a vendor during the
Festival of the Little Hills or whose name appears on the festival vendor
list as maintained by the Festival Committee shall park a recreational
vehicle, a trailer or van on any public street or public parking lot
located within the festival area which is the area bounded by the
northern curbline of Clark Street on the north, the western curbline of
Fifth Street on the west, the southern curbline of Ameristar Boulevard
on the south and the Missouri River on the east at any time from 6:00
A.M. of the Friday through 10:00 P.M. of the next Sunday during the
festival. Each three-hour period during which a parking violation occurs
or continues to occur shall constitute a separate offense.
Notwithstanding any other ordinance to the contrary, the minimum fine
for a violation of this Subsection (F) shall be two hundred dollars
($200.00). The Police Department is directed to place a notice on each
vehicle in violation of this Subsection (F) that the vehicle will be towed
at the owner's expense after six (6) hours of unlawful parking and to
notify the Festival Committee immediately of the violation. The Police
Department is authorized to tow any vehicle in violation of this
Subsection (F) after the vehicle has parked for six (6) or more
consecutive hours in violation of the Subsection.
A. No more than six (6) vehicles shall be allowed per family or dwelling
unit within an "R1-E" Single-Family Residential Zoning District. This
shall include vehicles parked on the property of the dwelling unit and
vehicles parked on the street.
1. For purposes of this Subsection, vehicles shall include automobiles,
trucks, motorcycles, recreational vehicles as defined in Section
400.050, boats, trailers, any other conveyance which requires State
Section
350.210
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
350.230
100:660
registration to be operated on public streets and those machines
described in Section 375.010.
2. For purposes of this Subsection, "family" is defined as persons who
are related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together and
occupying a single housekeeping unit with single kitchen facilities
or a group of persons living together and occupying a single
housekeeping unit with single kitchen facilities, of which group no
person shall be unrelated to more than two (2) persons in the group
or any group of people related by blood, marriage or adoption and
one (1) other unrelated person residing at the dwelling unit.
3. For purposes of this Subsection, "dwelling unit" shall have the
same meaning as in Section 400.050.
B. Any vehicle in excess of the six (6) described in Subsection (A) shall be
subject to immediate towing pursuant to Section 350.030(A)(10) in
areas that are so designated by signs or other official markings. This
provision shall apply to vehicles parked on the street. Vehicles parked
on private property shall only be towed upon application and issuance
of a search warrant pursuant to Chapter 135 of this Code.
Section
350.230
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
350.230
100:661

ARTICLE III
Stopping For Loading and Unloading
Section 350.240. Traffic Engineer To Designate Curb Loading
Zones.341 [R.O. 2009 §73.40; CC 1981 §18-332; Ord. No. 75-35,
8-6-1975]
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to determine the location of
passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain
appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which
the provisions of this Section are applicable.
Section 350.250. Commercial Deliveries in The Historic Downtown
District Prohibited During Certain Hours. [R.O. 2009 §73.41; Ord.
No. 09-03, 1-7-2009]
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle with a gross vehicle weight of thirtytwo
thousand (32,000) pounds or more to encumber Main Street within the
Historic Downtown District between the hours of 11:00 A.M. and 1:00 P.M.
daily for the purpose of making a commercial delivery.
Section 350.260. Standing in Passenger Curb Loading Zone.342 [R.O.
2009 §73.42; CC 1981 §18-334; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of
time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in
any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the
regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective and then only
for a period not to exceed three (3) minutes.
Section 350.270. Standing in Freight Curb Loading Zone.343 [R.O.
2009 §73.43; CC 1981 §18-335; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of
time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and
loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone
during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect.
Section 350.280. Public Carrier Stops and Stands.344 [R.O. 2009
§73.44; CC 1981 §18-336; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized and required to establish bus stops,
bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common carrier
motor vehicles on such public streets, in such places and in such number
341. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §360.485, RSMo.
342. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §350.430. State Law Reference—Similar provisions,
§300.495, RSMo.
343. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §350.430. State Law Reference—Similar provisions,
§300.500, RSMo.
344. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.505, RSMo.
Section
350.240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
350.280
100:663
as he/she shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to
the public and every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand or other stand
shall be designated by appropriate signs.
Section 350.290. Buses and Taxicabs.345 [R.O. 2009 §73.45; CC 1981
§18-337; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
Section 350.300. Restricted Use of Bus and Taxicab Stands.346 [R.O.
2009 §73.46; CC 1981 §18-338; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop
or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has
been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver
of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of
and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such
stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about
to enter such zone.
A. The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided
herein.
B. The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any
place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their
baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone
so designated as provided herein, except in case of an emergency.
C. The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or passenger
loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when
stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a position
with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than eighteen (18)
inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so
as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic.
D. The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated as
provided herein. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a
taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or
parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
345. Cross References—As to taxicabs, §§645.030 et seq.; as to parking buses in municipal lots
restricted, sch. IV.
346. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §350.430. State Law Reference—Similar provisions,
§300.515, RSMo.
Section
350.280
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
350.300
100:664
ARTICLE IV
Snow Emergency Routes
Section 350.310. Authority To Prohibit Parking During Snow
Emergency. [R.O. 2009 §73.60; CC 1981 §18-350; Ord. No. 79-3,
1-10-1979; Ord. No. 97-451, 12-17-1997; Ord. No. 07-162,
6-11-2007]
Whenever the Mayor has declared a snow emergency on the basis of
falling snow, sleet or freezing rain or on the basis of a forecast by the
United States Weather Bureau or other weather service of snow, sleet or
freezing rain, that weather and/or road conditions will make it necessary
that motor vehicle traffic be expedited, the Mayor, through the declaration
of a snow emergency, shall have power to restrict and prohibit vehicles
being parked on a designated and posted snow emergency route by making
said declaration as provided further in this Article.
Section 350.320. Declaration of Emergency — Termination. [R.O.
2009 §73.61; CC 1981 §§18-351—18-352; Ord. No. 79-3, 1-10-1979;
Ord. No. 97-451, 12-17-1997; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
Section 350.330. Signs To Make Snow Emergency Routes. [R.O.
2009 §73.62; CC 1981 §18-353; Ord. No. 79-3, 1-10-1979; Ord. No.
97-451, 12-17-1997]
On each route designated as a snow emergency route, the City Traffic
Engineer shall post special signs at intervals indicating that this is an
emergency snow route. These signs shall be distinctive and uniform in
appearance and shall be plainly readable to persons traveling on the street
or highway. The City Traffic Engineer shall determine those routes to be
designated as snow routes and shall file a list of those routes in the office of
the City Clerk.
A. Declaration By Mayor To Be Announced.
1. The Mayor shall cause each declaration of a snow emergency made
pursuant to this Subsection to be publicly announced by means of
broadcast and telecast by stations within normal operating range
covering the City and shall cause the declaration to be further
announced in newspapers of general circulation when feasible.
Each announcement made by the Mayor shall include the time it
became or will become effective.
2. The Mayor shall make and keep, or cause to be made or kept, a
record of each time the declarations are made in accordance with
this Section.
B. Termination Of Emergency. Whenever the Mayor shall find that an
emergency situation no longer exists, it shall be the Mayor's duty to
declare that the snow emergency has terminated in the same manner as
prescribed in this Section.
Section
350.310
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
350.340
100:665
Section 350.340. Removal of Vehicles — Disposition. [R.O. 2009
§73.63; CC 1981 §18-354; Ord. No. 79-3, 1-10-1979; Ord. No.
87-207, 10-22-1987]
Section 350.350. Restrictions On Depositing Snow and Ice.347 [R.O.
2009 §73.64; CC 1981 §18-355; Ord. No. 79-3, 1-10-1979]
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited snow or ice on or against
a fire hydrant or on any sidewalk, street or loading and unloading area of a
public transportation system; except that snow and ice may be temporarily
windowed on public roadways incident to the cleaning thereof or
temporarily windowed on curbs incident to the cleaning of sidewalks and
business districts.
Section 350.360. Interference With Snow Plows.348 [R.O. 2009
§73.65; CC 1981 §18-356; Ord. No. 79-3, 1-10-1979]
No person shall impede or interfere in any way with a snow plow or other
snow removal vehicle while such snow plow or other snow removal vehicle
is in operation on City streets.
Section 350.370. Conflicts. [R.O. 2009 §73.66; CC 1981 §18-357;
Ord. No. 79-3, 1-10-1979; Ord. No. 97-451, 12-17-1997; Ord. No.
07-162, 6-11-2007]
Any provision of this Article which becomes effective by declaration by the
Mayor or upon the occurrence of certain weather conditions shall, while
temporarily in effect, take precedence over conflicting provisions of law
A. Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked or abandoned on a snow
removal emergency route in violation of this Subsection, such vehicle
may be removed immediately.
B. Within forty-eight (48) hours of the removal of such vehicle, the Chief of
Police shall give notice to the registered owner of the vehicle, if known,
and to any holder of a security interest in the vehicle, that the vehicle
has been impounded and stored for violation of this Article. This notice
shall be sent by certified mail and give the location of the vehicle and
the costs incurred by the City for removal and storage.
C. Unclaimed vehicles may be disposed of in accordance with the
provisions of Section 375.090.
D. Vehicles may be redeemed in accordance with the provisions of Section
375.100. If the owner or the security interest holder requests a hearing,
the Chief of Police shall make the determinations required by Section
375.100(B) and shall determine whether the vehicle was parked or
abandoned in violation of this Article.
347. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §350.430.
348. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §350.430.
Section
350.340
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
350.370
100:666
normally in effect; except that it shall not take precedence over provisions
of law relating to traffic accidents, emergency travel of authorized
emergency vehicles or emergency traffic directions of a Police Officer.
Section
350.370
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
350.370
100:667

ARTICLE V
Reserved Parking For Persons With Physical Disabilities
Section 350.380. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §73.80; CC 1981 §18-358.1;
Ord. No. 91-27, 2-7-1991; Ord. No. 97-46, 1-22-1997; Ord. No.
11-163 §1, 8-17-2011]
For the purposes of this Article, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
ACCESSIBLE PARKING ACCESS AISLE — Any space adjacent to at least
one (1) side of a parking space reserved for persons with physical
disabilities, as defined below, that is the length of such reserved space, is a
minimum of five (5) feet in width and is striped with either blue, yellow or
white traffic paint in a cross-hatch design so as to increase its visibility.
LIFT VAN ACCESS AISLE — Any space adjacent to at least one (1) side of
one (1) in every four (4) parking spaces reserved for persons with physical
disabilities, as defined below, that is the length of such reserved space, is a
minimum of ninety-six (96) inches in width and is striped with either blue,
yellow or white traffic paint in a cross-hatch design so as to increase its
visibility and designated "Lift Van Accessible Only".
OWNER OR JOINT OWNERS OF MOTOR VEHICLES — Residents of the
State, at least one (1) of whom is physically disabled.
PHYSICALLY DISABLED PERSONS — Any natural person who has
permanently lost the use of one (1) or both legs, or one (1) or both arms or
any combination thereof, any person who is so severely disabled as to be
unable to move freely without the aid of crutches, braces, walker, canes, leg
prosthesis or wheelchair; or any person who suffers from lung disease to
such an extent that his forced expiratory volume in one (1) second (FEV),
when measured by spirometry, is less than one (1) liter or his arterial
oxygen tension (Po2) is less than sixty (60) mm/hg on room air at rest; or any
person who has a cardiovascular disease so severe as to measure between
three (3) to four (4) on the New York Heart Classification Scale.
RESERVED PARKING SPACE FOR PERSONS WITH PHYSICAL
DISABILITIES — Any space designated as reserved for persons with
physical disabilities by means of a sign upon which is inscribed the
international symbol of accessibility in white on a blue background and may
also have inscribed the words "reserved parking" or "accessible parking"
whether upon public or private property open to public use.
VEHICLE — Any non-commercial vehicle whose gross weight does not
exceed twelve thousand (12,000) pounds.
VEHICLES AUTHORIZED TO BE PARKED IN PARKING SPACES RESERVED
FOR PERSONS WITH PHYSICAL DISABILITIES — Those vehicles with one
(1) of the following:
A distinguishing license plate or card issued pursuant to Section
301.071, RSMo. (Disabled Veterans) or Section 301.142 (Physically
Disabled Persons).
1.
Section
350.380
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
350.380
100:669
Section 350.390. Prohibited Parking.349 [R.O. 2009 §73.81; CC 1981
§18-358.2; Ord. No. 91-27, 2-7-1991; Ord. No. 97-46, 1-22-1997;
Ord. No. 11-163 §1, 8-17-2011]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or stand a vehicle or to own
a vehicle which is parked in any parking space reserved for persons with
physical disabilities, accessible parking access aisle, or lift van access aisle,
unless the person is an owner or joint owner of a motor vehicle transporting
a physically disabled person and such vehicle is one authorized to be parked
in a "reserved parking space for persons with disabilities".
Section 350.395. Towing of Vehicles. [Ord. No. 11-163 §1,
8-17-2011]
The owner or person in lawful possession of any off-street parking facility,
upon notifying the Police Department or any Police Officer, may cause the
removal of any vehicle parking in violation of Section 350.390 from a space
designated for physically disabled persons if there is posted immediately
adjacent to, and readily visible from, such space, or in a conspicuous place
at each entrance to the public off-street parking facility, a sign not less than
seventeen (17) inches by twenty-two (22) inches in size with lettering not
less than one (1) inch in height, which clearly and conspicuously states the
following: "Unauthorized vehicles parked in spaces reserved for physically
disabled persons or disabled veterans and not displaying distinguishing
placards or license plates issued for physically disabled persons or disabled
veterans will be towed away at owner's expense. Towed vehicles may be
reclaimed at the City Police Department or by telephoning the Police
Department." Any person who parks in a space reserved for physically
disabled persons and not displaying distinguishing plates is guilty of an
infraction and shall be responsible for the expense of towing and
impounding. The Police Officer may in addition issue a parking ticket to the
person or upon the vehicle.
Section 350.397. Minimum Number of Reserved Parking Spaces For
Persons With Physical Disabilities. [R.O. 2009 §73.83; CC 1981
§18-359; Ord. No. 91-27, 2-7-1991; Ord. No. 93-6, 1-21-1993; Ord.
No. 11-163 §1, 8-17-2011]
2. A driver who is obviously physically disabled as defined above.
Any motor vehicle designed and operated for transporting physically
disabled persons.
3.
A. The owner of any off-street parking area or facility shall provide
reserved parking spaces for persons with physical disabilities at any
business, retail, professional or institutional establishment whether
public or private upon the same property in conformance with the
numbers required in the following chart:
349. Cross References—As to penalty, §350.430; as to disabled parking, §§350.380 et seq.
Section
350.380
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
350.397
100:670
Total Parking in Lot
Required Minimum Number of
Accessible Spaces
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total
1,001 and over 20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000
B. The parking space closest to the entrance way of each public entrance
to any business, retail, professional or institutional establishment shall
be designated as a reserved parking space for persons with physical
disabilities and shall have a minimum width of eleven (11) feet. Any
such parking space reserved for persons with physical disabilities shall
meet the following requirements:
1. All parking spaces reserved for persons with physical disabilities
shall be striped with either blue, yellow or white traffic paint and
shall have the international accessible parking symbol painted
within.
2. All parking spaces reserved for persons with physical disabilities
shall have a marked access aisle or traffic lane along the length of
at least one (1) side of a minimum of five (5) feet in width, which
aisle shall be striped in a cross-hatch design so as to increase its
visibility.
3. All parking spaces reserved for persons with physical disabilities
shall have a sign posted adjacent to, and visible from each space,
which signs shall have the international accessible parking symbol
upon it and the words "Reserved Parking" or "Accessible Parking".
The sign shall be twelve (12) inches by eighteen (18) inches in size
and conform to the R7-8 reserved parking for persons with physical
disabilities sign as depicted within the Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices.
4. All parking spaces reserved for persons with physical disabilities
and access aisles shall be level with surface slopes not exceeding
1:50 (2%) in all directions.
C. One (1) in every four (4) parking spaces reserved for persons with
physical disabilities, but not less than one (1) parking space reserved
Section
350.397
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
350.397
100:671
Section 350.400. Residential District Reserved Parking Spaces For
Persons With Physical Disabilities.350 [R.O. 2009 §73.84; CC 1981
§18-359.1; Ord. No. 91-27, 2-5-1991; Ord. No. 05-22, 1-14-2005;
Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007; Ord. No. 11-163 §1, 8-17-2011]
for persons with disabilities, shall be served by an access aisle a
minimum of ninety-six (96) inches wide and shall be designated "Lift
Van Accessible Only" with signs that meet the requirements of the
Americans with Disabilities Act, as amended, and any rules or
regulations established pursuant thereto.
A. Any owner or tenant of a building or facility open to the public or any
person possessing a current distinguishing license plate or card issued
pursuant to Section 301.071, RSMo. (Disabled Veterans) or Section
301.142, RSMo. (Physically Disabled Persons) may apply to have a
parking space on a public street in a residential district designated as a
reserved parking space for persons with physical disabilities. The
application shall be filed with the Department of Public Works on a form
approved by the Department.
B. The designated parking spaces covered by this Section shall be issued
only to physically disabled persons, as defined by Section 301.142,
RSMo., and those persons eligible for disabled veteran license plates as
set forth in Section 301.071, RSMo.
C. The Director of Public Works shall determine whether the parking
space shall be designated as a reserved parking space for persons with
physical disabilities, based upon the following considerations:
1. Proximity of residences of individuals who possess a current
Disabled Veteran or Physically Disabled Persons parking
identification card or sticker.
2. Access to, and proximity of, driveways by those physically disabled
persons or disabled veterans as provided above.
3. Access to, and proximity to, off-street parking spaces, including
driveways, by those physically disabled persons or disabled
veterans as provided above.
4. Number and proximity of other reserved parking spaces for
persons with physical disabilities on public streets in the area.
5. Number of days or nights per week on which the space will be in
use, including the length of time each day or each night it will be in
use.
6. Parking restrictions already in existence in the area.
7. Traffic and pedestrian safety considerations.
350. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §350.430.
Section
350.397
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
350.400
100:672
Section 350.410. Reserved Parking For Persons With Physical
Disabilities Designated.351 [R.O. 2009 §73.85; Ord. No. 93-251,
11-3-1993; Ord. No. 11-163 §1, 8-17-2011]
When signs are erected giving plainly visible notice thereof, no person shall
park any vehicle, unless the vehicle is authorized to be parked in a reserved
parking space for persons with physical disabilities as defined in Section
350.380, on the west side of Second Street from a point one hundred thirtysix
(136) feet north of Monroe Street north ninety-nine (99) feet.
8. No parking space on a public street shall be designated as a
reserved parking space for persons with physical disabilities unless
written consent has been obtained from the owners of the property
adjacent to the parking space.
9. Reserved parking spaces for persons with physical disabilities on
public streets shall be restricted to the use of any person properly
possessing a current distinguishing license plate or card issued
pursuant to Section 301.071, RSMo. (Disabled Veterans) or Section
301.142, RSMo. (Physically Disabled Persons), and shall not be
reserved for any specific individual.
D. If the application is disapproved, then the applicant may appeal in
writing to the Mayor within thirty (30) days after the disapproval.
E. If the application is approved by the Director of Public Works or by the
Mayor, then the Director of Public Works is authorized to install signs
indicating the parking space is restricted.
F. Designation of a parking space as a reserved parking space for persons
with physical disabilities shall be valid for one (1) year, and may be
renewed annually.
G. If the person receiving a designated parking space under this Section
should no longer be eligible for a current distinguishing license plate or
card as provided above, or should no longer reside at the residence
which was stated in the application for a designated space, the
designated parking space shall be terminated.
351. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §350.430.
Section
350.400
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
350.410
100:673

ARTICLE VI
Valet and Bicycle Parking Zones
Section 350.420. Establishment of Valet Parking Zones. [Ord. No.
10-23 §1, 2-19-2010; Ord. No. 11-163 §1, 8-17-2011]
A. Pursuant to the provisions of this Section, valet parking zones shall be
established on such public streets and in such places and in such
number as shall be determined by the City Council to be in the best
interest of the City, its citizens and visitors in order to provide
convenient parking near the point of destination in those portions of the
City designated as business districts by Chapter 400, Zoning Code.
B. A valet parking zone shall be created only upon the written request
submitted to the Department of Community Development by the owner
or occupant of the property adjacent to the site of the proposed valet
parking zone and the subsequent approval by the City Council of a
permit therefor setting forth the terms of the operation of the valet
parking zone, which terms shall include, but may not be limited to,
those set forth in this Section. Each request shall be accompanied by an
application form provided by the Department of Community
Development and shall include the location of the proposed valet
parking zone, a written plan of operations, the location where vehicles
will be parked, proof of lawful right to park vehicles, and such other
information as may be requested by the City. Each such request must be
accompanied by a non-refundable initial permit application fee of three
hundred dollars ($300.00). Each such permit shall obligate the holder
thereof (the "permittee") to operate the valet parking zone and perform
all of the obligations, duties and responsibilities set forth in the permit
and in this Section. All such permits issued shall thereafter be subject
to renewal by the City Council as of April first (1st) of every calendar
year. In determining whether to renew a permit, the City Council shall
consider the manner in which the valet parking zone has been
operated, the degree to which the applicant has complied with the
requirements set forth in this Section and the permit and the best
interests of the City and its citizens and visitors.
C. Valet parking zones shall be established only in those areas designated
as "business districts" pursuant to Chapter 400, Zoning Code of the
Code of Ordinances of the City. Valet parking zones shall be established
only on public streets and the adjacent sidewalks, and shall be adjacent
to the property to be served by the valet parking zone as specified in the
permit to be issued pursuant to Subsection (B) above. The City shall
determine the location and length of all valet parking zones based on
factors including, but not limited to, traffic flow, pedestrian safety and
impact on the overall streetscape. The valet parking zone shall not
extend more than eight (8) feet into the street from the curb and there
shall be no obstruction of fire hydrants, pedestrian crosswalk or a
accessible corner cut. All stanchions, ropes or other objects delineating
Section
350.420
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
350.420
100:675
the valet parking area shall be temporary and removed immediately
when valet parking hours end.
D. The City shall provide appropriate signage, at its cost, prohibiting
parking in valet parking zones between 5:30 P.M. and 11:30 P.M. and
designating such zones "No Parking, Valet Only, Tow Away Zone" or "No
Parking, Loading and Valet Only, Tow Away Zone".
E. The permittee shall remove all vehicles to be parked by valets from the
valet parking zone and from any other portion of a public right-of-way
as quickly as possible and in any case within ten (10) minutes. Vehicles
so removed shall not be parked in public streets, alleys or publicly
owned surface parking lots.
F. The permittee, at its own expense and cost, shall keep the valet parking
zone, including the sidewalk frontage and curb and gutter immediately
adjacent to it, in a neat, orderly and clean appearance and condition,
free from debris, nuisance and filth and provide for the removal of snow,
ice, trash and waste therefrom.
G. The permittee shall operate the valet parking zone, or cause the same
to be operated, in accordance with all requirements of this Section. In
the event that the permittee retains the services of a valet parking
company, the permittee shall provide written notice of the name of the
company to the Director of Community Development and to the Chief of
Police.
H. The City may, at any time, require the removal or suspension of valet
parking areas when street, sidewalk or utility repairs necessitate such
action, or in an emergency situation or for safety considerations,
without notice. The City, its officers and employees shall not be
responsible for any valet parking fixtures relocated during an
emergency.
I. The permittee shall provide and maintain, at its own expense and cost,
general liability insurance in full force and effect for the valet parking
zones, in standard form generally in use in the State of Missouri with
insurance companies having a current "best" rating of not less than A
and a financial rating not less than Class VII and authorized to do
business in the State of Missouri in the amount of five hundred
thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for any accident or occurrence
resulting in bodily injury to or death of one (1) person and an amount of
at least one million five hundred thousand dollars ($1,500,000.00) for
any accident or occurrence resulting in bodily injury to or the death of
more than one (1) person and comprehensive property damage
insurance covering liability for damage to all property from any
accident or occurrence in an amount of not less than two hundred fifty
thousand dollars ($250,000.00). Executed copies of said policies of
insurance or certificates thereof shall be delivered to the Director of
Community Development within thirty (30) days of the date on which
the City Council authorizes the issuance of the permit. No permit shall
Section
350.420
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
350.420
100:676
Section 350.425. Establishment of Bicycle Parking Zones. [Ord. No.
11-64 §1, 3-30-2011]
be issued unless and until the policy or policies or certificate(s) have
been delivered to the Director of Community Development. Not less
than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the term of each such
policy, a renewal or replacement insurance policy or certificate thereof
shall be delivered to the Director of Community Development; failure of
the permittee to comply with the requirements of this Subsection shall
be grounds for immediate termination of the permit notwithstanding
any other provision of this Section or the permit. All said policies
of insurance delivered to the City must contain a provision that the
company writing said policy will give the City twenty (20) days' notice
in writing in advance of any cancellation, lapse or reduction in the
amount of insurance. All of said policies of insurance must contain a
provision naming the City, its agents, employees, guests and invitees as
an additional insured.
J. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Section, or any
person who shall take part in or assist in the violation of this Section,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each violation. Any vehicle parked in violation of
Subsection (D) hereof may be subject to being towed.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of this Section, bicycle parking zones shall
be established on such public streets and in such places and in such
number as shall be determined by the City Council to be in the best
interest of the City, its citizens and visitors in order to provide
convenient bicycle parking near the point of destination in those
portions of the City designated as business districts by Chapter 400,
Zoning Code.
B. A bicycle parking zone shall be created only upon the written request
submitted to the Department of Community Development by the owner
or occupant of the property adjacent to the site of the proposed bicycle
parking zone and the subsequent approval by the City Council of a
permit therefor setting forth the terms of the operation of the bicycle
parking zone, which terms shall include, but may not be limited to,
those set forth in this Section. Each request shall be accompanied by an
application form provided by the Department of Community
Development and shall include the location of the proposed bicycle
parking zone, a written plan of operations and the hours for bicycle-only
parking, and such other information as may be requested by the City.
Each such request must be accompanied by a non-refundable initial
permit application fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00). Each such
permit shall obligate the holder thereof (the "permittee") to operate the
bicycle parking zone and perform all of the obligations, duties and
responsibilities set forth in the permit and in this Section. All such
permits issued shall thereafter be subject to renewal by the City
Section
350.420
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
350.425
100:677
Council as of April first (1st) of every calendar year. In determining
whether to renew a permit, the City Council shall consider the manner
in which the bicycle parking zone has been operated, the degree to
which the applicant has complied with the requirements set forth in this
Section and the permit and the best interests of the City and its citizens
and visitors.
C. Bicycle parking zones shall be established only in those areas
designated as "business districts" pursuant to Chapter 400, Zoning
Code of the Code of Ordinances of the City. Bicycle parking zones shall
be established only on public streets and the adjacent sidewalks, and
shall be adjacent to the property to be served by the bicycle parking
zone as specified in the permit to be issued pursuant to Subsection (B)
above. The City shall determine the location and length of all bicycle
parking zones based on factors including, but not limited to, traffic flow,
pedestrian safety and impact on the overall streetscape. The bicycle
parking zone shall not extend more than eight (8) feet into the street
from the curb and there shall be no obstruction of fire hydrants,
pedestrian crosswalk or a handicapped corner cut. All racks,
stanchions, ropes or other objects delineating the bicycle parking area
shall be temporary and removed immediately when bicycle parking
hours end.
D. The City shall provide appropriate signage, at its cost, prohibiting
parking in bicycle parking zones during established hours and
designating such zones "No Parking, Bicycles Only, Tow Away Zone" or
"No Parking, Loading and Bicycles Only, Tow Away Zone".
E. The permittee, at its own expense and cost, shall keep the bicycle
parking zone, including the sidewalk frontage and curb and gutter
immediately adjacent to it in a neat, orderly and clean appearance and
condition, free from debris, nuisance and filth and provide for the
removal of snow, ice, trash and waste therefrom.
F. The City may, at anytime, require the removal or suspension of bicycle
parking zones when street, sidewalk or utility repairs necessitate such
action, or in an emergency situation or for safety considerations,
without notice. The City, its officers and employees shall not be
responsible for any bicycle parking racks or fixtures relocated during
an emergency.
G. The permittee shall provide and maintain, at its own expense and cost,
general liability insurance in full force and effect for the bicycle parking
zones, in standard form generally in use in the State of Missouri with
insurance companies having a current "best" rating of not less than A
and a financial rating not less than Class VII and authorized to do
business in the State of Missouri in the amount of five hundred
thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for any accident or occurrence
resulting in bodily injury to or death of one (1) person and an amount of
at least one million five hundred thousand dollars ($1,500,000.00) for
any accident or occurrence resulting in bodily injury to or the death of
Section
350.425
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
350.425
100:678
more than one (1) person and comprehensive property damage
insurance covering liability for damage to all property from any
accident or occurrence in an amount of not less than two hundred
fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00). Executed copies of said policies of
insurance or certificates thereof shall be delivered to the Director of
Community Development within thirty (30) days of the date on which
the City Council authorizes the issuance of the permit. No permit shall
be issued unless and until the policy or policies or certificate(s) have
been delivered to the Director of Community Development. Not less
than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the term of each such
policy, a renewal or replacement insurance policy or certificate thereof
shall be delivered to the Director of Community Development; failure of
the permittee to comply with the requirements of this Subsection shall
be grounds for immediate termination of the permit notwithstanding
any other provision of this Section or the permit. All said policies
of insurance delivered to the City must contain a provision that the
company writing said policy will give the City twenty (20) days' notice
in writing in advance of any cancellation, lapse or reduction in the
amount of insurance. All of said policies of insurance must contain a
provision naming the City, its agents, employees, guests and invitees as
an additional insured.
H. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Section, or any
person who shall take part in or assist in the violation of this Section,
shall be guilty of an ordinance violation punishable by a fine of not less
than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each violation.
Section
350.425
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
350.425
100:679

ARTICLE VII
Penalty
Section 350.430. Penalty. [R.O. 2009 §73.99; CC 1981 §§18-296.1(b),
18-299; Ord. No. 80-95, 8-27-1980; Ord. No. 81-37, 4-15-1981; Ord.
No. 88-194, 10-19-1988; Ord. No. 91-27, 2-7-1991; Ord. No. 93-100,
5-5-1993; Ord. No. 94-134, 6-17-1994; Ord. No. 94-199, 8-17-1994;
Ord. No. 97-57, 2-20-1997; Ord. No. 05-03, 1-11-2005]
A. Any person who shall violate any parking regulation of the City for
which no other penalty is set forth shall be guilty of an infraction and
upon conviction thereof shall be fined ten dollars ($10.00) if such fine is
paid within seventy-two (72) hours of the violation, otherwise such fine
shall be not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than
seventy-five dollars ($75.00).
B. Any person who parks in an area in excess of posted time limits or any
person who parks in a parking space regulated by a parking meter and
allows the time on the meter to expire shall be fined ten dollars ($10.00)
if such fine is paid within seventy-two (72) hours of the violation,
otherwise such fine shall be not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
nor more than seventy-five dollars ($75.00).
C. Any person who violates Section 350.160 shall be fined not less than
forty-five dollars ($45.00).
D. A violation of Section 350.390 shall be punishable by a fine of not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than three hundred dollars
($300.00) in addition to the costs, if any, of the impounding and towing
of the vehicle. The fine for any second (2nd) or subsequent offense
committed within a one (1) year period shall be two hundred dollars
($200.00) in addition to the cost, if any, of the impounding and towing of
the vehicle.
E. A violation of Section 350.210(C) shall be punishable by a fine of not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred dollars
($200.00) in addition to the costs, if any, of the impounding and towing
of the vehicle and/or trailer. The fine for any second (2nd) or
subsequent violation committed within a one (1) year period shall be
two hundred dollars ($200.00) in addition to the cost, if any, of the
impounding and towing of the vehicle and/or trailer.
Section
350.430
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
350.430
100:681
Chapter 355
EQUIPMENT - LOADS
Section
350.430
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
350.430
100:682
ARTICLE I
Equipment
Section 355.010. Studded Tires.352 [R.O. 2009 §75.01; CC 1981
§18-130]
No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon any road or highway of
this State between April first (1st) and November first (1st) while the motor
vehicle is equipped with tires containing metal or carbide studs.
Section 355.020. Projections From Vehicles.353 [R.O. 2009 §75.02;
CC 1981 §18-131]
All vehicles carrying poles or other objects which project more than five (5)
feet from the rear of such vehicle shall, during the period when lights are
required by Section 355.040, carry a red light at or near the rear end of
the pole or other object so projecting. At other times a red flag or cloth, not
less than sixteen (16) inches square, shall be displayed at the end of such
projection.
Section 355.030. Muffler Cutouts.354 [R.O. 2009 §75.03; CC 1981
§18-132]
Muffler cutouts shall not be used and no vehicle shall be driven in such
manner or condition that excessive and unnecessary noises shall be made
by its machinery, motor, signaling device or other parts or by any improperly
loaded cargo. The motors of all motor vehicles shall be fitted with properly
attached mufflers of such capacity or construction as to quiet the maximum
possible exhaust noise as completely as is done in modern gas engine
passenger motor vehicles. Any cutout or opening in the exhaust pipe
between the motor and the muffler on any motor vehicle shall be completely
closed and disconnected from its operating lever and shall be so arranged
that it cannot automatically open or be opened or operated while such
vehicle is in motion.
Section 355.040. Lights.355
No person shall drive, move, park or be in custody of any vehicle or
combination of vehicles on any street or highway during the times when
lighted lamps are required unless such vehicle or combination of vehicles
displays lighted lamps and illuminating devices as Chapter 307, RSMo.,
requires. No person shall use on any vehicle any approved electric lamp or
similar device unless the light source of such lamp or device complies with
the conditions of approval as to focus and rated candlepower.
352. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §307.171, RSMo.
353. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §307.170(5), RSMo.
354. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §307.170(2), RSMo.
355. State Law References—Lights generally, §§307.020 et seq., RSMo.
Section
355.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
355.050
100:683
Section 355.050. Passenger Restraint System.356 [R.O. 2009 §75.05;
CC 1981 §18-450(a—c),(e),(f)(1); Ord. No. 84-27, 3-22-1984; Ord.
No. 86-9, 1-8-1986; Ord. No. 01-99, 5-21-2001; Ord. No. 09-22,
2-5-2009]
A. Definitions. As used in Subsections (B) and (C) below, the following
words have the following meanings:
CHILD BOOSTER SEAT — A seating system which meets the Federal
Motor Vehicle Safety Standards set forth in 49 C.F.R. 571.213, as
amended, that is designed to elevate a child to properly sit in a federally
approved safety belt system.
CHILD PASSENGER RESTRAINT SYSTEM — A seating system which
meets the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards set forth in 49 C.F.R.
571.213, as amended, and which is either permanently affixed to a
motor vehicle or is affixed to such vehicle by a safety belt or a universal
attachment system.
DRIVER — The person who is in actual physical control of a motor
vehicle.
PASSENGER CAR — Every motor vehicle designed for carrying ten
(10) persons or less and used for the transportation of persons; except
that the term shall not include motorcycles, motorized bicycles,
motortricycles and trucks with a licensed gross vehicle weight of twelve
thousand (12,000) pounds or more.
B. Each driver, except persons employed by the United States Postal
Service while performing duties for that Federal agency which require
the operator to service postal boxes from their vehicles, or which
require frequent entry into and exit from their vehicles, and front seat
passenger of a passenger car manufactured after January 1, 1968,
operated on a street or highway in this State, and persons less than
eighteen (18) years of age operating or riding in a truck, as defined in
Section 301.010, RSMo., on a street or highway of this State shall wear
a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt that meets Federal
National Highway, Transportation and Safety Act requirements. No
person shall be stopped, inspected, or detained solely to determine
compliance with this Subsection. The provisions of this Section and
Section 307.179, RSMo., shall not be applicable to persons who have a
medical reason for failing to have a seat belt fastened about their body,
nor shall the provisions of this Section be applicable to persons while
operating or riding a motor vehicle being used in agricultural workrelated
activities. Non-compliance with this Subsection shall not
constitute probable cause for violation of any other provision of law. The
provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to the transporting of
children under sixteen (16) years of age, as provided in Section
307.179, RSMo.
356. State Law References—Passenger restraint system, §§307.178—307.179, RSMo.
Section
355.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
355.050
100:684
Section 355.060. Equipment For Motorized Bicycles and Electrical
Personal Assistive Mobility Devices. [R.O. 2009 §75.06; Ord. No.
03-131, 6-4-2003]
C. Each driver of a motor vehicle transporting a child less than sixteen
(16) years of age shall secure the child in a properly adjusted and
fastened restraint as follows:
1. Children less than four (4) years of age, regardless of weight, shall
be secured in a child passenger restraint system appropriate for
that child.
2. Children weighing less than forty (40) pounds, regardless of age,
shall be secured in a child passenger restraint system appropriate
for that child.
3. Children at least four (4) years of age but less than eight (8) years
of age, who also weigh at least forty (40) pounds but less than
eighty (80) pounds and who are also less than four (4) feet, nine (9)
inches in height, shall be secured in a child passenger restraint
system or booster seat appropriate for that child.
4. Children at least eighty (80) pounds or children more than four (4)
feet, nine (9) inches in height shall be secured by a vehicle safety
belt or booster seat appropriate for that child.
5. A child who otherwise would be required to be secured in a booster
seat may be transported in the back seat of a motor vehicle while
wearing only a lap belt if the back seat of the motor vehicle is not
equipped with a combination lap and shoulder belt for booster seat
installation.
6. When transporting children in the immediate family when there are
more children than there are seating positions in the enclosed area
of the motor vehicle, the children who are not able to be restrained
by a child safety restraint device appropriate for the child shall sit
in the area behind the front seat of the motor vehicle unless the
motor vehicle is designed only for a front seat area. The driver
transporting children referred to in this Subsection is not in
violation of this Section.
D. No person shall be stopped, inspected or detained solely to determine
compliance with the provisions contained in this Section.
E. The provisions of this Section shall not be applicable to persons who
have a medical reason for failing to have a seat belt fastened about his/
her body, to any person employed by the United States Postal Service
while performing duties for that Federal agency which requires the
operator to service postal boxes from a vehicle, to persons operating or
riding a motor vehicle being used in agricultural work-related activities,
to any person required to make frequent entry into and exit from a
vehicle or to any public carrier for hire.
Section
355.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
355.060
100:685
Section 355.065. Vision-Reducing Material Applied To Windshield
or Windows Without Permit Prohibited — Penalty — Rules —
Procedure. [Ord. No. 12-115 §1, 7-12-2012]
A. No person shall operate a motorized bicycle on any street in this City
unless it is equipped in accordance with the minimum requirements for
construction and equipment of MOPEDS as required by Section
307.196, RSMo.
B. Every electric personal assistive mobility device (EPAMD) when in use
on a roadway during the period from one-half (½) hour after sunset to
one-half (½) hour before sunrise shall be equipped with the following:
1. A front-facing lamp on the front or carried by the rider which shall
emit a white light visible at night under normal atmospheric
conditions on a straight, level, unlighted roadway at five hundred
(500) feet;
2. A rear-facing red reflector at least two (2) square inches in
reflective surface area or a rear-facing red lamp on the rear which
shall be visible at night under normal atmospheric conditions on a
straight, level, unlighted roadway when viewed by a vehicle driver
under the lower beams of vehicle headlights at six hundred (600)
feet.
A. Any person may operate a motor vehicle with front sidewing vents or
windows located immediately to the right of the driver that have a sunscreening
device, in conjunction with safety glazing material, that has a
light transmission of thirty-five percent (35%) or more plus or minus
three percent (3%) and a luminous reflectance of thirty-five percent
(35%) or less plus or minus three percent (3%). Except as provided in
Subsection (C) of this Section, any sun-screening device applied to the
front sidewing vents or windows located immediately to the left and
right of the driver in excess of the requirements of this Section shall be
prohibited without a permit pursuant to a physician's prescription as
described below. A permit to operate a motor vehicle with front
sidewing vents or windows located immediately to the left and right of
the driver that have a sun-screening device, in conjunction with safety
and glazing material, which permits less light transmission and
luminous reflectance than allowed under the requirements of this
Subsection may be issued by the State of Missouri's Department of
Public Safety to a person having a serious medical condition which
requires the use of a sun-screening device if the permittee's physician
prescribes its use. The Director of the State of Missouri's Department of
Public Safety shall promulgate rules and regulations for the issuance of
the permit. This permit shall allow operation of the vehicle by any
titleholder or relative within the second degree of consanguinity or
affinity, which shall mean a spouse, each grandparent, parent, brother,
sister, niece, nephew, aunt, uncle, child and grandchild of a person who
resides in the household. Except as provided in Subsection (B) of this
Section
355.060
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
355.065
100:686
Section, all sun-screening devices applied to the windshield of a motor
vehicle are prohibited.
B. This Section shall not prohibit labels, stickers, decalcomania or
information signs on motor vehicles or the application of tinted or solarscreening
material to recreational vehicles as defined in Section
700.010, RSMo., provided that such material does not interfere with the
driver's normal view of the road. This Section shall not prohibit factoryinstalled
tinted glass, the equivalent replacement thereof or tinting
material applied to the upper portion of the motor vehicle's windshield
which is normally tinted by the manufacturer of motor vehicle safety
glass.
C. Any vehicle licensed with a historical license plate shall be exempt from
the requirements of this Section.
D. Any person who violates the provisions of this Section is guilty of an
ordinance violation.
Section
355.065
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
355.065
100:687

ARTICLE II
Loadings, Weight and Other Restrictions
Section 355.070. Unsafe and Dangerous Vehicles. [R.O. 2009
§75.15; CC 1981 §18-205]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or for an owner to permit to
be operated, a motor vehicle while such vehicle is unsafe and in a dangerous
condition upon any public street within the City.
Section 355.080. Overloading Vehicles Prohibited.
All motor vehicles, and every trailer and semi-trailer operating upon the
public highways of this City and carrying goods or material or farm products
which may reasonably be expected to become dislodged and fall from the
vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer as a result of wind pressure or air pressure
and/or by the movement of the vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer shall have a
protective cover or be sufficiently secured so that no portion of such goods
or material can become dislodged and fall from the vehicle, trailer or semitrailer
while being transported or carried.
Section 355.090. Weight Regulations.357 [R.O. 2009 §75.17; CC 1981
§18-207]
A. No vehicle or combination of vehicles shall be moved or operated on
any highway, street or alley in the City having a greater weight than
that described under Section 304.180, RSMo., provided that the City
Council and State Highway Commission or their legal agents for their
respective jurisdictions, whenever by thawing or frost, rains or soft
conditions due to construction, reconstruction and maintenance,
adverse critical weather conditions or other causes detrimental to the
surface or physical condition of such highways, streets and alleys in the
City, are authorized to limit the weights described under this Section to
such an amount and in such manner as will preserve their economical
use by the general public. When posted or marked it shall be unlawful
to transport any gross load in excess of the posted notice and in
addition to conviction and punishment for a misdemeanor, the
registered owner of any such vehicle shall be held liable in any court of
competent jurisdiction for destructive damages to the surface and
physical conditions pertaining, by an action of the State, City or any
interested person.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 304.240, RSMo.,
and the same rates of punishment shall apply where weights are limited
in excess of those posted as apply to those exceeded under Section
304.180, RSMo.
357. State Law References—Vehicle weight regulations, §§304.180 et seq., RSMo.
Section
355.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
355.100
100:689
Section 355.100. Commercial Vehicles Prohibited From Using
Certain Streets.358 [R.O. 2009 §75.18; CC 1981 §18-208; Ord. No.
75-35, 8-6-1975]
In cases where an equally direct and convenient alternate route is provided,
an ordinance may describe and signs may be erected giving notice thereof
that no persons shall operate any commercial vehicle upon streets or parts
of streets so described except those commercial vehicles making deliveries
thereon.
358. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.550, RSMo.
Section
355.100
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
355.100
100:690
Chapter 360
VEHICLE LICENSING
Section
355.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
355.100
100:691

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 360.010. Vehicle License Plates Required. [R.O. 2009
§71.08; CC 1981 §18-163; Ord. No. 83-51, 7-20-1983; Ord. No.
83-92, 10-18-1983; Ord. No. 96-50, 2-21-1996]
No motor vehicle or trailer shall be operated or parked on any highway
of this City unless it shall have displayed thereon a valid current license
plate or set of license plates issued for that motor vehicle or trailer by
the Director of Revenue of the State. Each such plate shall be securely
fastened to the motor vehicle in a manner so that all parts thereof shall be
plainly visible and reasonably clean so that the reflective qualities thereof
are not impaired. License plates shall be fastened to all motor vehicles
except trucks, tractors, truck-tractors or truck-tractors licensed in excess of
twelve thousand (12,000) pounds, on the front and rear of such vehicles not
less than eight (8) nor more than forty-eight (48) inches above the ground,
with the letters and numbers thereon right side up. The license plates on
trailers, motorcycles, motortricycles and motorscooters shall be displayed
on the rear of such vehicles with the letters and numbers thereon right side
up. The license plates on trucks, tractors, truck-tractors or truck-tractors
licensed in excess of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds shall be displayed
on the front of such vehicles not less than eight (8) nor more than fortyeight
(48) inches above the ground with the letters and numbers thereon
right side up. Any reciprocal license of another State accepted by the State
shall satisfy this requirement. The required current vehicle tag described
in Section 301.130, RSMo., shall also be properly affixed upon the license
plate.
Section 360.020. Driving With Substitute Plates. [R.O. 2009 §71.09;
CC 1981 §18-164; Ord. No. 83-51, 7-20-1983]
No person shall operate a motor vehicle or trailer upon the highways of
this City on which there is displayed on the front or rear thereof any other
plate, tag or placard bearing any number except the plate furnished by the
Director of Revenue of the State or the placard herein authorized, nor shall
there be displayed on any motor vehicle or trailer a placard, sign or tag
bearing the words "license lost", "license applied for" or words of similar
import as a substitute for such number plates or such placard.
Section 360.030. Vehicle State Inspection Stickers Required. [R.O.
2009 §71.10; Ord. No. 97-45, 1-22-1997]
No motor vehicle which is required to be registered in this State shall be
operated or parked on any highway of this City unless it shall have displayed
thereon a valid current State inspection sticker, seal or other device from
a duly authorized official inspection station, except those vehicles exempt
pursuant to State law.
Section
360.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
360.030
100:693

ARTICLE II
Prohibitions
Section 360.040. Driving Without A License. [R.O. 2009 §71.20; CC
1981 §18-170; Ord. No. 83-51, 7-20-1983; Ord. No. 83-92,
10-18-1983]
Section 360.050. Operator's License To Be in Holder's Possession.
[R.O. 2009 §71.21; CC 1981 §18-171; Ord. No. 83-51, 7-20-1983]
No person shall drive a motor vehicle upon the highways of the City except
such person who possesses an operator's license which shall be carried at
all times by the holder thereof while driving a motor vehicle and shall be
displayed upon demand of any officer of the Highway Patrol or any Police
Officer or Peace Officer or any other duly authorized persons for inspection
when demand is made therefor. Failure of any chauffeur or operator of a
motor vehicle to exhibit his/her license to any duly authorized officer shall
be presumptive evidence that such person is not a duly licensed chauffeur
or motor vehicle operator.
Section 360.060. Age of Operator.359 [R.O. 2009 §71.22; CC 1981
§18-172]
Any person at least fifteen (15) years of age who, except for age or lack
of instruction in operating a motor vehicle, would otherwise be qualified to
obtain a license pursuant to Sections 302.010 to 302.340, RSMo., may apply
for and the Director shall issue a temporary instruction permit entitling
the applicant, while having such permit in the applicant's immediate
possession, to drive a motor vehicle of the appropriate class upon the
highways for a period of twelve (12) months, but any such person, except
when operating a motorcycle or motortricycle, must be accompanied by
a licensed operator for the type of motor vehicle being operated who
is actually occupying a seat beside the driver for the purpose of giving
instruction in driving the motor vehicle, who is at least twenty-one (21)
years of age, and in the case of any driver under sixteen (16) years of
A. No person whose operator's or chauffeur's license and driving privilege
as a resident or non-resident has been canceled, suspended or revoked
under the provisions of Chapter 302, RSMo., or Chapter 577, RSMo.,
shall drive any motor vehicle upon the highways of this City while such
license and privilege is canceled, suspended or revoked and before an
official reinstatement notice or termination notice is issued.
B. No person whose operator's or chauffeur's license has expired shall
drive any motor vehicle upon the highways of this City unless such
person has in his/her possession a current temporary license or other
current authorization permitting the operation of motor vehicles by
such person in the State.
359. State Law Reference—Minimum age of operator of licensees, §302.060(2), RSMo.
Section
360.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
360.060
100:695
age, the licensed operator occupying the seat beside the driver shall be
a grandparent, parent, guardian, a driver training instructor holding a
valid driver education endorsement on a teaching certificate issued by
the Department of Elementary and Secondary Education or a qualified
instructor of a private drivers' education program who has a valid driver's
license. An applicant for a temporary instruction permit shall successfully
complete a vision test and a test of the applicant's ability to understand
highway signs which regulate, warn or direct traffic and practical
knowledge of the traffic laws of this State, pursuant to Section 302.173,
RSMo. In addition, beginning January 1, 2007, no permit shall be granted
pursuant to this Section unless a parent or legal guardian gives written
permission by signing the application and in so signing, state they, or
their designee as set forth in Subsection (2) of this Section, will provide
a minimum of forty (40) hours of behind-the-wheel driving instruction,
including a minimum of ten (10) hours of behind-the-wheel driving
instruction that occurs during the nighttime hours falling between sunset
and sunrise. The forty (40) hours of behind-the-wheel driving instruction
that is completed pursuant to this Section may include any time that the
holder of an instruction permit has spent operating a motor vehicle in
a driver training program taught by a driver training instructor holding
a valid driver education endorsement on a teaching certificate issued by
the Department of Elementary and Secondary Education or by a qualified
instructor of a private drivers' education program. If the applicant for
a permit is enrolled in a Federal residential job training program, the
instructor, as defined in Subsection (5) of this Section, is authorized to sign
the application stating that the applicant will receive the behind-the-wheel
driving instruction required by this Section.
Section 360.070. Insurance Identification Card To Be Carried in
Motor Vehicle At All Times. [R.O. 2009 §71.23; Ord. No. 98-51,
1-22-1998]
A. An insurance identification card, as defined by Section 303.024, RSMo.,
shall be carried in an insured motor vehicle at all times. The operator of
an insured motor vehicle shall exhibit the insurance identification card
on the demand of any Peace Officer who lawfully stops such operator or
investigates an accident while that officer is engaged in the
performance of the officer's duties. If the operator fails to exhibit an
insurance identification card, the officer shall notify the State Director
of Revenue, in the manner determined by the Director, and the officer
may issue a summons to the operator pursuant to Subsection (B) of this
Section. A motor vehicle liability insurance policy, a motor vehicle
liability insurance binder or receipt which contains the policy
information required in Subsection (2) of Section 303.024, RSMo., shall
be satisfactory evidence of insurance in lieu of an insurance
identification card.
B. No person operating a motor vehicle shall fail to exhibit an insurance
identification card or other satisfactory evidence of insurance in lieu of
such card upon the demand of any Peace Officer, when any Peace
Section
360.060
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
360.070
100:696
Officer lawfully stops such operator or investigates an accident while
that officer is engaged in the performance of the officer's duties.
However, no person shall be found guilty of violating this Section if
the operator demonstrates to the court that he/she met the financial
responsibility requirements of Section 303.025, RSMo., at the time the
Peace Officer wrote the summons.
Section
360.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
360.070
100:697
Chapter 365
BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES AND SIMILAR VEHICLES
Section
360.070
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
360.070
100:698
ARTICLE I
Bicycles and Mopeds
Section 365.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §76.01; CC 1981 §18-436;
Ord. No. 88-209, 11-2-1988]
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
BICYCLE — Every vehicle propelled solely by human power upon which any
person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels, or two (2) parallel wheels
and one (1) or two (2) forward or rear wheels, all of which are more than
fourteen (14) inches in diameter, except scooters and similar devices.
BICYCLIST — A person operating or in actual physical control of a bicycle,
including a person on foot walking a bicycle.
MOPED — Any two- or three-wheeled device having an automatic
transmission and a motor with a cylinder capacity of not more than fifty
(50) cubic centimeters, which produces less than three (3) gross brake
horsepower, and is capable of propelling the device at a maximum speed
of not more than thirty (30) miles per hour on level ground. A motorized
bicycle shall be considered a motor vehicle for purposes of any
homeowners' or renters' insurance policy.
MOPEDER — A person operating or in actual control of a moped, including
a person on foot walking a moped.
PEDESTRIAN — A person on foot, on a skateboard, on foot walking a bicycle
or a moped or on a scooter.
VEHICLE — Every device, excluding scooters, skateboards, wagons,
wheelchairs, unicycles, pushcarts, tricycles and other children's toys in,
upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn
upon a roadway or sidewalk.
Section 365.020. Rules of The Road.360 [R.O. 2009 §76.02; CC 1981
§18-437; Ord. No. 88-209, 11-2-1988; Ord. No. 95-131, 5-4-1995]
A. Carrying Articles. No bicyclist or mopeder shall carry any article which
prevents the use of both hands in the control and operation of the
bicycle or moped. A bicycler or mopeder shall keep at least one (1) hand
on the handlebars at all times.
B. Left Turns. Bicyclists and mopeders shall use the procedures
established by the laws of this State and other ordinances of this City
for left turns by vehicles upon a roadway.
C. Rights And Duties. Every operator of a bicycle or moped on a roadway
shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to the driver of any other vehicle, except as to the provisions
360. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §365.180.
Section
365.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
365.020
100:699
of this Chapter and except as to the provisions of laws and other
ordinances which by their nature can have no application.
D. Operation. No operator of a bicycle or moped shall operate a bicycle or
moped in excess of the posted speed limit or in a manner so as to
endanger the life, limb or property of the operator or of any other
person.
E. Parking.
1. Bicycles and mopeds may be parked on any sidewalk where such
parking is not prohibited by official traffic control devices and
where such parking will not unreasonably obstruct pedestrian or
other traffic.
2. No bicycle or moped shall be secured to any fire hydrant.
F. Passengers. No bicycle or moped shall be used to carry more persons at
one (1) time than the number for which it is designed or equipped.
G. Position On Roadway.
1. Every operator of a bicycle or moped traveling at less than the
normal speed of traffic on a roadway shall ride as near to the righthand
curb or edge of the roadway as practicable, except when
reasonably necessary to maintain the safe operation of the vehicle.
2. Every bicyclist or mopeder on a one-way roadway with two (2) or
more marked traffic lanes shall ride as near to the left-hand curb or
edge of such roadway as practicable.
H. Sidewalks And Crosswalks. Except as permitted under Subsection (L) of
this Section, no person shall operate a moped or bicycle upon a
sidewalk or in a sidewalk area. Except as permitted under Subsection
(L) of this Section, a bicycle or moped shall be walked, not operated,
upon a sidewalk and the mopeder or bicyclist shall be granted all the
rights and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to a pedestrian
under the same circumstances. A bicycle or moped may be operated
across a roadway upon a crosswalk and shall be granted all the rights
and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to a pedestrian under
the same circumstances.
I. Turn Signals. Operators of bicycles and mopeds shall give a signal of
their intention to turn right or left continuously during not less than the
last one hundred (100) feet traveled by their vehicle before turning and
shall give a signal while the vehicle is stopped, waiting to turn. A hand
or arm signal need not be given continuously if the hand is needed in
the control or operation of the vehicle.
J. Turns. Whenever official traffic control devices indicate that no right,
left or U-turn is permitted, no operator of a bicycle or moped shall make
such a turn.
Section
365.020
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
365.020
100:700
Section 365.030. Riding Scooter, Skateboard or Skates.361 [R.O.
2009 §76.03; CC 1981 §§18-439—18-439.1; Ord. No. 89-25,
2-8-1989; Ord. No. 89-135, 7-12-1989; Ord. No. 92-250, 10-21-1992;
Ord. No. 93-110, 6-2-1993; Ord. No. 98-233, 5-20-1998; Ord. No.
16-082 §1, 4-5-2016]
K. Single File. Operators of bicycles or mopeds on a roadway shall ride
single file.
L. Bicycle Paths. Bicycles may be operated upon a sidewalk when said
sidewalk is designated a bicycle path by official traffic control signals.
All operators of bicycles on a designated bicycle path shall yield the
right-of-way to pedestrians using the bicycle path.
A. Riding Scooters Or Skateboards On Sidewalks, Alleyways And
Roadways.
1. No person shall ride a scooter or skateboard on:
a. Roadways.
b. Sidewalks in a commercial zoning district.
c. Any roadway, sidewalk, parking lot, rooftop, stairway or other
surface within the Historic Downtown District (HDD) and the
South Main Preservation District (SMPD).
2. Any person operating a skateboard or scooter shall be granted all
of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to all
other pedestrians.
3. Notwithstanding their status as pedestrians, scooter and
skateboard operators shall yield the right-of-way to all pedestrian
traffic upon the sidewalk.
4. No more than one (1) person shall ride on a scooter or skateboard
at one time.
B. Riding Scooters Or Skateboards, Using Skates Or In-Line Skates
Prohibited In Certain Areas. No person shall ride a scooter, skateboard,
use skates or in-line skates on any area of the City parking garage, the
Foundry Art Centre and its parking lots, City Hall, the Criminal Justice
Facility, Senior Citizen Center, City Fire Stations, or other City property
where a sign prohibiting such riding or using is posted. [Ord. No.
17-300, 1-2-2018]
C. At the time any person is stopped and issued a citation for riding a
skateboard in violation of this Section, the skateboard used in the
violation may be immediately seized and impounded as evidence by the
officer issuing the citation.
361. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §365.180.
Section
365.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
365.040
100:701
Section 365.040. Use of Helmets.362 [R.O. 2009 §76.04; Ord. No.
06-141, 6-14-2006]
A. No person fifteen (15) years of age or younger shall ride a bicycle within
the municipal boundaries of the City as an operator or passenger
without properly wearing an approved bicycle helmet securely fastened
by chin or neck strap.
B. An approved bicycle helmet is headgear which meets or exceeds the
impact standard for protective helmets set by the U.S. Consumer
Products Safety Commission Federal safety standards.
C. No parent, custodian or legal guardian of a person fifteen (15) years of
age or younger shall allow that person to ride or be a passenger on a
bicycle within the municipal boundaries of the City as set out in this
Section without wearing an approved bicycle helmet. This is an offense
of absolute liability.
362. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §365.180.
Section
365.040
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
365.040
100:702
ARTICLE II
Motorcycles
Section 365.050. Riding On Motorcycles.363 [R.O. 2009 §76.15; CC
1981 §18-200; Ord. No. 75-35, 8-6-1975]
A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and
regular seat attached thereto and such operator shall not carry any other
person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless such
motorcycle is designed to carry more than one (1) person, in which event
a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for
two (2) persons or upon another seat firmly attached to the rear or side.
Section 365.060. Safety Helmets Required.364 [R.O. 2009 §76.16; CC
1981 §18-204(a); Ord. No. 3498, 8-5-1967]
Every person who shall operate or ride a motorcycle, motor scooter,
motorbike or similar motor vehicle, or who shall be a passenger thereon, is
hereby required to wear upon his/her head a protective safety helmet and
shatter-proof protective eye shield, glasses or goggles while operating or
riding such motorcycle, motorbike, motor scooter or similar motor vehicle.
Such protective safety helmet must conform to the standards and
specifications for protective headgear for vehicular users approved by the
American Standards Association, incorporated on June 22, 1966, such
standards and specifications being on file in the City offices and
incorporated by reference.
363. State Law Reference—Similar provisions, §300.345, RSMo.
364. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §365.180.
Section
365.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
365.060
100:703

ARTICLE III
All-Terrain Vehicles
Section 365.070. Definition. [R.O. 2009 §76.30; CC 1981 §18-215;
Ord. No. 93-86, 4-21-1993]
For the purposes of this Article, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE — Any motorized vehicle manufactured and used
exclusively for off-highway use which is fifty (50) inches or less in width,
with an unladen dry weight of six hundred (600) pounds or less, traveling
on three (3), four (4) or more low pressure tires, with a seat designed to be
straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering control.
Section 365.080. Prohibited On Streets or Sidewalks—Exceptions.365
[R.O. 2009 §76.31; CC 1981 §18-216; Ord. No. 93-86, 4-21-1993]
Section 365.090. Prohibited in Stream — Exceptions.366 [R.O. 2009
§76.32; CC 1981 §18-217; Ord. No. 93-86, 4-21-1993]
No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle within any stream or river in
this City, except that all-terrain vehicles may be operated within waterways
which flow within the boundaries of land which an all-terrain vehicle
operator owns or has permission to be upon.
Section 365.100. License and Flag Required. [R.O. 2009 §76.33; CC
1981 §18-218; Ord. No. 93-86, 4-21-1993]
A person operating an all-terrain vehicle on a street pursuant to an
exception covered in this Chapter shall have a valid operator's or
chauffeur's license, but shall not be required to have an examination for the
operation of a motorcycle and the vehicle shall be operated at speeds of less
than thirty (30) miles per hour. When operated on a street, an all-terrain
vehicle shall have a bicycle safety flag, which extends not less than seven
(7) feet above the ground, attached to the rear of the vehicle. The bicycle
A. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle upon the streets of this
City, except as follows:
1. All-terrain vehicles operated for agricultural purposes or industrial
on-premise purposes between the official sunrise and sunset on the
day of operation.
2. All-terrain vehicles owned and operated by a governmental entity
for official use.
B. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle upon the sidewalks of this
City.
365. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §365.180.
366. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §365.180.
Section
365.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
365.100
100:705
safety flag shall be triangular in shape with an area of not less than thirty
(30) square inches and shall be dayglow in color.
Section 365.110. Careless Driving — Under The Influence — Helmet
Required.367 [R.O. 2009 §76.34; CC 1981 §18-219; Ord. No. 93-86,
4-21-1993]
Section 365.120. Passengers Prohibited — Exception.368 [R.O. 2009
§76.35; CC 1981 §18-220; Ord. No. 93-86, 4-21-1993]
No operator of an all-terrain vehicle shall carry a passenger, except for
agricultural purposes.
A. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle:
1. In any careless way so as to endanger the person or property of
another;
2. While under the influence of alcohol or any controlled substance;
or
3. Without a securely fastened safety helmet on the head of an
individual who operates an all-terrain vehicle unless the individual
is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
367. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §365.180.
368. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §365.180.
Section
365.100
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
365.120
100:706
ARTICLE IV
Low-Speed Vehicles
Section 365.130. Definition. [R.O. 2009 §76.40; Ord. No. 08-160,
8-21-2008]
For the purposes of this Article, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
LOW-SPEED VEHICLE — A motor vehicle that is four-wheeled; whose speed
range is at least twenty (20) miles per hour and not more than twenty-five
(25) miles per hour on a paved level surface; whose gross vehicle weight
is less than three thousand (3,000) pounds; has successfully completed
the neighborhood electric vehicle America test program conducted by the
Federal Department of Energy; conforms to the definition and requirements
for low-speed vehicles, as adopted in the Federal motor vehicle safety
standards for low-speed vehicles under 49 CFR 571.500; and complies with
Section 365.150.
Section 365.140. Operation of Low-Speed Vehicles On Streets
Permitted. [R.O. 2009 §76.41; Ord. No. 08-160, 8-21-2008]
Section 365.150. Low-Speed Vehicle Standards. [R.O. 2009 §76.42;
Ord. No. 08-160, 8-21-2008]
A. A low-speed vehicle may be operated upon the streets of the City of St.
Charles if it meets the requirements of this Article. Every person
operating a low-speed vehicle shall be granted all the rights and shall
be subject to all the duties applicable to the driver of any other motor
vehicle except as to the special regulations in this Article.
B. The operator of a low-speed vehicle shall observe all State and City
traffic laws and rules of the road.
C. A low-speed vehicle shall not be operated on a street or highway with a
posted speed limit greater than thirty-five (35) miles per hour. This
provision shall not be construed to prohibit a low-speed vehicle from
crossing, at an intersection or permitted crossing point, a street or
highway with a posted speed limit greater than thirty-five (35) miles per
hour.
A. A low-speed vehicle shall:
1. Meet the definitional requirements contained in Section 365.130;
2. Be manufactured in compliance with the National Traffic Safety
Administration and comply with the standards in 49 CFR 571.500;
and
3. Be equipped with:
a. Headlamps;
Section
365.130
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
365.150
100:707
Section 365.160. Low-Speed Vehicles — Driver's License and
Insurance Required. [R.O. 2009 §76.43; Ord. No. 08-160, 8-21-2008]
Section 365.170. Low-Speed Vehicles — Title and Registration.
[R.O. 2009 §76.44; Ord. No. 08-160, 8-21-2008]
It shall be the responsibility of the operator or owner of a low-speed vehicle
to comply with State titling or registration requirements.
Section 365.180. Penalty. [R.O. 2009 §76.99; CC 1981 §§18-204(b),
18-440; Ord. No. 3498, 8-5-1967; Ord. No. 88-209, 11-2-1988; Ord.
No. 92-249, 10-21-1992; Ord. No. 06-141, 6-14-2006]
b. Front and rear turn signals;
c. Stop lamps;
d. Reflex reflectors; one (1) red on each side as far to the rear as
practicable and one (1) red on the rear;
e. An exterior mirror mounted on the driver's side and either an
exterior mirror on the passenger side or an interior rearview
mirror;
f. A parking brake;
g. A windshield that conforms to the requirements of the Federal
motor vehicle safety standard of glazing materials (49 CFR
571.205);
h. A serial number, manufacturer's code, or vehicle identification
number; and [Ord. No. 17-181 § 1, 9-20-2017]
i. A type 1 or type 2 seatbelt assembly conforming to 49 CFR
571.209 and Federal motor Vehicle Standard 209 for each
designated seating position.
A. Every operator of a low-speed vehicle shall:
1. Possess a valid driver's license issued by the State, pursuant to
Chapter 302, RSMo.; and
2. Maintain financial responsibility as required by Chapter 303,
RSMo.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter for which no
other penalty is set forth shall be subject to the general penalty set
forth in Section 100.150 of this Code.
B. Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Article set
forth in Sections 365.010 through 365.040 shall be punished by a fine of
not more than fifty dollars ($50.00).
Section
365.150
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
365.180
100:708
Chapter 370
PARADES AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES
Section 370.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §98.01; CC 1981 §20-176;
Ord. No. 78-66, 10-4-1978; Ord. No. 03-122, 5-27-2003]
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
PARADE — Any parade, march or procession comprising more than six (6)
vehicles or group of pedestrians more than eight (8) feet in width or more
than forty (40) feet in length or any ceremony, show, exhibition or pageant
of any kind or any similar display in or upon any street, park or other City
property in this City.
PARADE PERMIT — A permit as required by this Chapter.
Section 370.020. Permit Required — Exception For Funerals.369
[R.O. 2009 §98.02; CC 1981 §20-177; Ord. No. 78-66, 10-4-1978]
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade,
unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the Chief of Police;
provided however, that this Chapter shall not apply to funeral processions.
Section 370.030. Application Filing and Contents. [R.O. 2009
§98.03; CC 1981 §§20-178—20-179]
A. Application—Filing Period. A person seeking issuance of a parade
permit required by this Chapter shall file an application with the Chief
of Police on forms provided by such officer not less than five (5) days
nor more than thirty (30) days before the date on which it is proposed to
conduct the parade.
B. Application—Contents. The application for a parade permit required by
this Chapter shall set forth the following information:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct such parade;
2. If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an
organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and
responsible heads of such organization;
3. The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
the parade chairperson and who will be responsible for its conduct;
4. The date when the parade is to be conducted;
369. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
365.180
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
370.030
100:709
Section 370.040. Late Applications. [R.O. 2009 §98.04; CC 1981
§20-180]
The Chief of Police, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the
authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than two
(2) days before the date such parade is proposed to be conducted.
Section 370.050. Standards For Issuance. [R.O. 2009 §98.05; CC
1981 §20-181; Ord. No. 78-66, 10-4-1978]
5. The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination
point;
6. The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles
which, will constitute such parade; the type of animals and
description of the vehicles;
7. The hours when such parade will start and terminate;
8. A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a
portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed;
9. The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade;
10. The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any
such assembly area or areas;
11. The interval of space to be maintained between units of such
parade;
12. If the parade is designed to be held by and on behalf of or for any
person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall
file with the Chief of Police a communication in writing from the
person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to
apply for the permit on his/her behalf;
13. Any additional information which the Chief of Police shall find
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit
should issue.
A. The Chief of Police shall issue a permit required by this Chapter, upon
written approval of the Mayor, when, from a consideration of the
application and from such other information as may otherwise be
obtained, he/she finds that:
1. The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe
and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;
2. The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great
a number of Police Officers of this City to properly police the line of
movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal
police protection to the City;
Section
370.030
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
370.050
100:710
Section 370.060. Notice of Rejection. [R.O. 2009 §98.06; CC 1981
§20-182]
If the Chief of Police or Mayor disapprove the application for a parade
permit required by this Chapter, they shall mail to the applicant, within five
(5) days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of their
action.
Section 370.070. Appeal From Denial of Application. [R.O. 2009
§98.07; CC 1981 §20-187; Ord. No. 78-66, 10-4-1978]
In the event the Mayor disapproves the application for a permit under this
Chapter, the applicant has the right to appeal directly to the City Council.
Section 370.080. Alternate Parade Permits. [R.O. 2009 §98.08; CC
1981 §20-183]
The Chief of Police, in denying an application for a parade permit required
by this Chapter, shall be empowered, upon written approval of the Mayor,
to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time or over a route
different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept
an alternate permit shall, within two (2) days after notice of the action of the
Chief of Police, file a written notice of acceptance with the Chief of Police.
An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of and shall
have the effect of a parade permit under this Chapter.
3. The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so
great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance
service to portions of this City other than that to be occupied by the
proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto;
4. The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly
points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and
police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to
such assembly areas;
5. The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of
firefighting equipment en route to a fire;
6. The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to
persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a
disturbance;
7. The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point
of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en
route;
8. The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any
product, cause, goods or event and is not designed to be held
purely for private profit.
Section
370.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
370.090
100:711
Section 370.090. Permit Contents. [R.O. 2009 §98.09; CC 1981
§20-184; Ord. No. 78-66, 10-4-1978]
Section 370.100. Duties of Permittee. [R.O. 2009 §98.10; CC 1981
§§20-185, 20-188]
Section 370.110. Revocation of Permit. [R.O. 2009 §98.11; CC 1981
§20-186]
The Chief of Police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued
under the provisions of this Chapter upon application of the standards for
issuance as herein set forth.
Chapter 375
ABANDONED VEHICLES
Cross References—As to tow trucks, §§645.170 et seq.
Section 375.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §90.01; CC 1981 §18-385;
Ord. No. 98-126, 3-9-1998; Ord. No. 04-223, 9-10-2004]
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
A. Each parade permit issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall
state the following information:
1. Starting time;
2. Minimum speed;
3. Maximum speed;
4. Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of
the parade;
5. The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by
the parade;
6. The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof;
7. Such other information as the Chief of Police shall find necessary to
the enforcement of this Chapter.
A. Chairperson To Have Permit On Person During Parade. The parade
chairperson or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry
the parade permit required by this Chapter upon his/her person during
the conduct of the parade.
B. Duties Of Permittee. A permittee under the provisions of this Chapter
shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all
applicable laws and ordinances.
Section
370.090
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
375.010
100:712
ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE —
Any vehicle which does not possess an engine or has one (1) or more flat
or missing tires or otherwise is incapable of being operated for want of a
major component of the vehicle shall be deemed an abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled or inoperative vehicle. Any vehicle missing significant body
parts such as the hood, fender, cab, door or trunk lid may be deemed to
be abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative. Any vehicle which is
located on public property, on a public street or alley or on private property
and which does not have lawfully affixed thereto an unexpired license plate
and a current motor vehicle safety inspection certificate shall be deemed an
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any real property within the City which is privately
owned and which is not public property.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any street, highway, alley or alleyway, which shall
include the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained for the purpose of vehicular travel, and shall mean any other
publicly-owned property or facility.
VEHICLE — A machine propelled or pushed or pulled by power other than
human power designed to travel along the ground or in water by use of
wheels, treads, runners or slides and transport persons or property or
pull machinery and shall include, without limitation, automobiles, trucks,
trailers, motorcycles, motorbikes, motor scooters, tractors, go-carts, golf
carts, campers, buggy and wagons, recreational and camping trailers,
boats, boats on a trailer, camper shells, cargo/enclosed trailers, race car
trailers, equipment trailers, car haulers, concession/specialty trailers,
motorcycle-ATV-snowmobile trailers and landscape trailers.
Section 375.020. Abandoned Vehicles or Vehicles Otherwise in
Violation of City Code Declared A Nuisance — Exceptions.370 [R.O.
2009 §90.02; CC 1981 §18-386; Ord. No. 98-126, 3-9-1998; Ord. No.
04-223, 9-10-2004; Ord. No. 06-342, 12-20-2006]
A. No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or
leaving of any vehicle which is in violation of any provision of City Code
or abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative, whether attended
or not, upon any public or private property within the City. The
presence of a vehicle in violation of City Code or an abandoned,
wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle on public or private
property is declared a public nuisance in violation of this Chapter and
may be abated in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
B. This Section shall not apply to:
1. Any vehicle enclosed within a building on private property or
stored behind a solid fence of not less than six (6) feet in height at a
legally conforming business operating in the appropriate business
370. Cross References—As to penalty, §100.150; as to junk dealers, ch. 625.
Section
375.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
375.020
100:713
Section 375.030. Service of Notice To Remove From Private or
Public Property. [R.O. 2009 §90.03; CC 1981 §18-387; Ord. No.
98-126, 3-9-1998; Ord. No. 04-223, 9-10-2004]
zone. A tarpaulin, tent or other similar temporary structure shall
not be deemed to satisfy the requirements of this Section.
2. Property operated as any service station, automobile repair shop,
body repair shop, tow truck operator or auto, truck or trailer
business enterprise lawfully licensed by the City and properly
operated in the appropriate business zone pursuant to the zoning
laws of the City; provided the vehicle is not located on said property
outside of a building for more than thirty (30) days. In the event a
vehicle is located on said property outside of a building for more
than thirty (30) days, then the notice procedures stated in Section
375.050(D) shall apply.
3. Any vehicle that is in working order and in an operable condition,
whether or not the vehicle displays a current Missouri license
plate, upon which the owner or occupant of the private property
where the vehicle is located has obtained or has initiated the
process to obtain a mechanic's lien. Upon the request of the
Director of Community Development or his/her representative, the
owner or occupant of the property where the vehicle is located
shall be required to provide written documentation to verify that a
mechanic's lien has either been obtained or has been applied for.
Copies of said documentation must be kept on the dashboard of the
vehicle for ready inspection by Department of Community
Development personnel. In the event said documentation is not
provided, the notice procedures stated in Section 375.050(D) shall
apply.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the parking, storing or
leaving of not more than one (1) vehicle which does not have lawfully
affixed thereto an unexpired license plate and a current motor vehicle
safety inspection certificate, but is otherwise operable, shall be
permitted upon private real property only by the owner of the real
property or the person in charge of the private real property and shall
only be located within a building or located in the rear yard on a paved
driveway or paved parking area. In a mobile home park as defined in
Section 400.050, it shall be unlawful to park, store or leave a motor
vehicle which does not have a current license plate and safety
inspection sticker if one is required. [Ord. No. 15-299 §1,
12-15-2015]
D. As used throughout this Chapter, the terms "operable condition" and
"working order" shall be defined as a vehicle that will start and operate
under its own power. The term "occupant of the private property" shall
include a tenant or manager of the business legally operating on the
property.
Section
375.020
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
375.030
100:714
Section 375.040. Responsibility For Removal. [R.O. 2009 §90.04; CC
1981 §18-388; Ord. No. 98-126, 3-9-1998; Ord. No. 04-223,
9-10-2004]
Section 375.050. Notice Procedure — Contents. [R.O. 2009 §90.05;
CC 1981 §§18-389—18-390; Ord. No. 98-126, 3-9-1998; Ord. No.
06-342, 12-20-2006]
A. In the case of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative
vehicle or a vehicle otherwise in violation of City Code being present
upon private property, the Chief of Police shall cause to be served a
notice in writing upon the occupant of the land where the nuisance
exists or in the case where there is no occupant, then upon the owner of
the property or the owner's agent stating the existence of the nuisance
and requesting its removal in the time specified in this Chapter.
B. In the case of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative
vehicle or a vehicle otherwise in violation of City Code being present
upon public property, the Chief of Police shall cause to be served a
notice in writing securely attached upon the vehicle, giving notice of
the existence of the nuisance and requesting its removal in the time
specified in this Chapter. A notice shall be sent to the registered owner
of the vehicle.
A. Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard, the owner of the
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or a vehicle
otherwise in violation of City Code and the owner or occupant of the
private property on which the same is located, either or all of them,
shall be responsible for its removal. In the event of removal and
disposition by the City, the owner or occupant of the private property
where same is located shall be liable for the expenses incurred. Where
the vehicle to be removed is upon public property, the registered owner
of the vehicle shall be responsible for removal expenses.
B. The vehicle shall be removed to a location where it will no longer be
classified as an abandoned vehicle or a vehicle otherwise in violation of
City Code, will be enclosed within a building on private property or will
be moved to the property of an automobile repair shop, body repair
shop, junk yard, tow-truck operator or auto, truck or trailer business
enterprise lawfully licensed by the City and properly operated in the
appropriate business zone pursuant to the zoning laws of the City.
Removal of the vehicle to another location on the streets or on private
property while it is still an abandoned vehicle or a vehicle otherwise in
violation of City Code shall constitute a separate offense. If proper
notice has been given prior to the move of the vehicle to the new
location in violation of this Section, no new notice shall be required for
removal of the vehicle in accordance with Section 375.070.
A. Notice Procedure. The Chief of Police or the Chief's designee shall give
notice of removal to the owner or occupant of the private property
Section
375.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
375.050
100:715
where the vehicle is located. The notice shall be posted, at least fortyeight
(48) hours before the time of towing, in a conspicuous place
upon the private property on which the vehicle is located and duplicate
copies shall be delivered, at least forty-eight (48) hours before the time
of towing, by hand delivery or certified mail to the owner or occupant
of the private property at the last known address. Where the vehicle to
be removed is upon public property, a notice shall be securely affixed to
the vehicle.
B. Content Of Notice. The notice shall direct removal and the notice shall
advise that upon failure to comply with the notice to remove within
forty-eight (48) hours may result in a citation for violation of the City
Code for each day the vehicle remains and that upon failure to comply
with the notice to remove within forty-eight (48) hours, the Chief of
Police or the Chief's designee may undertake such removal at the cost
of the registered owner of the vehicle.
C. A vehicle may be towed and summons may be issued without a notice if,
previously:
1. A notice has been issued for the same vehicle on the same property;
or
2. The owner or occupant of the property has been issued a notice
concerning any abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative
vehicle on the property; or
3. A proper notice has been issued for the vehicle at another location
within the City.
D. A vehicle located on property described in Section 375.020(B)(2) for
more than thirty (30) days shall be subject to the following procedure:
1. Notice procedure. The Chief of Police or the Chief's designee shall
give notice of removal to the owner or occupant of the property
where the vehicle is located and to the registered owner of the
vehicle. The notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the
property on which the vehicle is located, affixed to the vehicle and
duplicate copy mailed by certified mail to the owner or occupant of
the property at the last known address of the owner or occupant
and to the registered owner of the vehicle.
2. Content of notice. The notice shall direct removal of the vehicle
within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice. The notice shall
further state that upon failure to comply with the notice of removal,
the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee may undertake the
removal of the vehicle at the cost of the owner or occupant of the
property or at the cost of the registered owner of the vehicle. Prior
to the expiration of the thirty (30) day period for removal, the
owner or occupant of the property on which the vehicle is located
or the registered owner of the vehicle may request an extension
from the Director of Community Development. Such request shall
Section
375.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
375.050
100:716
Section 375.060. Hearing Request and Procedure. [R.O. 2009
§90.06; CC 1981 §§18-391—18-392; Ord. No. 98-126, 3-9-1998; Ord.
No. 06-342, 12-20-2006]
Section 375.070. Removal of Motor Vehicles From Property. [R.O.
2009 §90.07; CC 1981 §18-393; Ord. No. 98-126, 3-9-1998; Ord. No.
04-223, 9-10-2004; Ord. No. 06-342, 12-20-2006]
be in writing on a form provided by the Community Development
Department and include an explanation for why additional time is
needed for the removal of the vehicle. The Director of Community
Development may grant one (1) extension of not more than thirty
(30) days. Upon expiration of the thirty (30) day extension, if the
property is not in compliance with the Chapter, the vehicle may be
removed.
A. Request For Hearing. The persons to whom the notices are directed
may file a written request for hearing before the Chief of Police or the
Chief's designee within the forty-eight (48) hour period of compliance
prescribed in Section 375.050(A).
B. Procedure For Hearing.
1. The hearing shall be held as soon as practicable after the filing of
the request and notice shall be sent to the persons requesting the
hearing at least ten (10) days in advance of the hearing.
2. At any such hearing the City and the persons to whom the notices
have been directed may introduce such evidence and call such
witnesses as either party deems necessary. The Chief of Police or
the Chief's designee shall conduct the hearing and his/her decision
affirming or failing to find a nuisance shall be in writing and include
findings of fact and conclusions of law.
A. If the violation described in the notice has not been remedied within the
forty-eight (48) hour period of compliance or in the event that the
nuisance has been affirmed by the Chief of Police or the Chief's
designee, thereafter the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee may take
possession of the abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative
vehicle and remove it from the public or private property. It shall be
unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or refuse to allow such
person or persons to enter upon private property for the purpose of
removing a vehicle under the provisions of this Chapter.
B. For the purposes of this Section, the violation described in the notice
shall not be considered to be remedied if the vehicle has merely been
moved to another location on the streets or on private property while it
is still an abandoned vehicle or a vehicle otherwise in violation of City
Code, unless:
1. It is enclosed within a building on private property, or
Section
375.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
375.070
100:717
Section 375.080. Notice of Removal. [R.O. 2009 §90.08; CC 1981
§18-394; Ord. No. 98-126, 3-9-1998; Ord. No. 06-342, 12-20-2006]
Section 375.090. Disposition of Vehicles. [R.O. 2009 §90.09; CC
1981 §18-395; Ord. No. 98-126, 3-9-1998]
Section 375.100. Redemption of Impounded Vehicles. [R.O. 2009
§90.10; CC 1981 §18-396; Ord. No. 98-126, 3-9-1998]
2. It is moved to the property of an automobile repair shop, body
repair shop, junk yard, tow-truck operator or auto, truck or trailer
business enterprise lawfully licensed by the City and properly
operated in the appropriate business zone pursuant to the zoning
laws of the City; provided the vehicle is not located on said property
outside of a building for more than thirty (30) days.
A. A report indicating the storage location of the vehicle shall be
submitted by the Chief of Police to the Director of Revenue of the State.
B. Within forty-eight (48) hours of the removal of such vehicle, the Chief of
Police shall give notice to the registered owner of the vehicle, if known,
to any holder of a security interest in the vehicle and to the owner or
occupant of the private property from which the vehicle was removed,
that the vehicle has been impounded and stored for violation of this
Chapter. This notice shall be sent by certified mail and give the location
of the storage of the vehicle.
A. The Chief of Police or the Chief's designee may sell the vehicle at public
auction if it is unclaimed for at least sixty (60) days after the removal of
the vehicle, after posting public notices for at least ten (10) days at the
storage location and publication of the notice in a daily newspaper, as
defined in Sections 493.045 through 493.050, RSMo., of the County of
St. Charles. In addition, if the vehicle was upon private property, then
there shall be a posting of notices at the place of removal for at least ten
(10) days. The notice shall include a description of the vehicle,
including any identifying marks or numbers, the date and place it was
found and the time and place of the public auction.
B. The proceeds of the sale shall be used first (1st) to pay the person who
towed the vehicle at the request of the Chief of Police or the Chief's
designee a sum of money (not to exceed the bid contract price) that will
reasonably compensate the person for the towing service performed;
second (2nd) the person who stores the vehicle the sum of two dollars
($2.00) per day for each day or fraction thereof the vehicle was stored;
the balance of the proceeds, if any, shall be turned over to the Director
of Finance and the same shall be added to the City's general revenue
funds.
A. The owner of any vehicle seized under the provisions of this Chapter or
the holder of a valid security interest thereon which is in default, may
redeem such vehicle at any time after its removal but prior to the sale
Section
375.070
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
375.100
100:718
Schedule I
SPEED LIMITS
Table I-A. Speed Limits. [R.O. 2009 Ch. 77 Sch. I; CC 1981
§§18-239—18-239(b); Ord. No. 82-35, 5-19-1982; Ord. No. 84-5,
1-18-1984; Ord. No. 84-101, 8-23-1984; Ord. No. 85-106, 8-6-1985;
Ord. No. 85-177, 11-5-1985; Ord. No. 85-242, 10-20-1985; Ord. No.
86-290, 10-21-1986; Ord. No. 92-10, 1-23-1992; Ord. No. 92-295,
12-2-1992; Ord. No. 93-70, 4-21-1993; Ord. No. 93-242, 10-20-1993;
Ord. No. 96-130, 4-17-1996; Ord. No. 98-176, 4-22-1998; Ord. No.
00-270, 9-21-2000; Ord. No. 02-277, 11-22-2002; Ord. No. 03-121,
5-27-2003; Ord. No. 03-272, 10-23-2003; Ord. No. 05-286,
11-2-2005; Ord. No. 06-113, 5-4-2006; Ord. No. 06-167, 6-30-2006;
Ord. No. 06-279, 10-10-2006; Ord. No. 06-294, 11-8-2006; Ord. No.
06-308, 11-29-2006; Ord. No. 07-133, 5-9-2007; Ord. No. 08-88,
5-9-2008; Ord. No. 12-198 §1, 11-8-2012; Ord. No. 13-012 §2,
1-11-2013; Ord. No. 14-033 §2, 2-18-2014; Ord. No. 14-280 §§1—2,
12-16-2014]
In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 325, and when signs are
erected giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive
a vehicle at a speed in excess of the speeds listed below on the streets as
designated.
Street Speed Limit
All Alleys [Ord. 02-277] 15 mph
Circle Drive [Ord. 82-35] 15 mph
Diekamp Lane [Ord. 06-294] 15 mph
Evans Street [Ord. 82-35] 15 mph
thereof upon proof of ownership and payment to the Chief of Police or
the Chief's designee a sum as may be determined for the actual expense
of removal and storage and any preliminary sale advertising expenses.
B. The owner of any vehicle seized under the provisions of this Chapter, or
the holder of a valid security interest thereon which is in default, may
request a hearing before the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee to
determine the actual expenses of removal and storage. Upon request of
the hearing, the vehicle may be released upon proof of ownership or the
holding of a valid security interest thereon which is in default and upon
posting of a bond equal to the accrued removal and storage expenses as
may be submitted by the towing and storage contractor. The Chief of
Police or the Chief's designee shall then hold a hearing within ten (10)
days to determine the actual expenses of removal and storage and this
determined amount shall be assessed against the owner or holder of a
valid security interest thereon which is in default.
Section
375.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Table I-A
100:719
Street Speed Limit
Forest Avenue from Evans Avenue to Perry Street
[Ord. 03-272]
15 mph
Gary Court [Ord. 06-167] 15 mph
Gum Tree Place [Ord. 82-35] 15 mph
Howell Street [Ord. 82-35] 15 mph
Main Street from Boone's Lick to Clark Street
[Ord. 92-295]
15 mph
Nathan Avenue [Ord. 82-35] 15 mph
Oak Avenue [Ord. 82-35] 15 mph
Osage Street [Ord. 82-35] 15 mph
Powell Street [Ord. 82-35] 15 mph
Dardenne Street [Ord. 82-35] 20 mph
Holly Brook Subdivision:
Holly Brook Drive [Ord. No. 12-198] 20 mph
Cattail Way [Ord. No. 12-198] 20 mph
Moss Rock Drive [Ord. No. 12-198] 20 mph
Waterfall Drive [Ord. No. 12-198] 20 mph
South Main Street from the intersection of
Reservoir Drive to the intersection of Boone's Lick
Road [Ord. 13-012]
20 mph
Fox Hill Road [Ord. 06-279] 25 mph
Riverside Drive, from Clark Street to Boone's Lick
Road [Ord. No. 82-35; Ord. No. 18-277,
12-18-2018]
25 mph
Boone's Lick Road from Fifth Street to First Capitol
Drive [Ord. 82-35]
30 mph
Droste Road from West Clay Street to the City
limits [Ord. 82-35]
30 mph
Duchesne Drive from Droste Road to Elm Street
[Ord. 82-35]
30 mph
Ehlmann Road from Harry S. Truman Road to
Shady Springs Lane [Ord. 05-286]
30 mph
Elm Street [Ord. 82-35] 30 mph
Fifth Street from 200 feet south of McDonough
Street to Olive Street [Ord. 82-35]
30 mph
First Capitol Drive (Highway 94) from Sixth Street
to West Clay Street [Ord. 82-35]
30 mph
Fox Hill Road [Ord. 82-35] 30 mph
Table I-A ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Table I-A
100:720
Street Speed Limit
Hawks Nest Drive from Duchesne Drive to Zumbehl
Road [Ord. 00-270]
30 mph
Pralle Lane between Old Highway 94 and Kunze
Drive [Ord. 08-88]
30 mph
Randolph Street from Fifth Street to Concordia
Lane [Ord. 98-176]
30 mph
Regency Parkway from Bogey Road to Zumbehl
Road [Ord. 86-290]
30 mph
Riverside Drive [Ord. 82-35] 30 mph
Second Street (Highway 94) from Bayard Street to
Tecumseh Stree [Ord. 82-35]
30 mph
Tecumseh Street (Highway 94) from Second Street
to Third Street [Ord. 82-35]
30 mph
Third Street (Highway 94) from Tecumseh Street to
300 feet north of Barthel Avenue [Ord. 82-35]
30 mph
West Clay Street from First Capitol Drive (Highway
94) to the most eastern intersection of Westbury
Drive [Ord. 82-35]
30 mph
Zumbehl Road from Campus Drive
northwestwardly to the City limits [Ord. 82-35]
30 mph
Bethman Road [Ord. 82-35] 35 mph
Boschertown Road [Ord. 82-35] 35 mph
Country Club Road [Ord. 82-35] 35 mph
Fifth Street from McDonough Street south to a
point 200 feet north of San Juan Drive [Ord.
84-101]
35 mph
Fox Hill Road from North Randolph Street east to
Missouri State Route 94 [Ord. 07-133]
35 mph
Hackmann Road [Ord. 03-121] 35 mph
Hemasath Road [Ord. 03-121] 35 mph
Muegge Road from Mexico Road to 660 feet south
of Mexico Road [Ord. No. 16-078 §2, 4-5-2016]
35 mph
Muegge Road from 660 feet south of Mexico Road
to Old Highway 94 [Ord. No. 16-078 §2,
4-5-2016]
40 mph
Muegge Road from Old Highway 94 to 575 feet
south of Old Highway 94 [Ord. No. 16-078 §2,
4-5-2016]
35 mph
Mueller Road [Ord. 82-35] 35 mph
New Town Boulevard [Ord. 06-308] 35 mph
Table I-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table I-A
100:721
Street Speed Limit
Seeburger Road [Ord. 82-35] 35 mph
South River Road between South Fifth Street and
South Main Street [Ord. 92-10; Ord. 14-280]
35 mph
Third Street (Highway 94) from 300 north of
Barthel Avenue to 3/10 mile south of the northern
City limits [Ord. 82-35]
35 mph
West Clay Street from First Capitol Drive to Boone
Avenue [Ord. 14-033]
35 mph
Zumbehl Road from its intersection with First
Capitol Drive south (Highway 94 South) to a point
north 1,660 feet [Ord. 85-242]
35 mph
Zumbehl Road from its intersection with First
Capitol Drive south (Highway 94 South) to West
Clay Street [Ord. 06-113]
35 mph
Cave Springs Road from the south City limits north
to Ehlmann Road [Ord. 84-5]
40 mph
Friedens Road [Ord. 93-242] 40 mph
Little Hills Expressway from State Route 94 to
Boshertown [Ord. 93-70]
40 mph
South River Road between South Main Street and
Friedens Road [Ord. 14-280]
40 mph
Old State Highway 94 from a point 760 feet north
of Pralle Lane south to a point 1,900 feet south of
McClay Road [Ord. 82-35]
40 mph
West Clay Street from the most eastern intersection
of Westbury Drive to the City limits [Ord. 82-35]
40 mph
Zumbehl Road from the Highway I-70 North
Service Road (West Clay Street) south to a point
1,660 feet north of First Capitol Drive South
(Highway 94 South) [Ord. 85-242]371
40 mph
First Capitol Drive (Highway 94) from Boone's Lick
Road south to Friedens Road [Ord. 82-35]
45 mph
North Outer Road to I-70 (West Clay Street) from
Zumbehl Road to the west City limits [Ord. 82-35]
45 mph
South Outer Road to I-70 (West Clay Street) from
Missouri State Highway 94 (First Capitol Drive) to
the west City limits [Ord. 82-35]
45 mph
Third Street (Highway 94) from 3/10 mile south of
the City limits to the City limits [Ord. 82-35]
45 mph
371. Editor’s Note: The former speed regulation on Fairgrounds Road from Fifth Street to
Missouri State Highway 94 of 45 mph, which immediately followed and derived from Ord.
No. 82-35, was repealed 3-21-2017 by § 2 of Ord. No. 17-043.
Table I-A ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Table I-A
100:722
Street Speed Limit
Missouri State Highway 94 from Friedens Road
south to the south City limits [Ord. 82-35]
55 mph
Interstate 70 within the corporate limits of the City
[Ord. 96-130]
60 mph
Missouri State Route 370 within the corporate
limits of the City [Ord. 95-191]
60 mph
Schedule II
WEIGHT AND LOAD RESTRICTIONS
Table II-A. Weight and Load Restrictions. [R.O. 2009 Ch. 77 Sch. II;
CC 1981 §§18-211—18-213; Ord. No. 82-47, 6-16-1982; Ord. No.
85-211, 11-22-1985; Ord. No. 92-172, 7-30-1992; Ord. No. 98-283,
7-24-1998; Ord. No. 99-136, 5-6-1999; Ord. No. 00-47, 2-16-2000;
Ord. No. 01-70, 4-18-2001; Ord. No. 03-208, 8-25-2003; Ord. No.
03-237, 9-18-2003; Ord. No. 04-97, 5-25-2004; Ord. No. 05-182,
6-22-2005; Ord. No. 06-287, 10-20-2006; Ord. No. 07-59, 3-13-2007;
Ord. No. 09-182, 10-2-2009]
A. Over 18,000 Pounds.
1. Restrictions.
a. When signs are erected giving plainly visible notice, no person
shall operate or drive, or cause to be operated or driven, any
motor-truck over eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds licensed
vehicle weight, manufacturer's rating, upon or along those
streets designated by ordinance, including:
Street Location
Alley [Ord. 09-182] Between First Capitol and
Jackson
Foxhill Road (within City)
[Ord. 00-47]
From North Drive to
Boschertown Road
Fourth Street [Ord.
03-208]
From Tecumseh Street to
Morgan Street
Graystone Drive [Ord.
06-287]
Muegge Road [Ord.
01-70]
Old Highway 94 to Old Muegge
Road
North Fifth Street [Ord.
04-97]
From Clark Street to Olive Street
and Bainbridge Street to
Tecumseh Street
Table I-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table II-A
100:723
Street Location
Riverbluff Drive [Ord.
92-172]
From South Main Street to Fifth
Street
Rodeo Drive [Ord.
92-172]
Third Street [Ord.
92-172]
From Morgan Street to Olive
Street
Wilshire Valley Boulevard
[Ord. 92-172]
Wilshire Valley Drive [Ord.
92-172]
All local streets as
determined by the latest
current functional
classification study
performed for the City
[Ord. 03-237]
b. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to impair the right
to cross such streets within such limits of intersecting points,
nor to enter such streets where it is required to deliver or pick
up goods, wares or merchandise to a person or business
resident upon such streets.
2. Any violation hereunder shall be subject to the general penalty
clause for offenses punishable in the Municipal Court.
B. Over 12,000 Pounds.
1. Restrictions.
a. When signs are erected giving plainly visible notice, no person
shall operate or drive, or cause to be operated or driven, any
motor-truck over twelve thousand (12,000) pounds licensed
vehicle weight, manufacturer's rating, except for
motorcoaches, upon or along those streets designated by
ordinance, including:
Street Location
Boone's Lick Road [Ord.
99-136]
From Fifth Street east to its
terminus
Clark Street [Ord.
98-283]
From Main Street to Second Street
Elm Street [Ord. 07-59] Between Kingshighway to Elm
Point Industrial Drive
Main Street [Ord.
82-47]
From Boone's Lick Road to
Madison Street
Table II-A ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Table II-A
100:724
Schedule III
PARKING RESTRICTIONS
Table III-A. Parking Prohibited.
Parking is prohibited at the following locations in accordance with the
provisions of Section 350.190 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of St.
Charles, Missouri. (Note: This list contains only those locations prescribed
after January 1, 1982, as prescribed by Section 350.190. Even though they
are not listed in this Schedule, all parking restrictions adopted by ordinance
prior to January 1, 1982, are still in effect.)
Street Location
Riverside Drive [Ord.
98-283]
From Boone's Lick Road to North
Main Street
South Main Street [Ord.
98-283]
From Boone's Lick Road to South
River Road
b. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to impair the right
to cross such streets within such limits of intersecting points,
nor to enter such streets where it is required to deliver to or
pick up goods, wares or merchandise from a person or
business resident upon such streets.
2. Any violation hereunder shall be subject to the general penalty
clause for offenses punishable in the Municipal Court.
C. Exceptions. No person shall drive or operate a truck or commercial
vehicle licensed in excess of the established maximum vehicle weight as
licensed by the State over the streets designated by ordinance;
provided that this shall not apply to school buses, tour buses or vehicles
delivering material, equipment or supplies to property along such
designated streets.
Table II-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table III-A
100:725
Street Restriction
Alley [Ord. 84-159] Which runs in between and parallel to
Riverside Drive and Main Street from
a point 62 feet north of Monroe Street
north 40 feet on the west side of the
alley
Alley [Ord. 88-230] Between Main Street and Second
Street from First Capitol Drive to
Madison Street, excepting therefrom
the location of the loading zone along
the east side of the alley which runs in
between and parallel to Main Street
and Second Street from the north curb
line of First Capitol Drive north 160
feet
Alley [Ord. 09-182] Along both sides located between and
parallel to First Capitol Drive and
Jackson Street from the western curb
line of Seventh Street west 160 feet
Alley [Ord. 10-278] Along both sides located between and
parallel to Main Street and Second
Street from Jackson Street to
Tompkins Street
Adams Street [Ord. No. 16-224
§1, 11-1-2016]
Along the south side beginning at a
point 142 feet east of the eastern
curbline of North Fourth Street and
ending at a point 122 feet west of the
western curbline of North Third
Street.
Apple Blossom Lane [Ord.
92-208]
In front of 3019 Apple Blossom Lane
on the north side of Apple Blossom
Lane
South side of Barbour Street
[Ord. 03-324]
From Benton Avenue to South Sixth
Street
Bayard Street [Ord. 87-236] From Second Street east 155 feet on
the north side of Bayard Street
North Benton Street [Ord. 86-8] From Jefferson Street north 150 feet
on both sides of North Benton Street
Berlekamp Drive [Ord. 84-62] From Country Club Road east to
Norwood Drive on the north side of
Berlekamp Drive
Bogey Estates Drive [Ord.
84-161]
From Berlekamp Drive to Shadow
Wood Drive on both sides of Bogey
Estates Drive
Table III-A ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Table III-A
100:726
Street Restriction
Boone's Lick Road [Ord. 82-11] From Fifth Street to First Capitol
Drive on the north side of Boone's Lick
Road
North side of Boone's Lick Road
[Ord. 04-151]
From South Main Street to South
Second Street
Brook Hill Lane, on the south side
[Ord. 17-284]
From the eastern curbline of
Hackmann Road to 1,670 feet east
(end of the street) and inside the two
(2) culs-de-sac off of Brook Hill Lane,
Rising Hill Court and Hollow Hill
Court
Cave Springs Road [Ord. 84-16] From the south City limits line north to
Ehlmann Road on both sides of Cave
Springs Road
Cedarbrook Drive [Ord. 14-028] Along the south and west side from
240 feet north of the eastem
intersection with West Clay Street to a
point 30 feet north and west
Cedarbrook Drive [Ord. 87-133] West from the northern edge of West
Clay Street north 60 feet on the east
side of Cedarbrook Drive
Cedarbrook Drive [Ord. 87-133] East starting at a point 75 feet north of
West Clay Street north 20 feet on the
west side of Cedarbrook Drive
Chargene [Ord. 88-1] From West Clay Street 125 feet along
the east side of Chargene
Chargene [Ord. 88-1] From West Clay Street 160 feet along
the west side of Chargene
Chargene [Ord. 96-308] From West Clay Street to Chesstal on
the west side of Chargene
Civic Circle [Ord. 13-193] On the south side (southern
intersection) from the western
curbline of Rue Royale Street west 50
feet
Clark Street [Ord. 83-90] From the western curb line of Sixth
Street west 157 feet on the south side
of Clark Street
Clark Street [Ord. 86-80] From Benton Avenue eastwardly 24
feet on the northern side of Clark
Street
Clark Street [Ord. 88-67] East 100 feet from the intersection of
Clark Street and Benton Avenue along
the north side of Clark Street
Table III-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table III-A
100:727
Street Restriction
Clark Street [Ord. 97-168] From Second Street to Third Street on
the south side of Clark Street
Clark Street [Ord. 93-27] From Sixth Street west 100 feet on the
north side of Clark Street
Clark Street [Ord. 04-229] On south side from Fourth Street west
100 feet
Cole Boulevard [Ord. 86-109] From Droste Road south 65 feet on the
west side of Cole Boulevard
College Drive [Ord. 13-018] From the western edge of the
driveway for 153 College Drive to the
edge of the existing yellow painted
curb on the southwest end of the
roadway, from the eastern edge of the
driveway for 153 College Drive to a
point 10 feet east of the driveway, and
from the northern edge of the
driveway for 150 College Drive to a
point 10 feet north of the driveway
Compton Parkway [Ord. 10-233] Within the hammerhead turnaround
located 670 feet north of the western
curb line of Eaton Drive at the
terminus of Compton Parkway
Concordia Lane [Ord. No. 12-89] On the east side from Coverdell School
entrance north 25 feet and on the east
side from the Coverdell School
entrance south 100 feet
Connie Drive [Ord. 96-166] The east curb line of Ruth Drive east
105 feet on the south side of Connie
Drive
Country Club Road [Ord. 83-16] From Fairways Circle to Muegge Road
on both sides of Country Club Road
Dardenne Street [Ord. 84-159] From a point 135 feet east of Rosebrae
Drive west 175 feet on the north side
of Dardenne Street
Decatur Street [Ord. 96-217] Beginning at a point 112 feet west of
the west curb line of Second Street
west 20 feet on the south side of
Decatur Street
Deroy Lane [Ord. 92-57] Along both sides of Deroy Lane
Diekamp Lane [Ord. 01-218] From Old Highway 94 South west to
its terminus on the north and west side
of Diekamp Lane
Table III-A ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Table III-A
100:728
Street Restriction
Diekamp Lane [Ord. 07-165] On the south side starting at a point
1,070 feet west of Old Highway 94
westwardly 720 feet
Droste Road [Ord. 99-192] From Charbo Street to Glenco Drive
on both sides of Droste Road
Droste Road [Ord. 87-236] From Glenco Drive east 100 feet on
the north side of Droste Road
Droste Road [Ord. 93-247] From Norwich Drive east 180 feet on
both sides of Droste Road
Droste Road [Ord. 93-247] From Norwich Drive west 230 feet on
both sides of Droste Road
Droste Road [Ord. 88-67] East 100 feet and west 100 feet from
the intersection of Droste Road and
Ruth Drive along the south side of
Droste Road
Droste Road [Ord. 98-123] 209 feet west of Ruth Drive east to
Cole Boulevard on the south side of
Droste Road
Droste Road [Ord. 86-331] From Tilbury Lane to Zumbehl Road
on both sides of Droste Road
Droste Road [Ord. 11-230] On the northeast side from the
southern property line of McNair Park
to the northern property line of
McNair Park
Droste Road [Ord. 11-230] On the southwest side from the
southern radius return in the curb line
of Cole Boulevard to the northern
radius return in the curb line of
northern McNair Park entrance
Duchesne Drive [Ord. 84-110] From the north curb line of Elm Street
north 525 feet on the east side of
Duchesne Drive
Duchesne Drive [Ord. 84-110] From the north curb line of Elm Street
north 465 feet on the west side of
Duchesne Drive
Duchesne Drive [Ord. 96-13] From Peggy Place north 135 feet on
the west side of Duchesne Drive
Duchesne Drive [Ord. 11-39] Along the west side from St. Robert
Lane north 100 feet
Dunbar Drive [Ord. 14-095] Along the north side from 110 feet
east of the eastern curbline of Berwick
Court east to the end of Dunbar Drive
Table III-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table III-A
100:729
Street Restriction
East Arpent Street [Ord. 08-111;
Ord. 17-283]
On the south side from Rue Royale
Street to South Civic Green Drive and
on the north side from Rue Royale
Street to Reed Crossing Street
Eighth Street [Ord. 14-278] Along the west side between 80 feet
and 120 feet north of the northern
curb line of Jackson Street
Elm Point Industrial Drive [Ord.
03-115]
From a point 100 feet north of
Deerfield Drive south 670 feet on both
sides of Elm Point Industrial Drive
Elm Street Drive [Ord. 92-8] From Briarcliff Drive to its
northeastern terminus along the north
side of Elm Street Drive
Elm Street [Ord. 17-304] Beginning at Hardin/Blackhurst School
southern property line to Hawthorne
Avenue
Elm Street [Ord. 96-249] From 253 feet east of Hunters Ridge
west to Marie Drive on both sides of
Elm Street
Fairgrounds Road [Ord. 83-16] Boone's Lick Road south to the State
maintenance facility on both sides of
Fairgrounds Road
Feldworth Street [Ord. 11-221] Along the west side from the north
curb line of John Kirby Street north to
its terminus
Fifth Street [Ord. 98-194] From Adams Street north 50 feet on
the east side of Fifth Street
Foxborough Circle (along the
westside) [Ord. 05-132]
From the southern curb line of
Riverchase Parkway south 100 feet
North Fifth Street [Ord. 03-273] From Adams Street south 132 feet on
the east side of North Fifth Street
North Fifth Street, west side
[Ord. No. 15-171 §1, 8-6-2015]
100 feet north from the intersection of
North Fifth Street and Randolph
Street
South Fifth Street in the 1700
Block [Ord. 98-131]
From San Juan Drive to Rio Vista Drive
along the east side of South Fifth
Street
First Capitol Drive [Ord. 98-280] From Oak Street east to a point 115
feet east of Ninth Street on the north
side of First Capitol Drive
First Capitol Drive [Ord. 85-95] From Main Street to Second Street
along the south side of First Capitol
Drive
Table III-A ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Table III-A
100:730
Street Restriction
First Capitol Drive [Ord. 98-280] From Eighth Street west 75 feet on the
south side of First Capitol Drive
First Capitol Drive [Ord. 85-95] From Fourth Street to Fifth Street
along the south side of First Capitol
Drive
Forest Gate Drive [Ord. 04-235] From Rosewall Drive east 100 feet
(both sides)
Forest Hills Drive [Ord. 90-139] Along the north side of Forest Hills
Drive
Forest Hills Drive [Ord. 04-234] From Regency Parkway east 90 feet
(south side)
Fountain Lakes Boulevard [Ord.
No. 15-126 §1, 6-2-2015]
On the north side from New Town
Boulevard to Schattdecor Drive
Franklin Street [Ord. 01-217] From Fifth Street east to Fourth Street
on the south side of Franklin Street
Franklin Street [Ord. 01-118] From Fifth Street west 150 feet on the
south side of Franklin Street
Franklin Street [Ord. 02-164] From Sixth Street east 150 feet on the
south side of Franklin Street
Gallaher Avenue [Ord. 88-17] From Hartford Place east 70 feet on
the south side of Gallaher Avenue
Gamble Street [Ord. 87-53] From the north curb line of Watson
Street north 137 feet along the east
side of Gamble Street
Graystone Drive [Ord. 02-20] From the southern curb line of
Zumbehl Road south 662 feet
Gustane Drive [Ord. 87-153] From Boone's Lick Road north 50 feet
on the east side of Gustane Drive
Harry S. Truman Boulevard [Ord.
10-236]
Beginning at a point 1,435 feet north
of Ehlmann Road northwardly 2,280
feet on both sides
Harvest Ridge Drive [Ord.
03-139]
From Kunze Drive south 430 feet on
the west side of Harvest Ridge Drive
Hastings Way [Ord. 02-165] From a point 815 feet east of Elm
Point Road east 75 feet on the north
side of Hastings Way
Hastings Way [Ord. 01-270] West side from Runnymede Drive
north 350 feet
Hawks Nest Drive [Ord. 92-9] From Falcons Way south to Lynnbrook
Drive along the east side of Hawks
Nest Drive
Table III-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table III-A
100:731
Street Restriction
Hawks Nest Drive [Ord. 90-123] From Forest Gate Drive north 100 feet
along the west side of Hawks Nest
Drive
Hawks Nest Drive [Ord. 99-69] From Forest Gate Drive north 150 feet
on the west side of Hawks Nest Drive
Hempstead Street [Ord. 08-111] Along the north side beginning at a
point 145 feet from the western
curbline of Canal Street westwardly 30
feet
Hempstead Street [Ord. No.
18-067, 3-20-2018]
On the west side from the northern
curbline of New Town Drive to the
eastern curbline of Arpent Street.
Heritage Landing [Ord. 93-171] Right-of-way which runs from Heritage
Landing northwardly 650 feet and is
bordered to the east by Missouri State
Route 94 South and to the west by Old
State Route 94 South
Highway 94 South [Ord. 85-72] From Sherman Drive south 730 feet on
the east side of Highway 94 South
Jackson Street [Ord. No. 17-011
§ 1, 1-17-2017]
Along the north side from 74 feet west
of the western curb line of South
Eighth Street to the western curb line
of South Eighth Street
Jackson Street [Ord. No. 17-011
§ 1, 1-17-2017]
Along the south side from 96 feet west
of the western curb line of South
Eighth Street to the western curb line
of South Eighth Street
Jefferson Street [Ord. No.
16-259 §§1 — 2, 12-6-2016372]
Along the south side beginning at the
eastern curbline of Kingshighway and
ending at western curbline of Third
Street
Jefferson Street [Ord. No.
17-171 §§ 1 — 2, 9-8-2017]
Along the south side from
Kingshighway to Seventh Street
Jefferson Street [Ord. No.
17-171 §§ 1 — 2, 9-8-2017]
Along the south side from Sixth Street
to Third Street
Jefferson Street [Ord. 89-199] From Fifth Street west 175 feet on the
north side of Jefferson Street
Jefferson Street [Ord. 93-234] From Kingshighway east 190 feet on
the north side of Jefferson Street
372. Editor's Note: Section 2 also repealed former parking restriction for Jefferson Street,
which followed and which derived from ordinances 95-287, 98-501, 07-216 and 10-279.
Table III-A ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Table III-A
100:732
Street Restriction
John Kirby Street [Ord. 11-221] Along the south side from the east
curb line of Feldworth Street west to
the east curb line of Shire Lane
Kettering Drive [Ord. 95-4] From Hackmann Road
southeastwardly 286 feet on the
southwesterly side of Kettering Drive
Kingshighway [Ord. 86-109] 75 feet north and 75 feet south of its
intersection with Bennett Avenue on
the west side of Kingshighway
Kingshighway [Ord. 03-325] Beginning at a point 413 feet north of
Park Avenue north 50 feet on the west
side of Kingshighway
Lawrence Street [Ord. 02-23] From Second Street east 170 feet on
the south side of Lawrence Street
Little Hills Expressway [Ord.
94-307]
Along both sides of Little Hills
Expressway
Little Hills Industrial Boulevard
[Ord. 98-341; repealed Ord.
13-199]
Little Hills Industrial Boulevard
[Ord. 13-199]
Along the south side from 25 feet west
of the western curbline of Little Hills
Parkway to 25 feet east of the eastern
curbline of Little Hills Parkway
Little Hills Parkway [Ord. 96-18] On both sides of Little Hills Parkway
Madison Street [Ord. 01-67] From Fifth Street east 100 feet on the
south side of Madison Street
Madison Street [Ord. 84-161] From the western curbline of Fifth
Street west 325 feet on the north side
of Madison Street
Madonna Drive [Ord. No.
19-055, 3-5-2019]
Along the east side from the northern
curbline of West Randolph Street to a
point 550 feet north
Madonna Drive [Ord. 15-036] Along the south side 60 feet beyond
the curb radius return at West
Randolph Street
Main Street [Ord. 87-112] Starting at a point 145 feet north of
Adams Street north 60 feet on the east
side of Main Street
North Main Street [Ord. 89-28] Beginning 183 feet north of the north
curb line of Adams Street and
continuing 58 feet in a northwardly
direction
Table III-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table III-A
100:733
Street Restriction
North Main Street [Ord. 90-23] From a point 150 feet south of the
southern curbline of Clark Street north
20 feet on the west side of North Main
Street
South Main Street [Ord. 03-221] From Reservoir Avenue north 100 feet
on the east side of South Main Street
South Main Street [Ord. 96-216] From Reservoir Avenue to Riverbluff
Drive on both sides of South Main
Street
Maple Tree Drive [Ord. No.
16-100 §1, 5-3-2016]
On the south side from the western
curb line of Hackmann Estates Drive
west 2,293 feet to the municipal
boundary of the City.
Marie Drive [Ord. 04-83] Along south side in front of 20 and 21
Marie Drive
McDonough Street [Ord. 99-61] From a point 140 feet west of South
Main Street west 25 feet along the
south side of McDonough Street
McDonough Street [Ord. 03-114] From the eastern curb line of Fifth
Street east 52 feet along the south
side of McDonough Street
Mercantile Drive [Ord. 95-229] From North Drive north to its terminus
Monroe Street [Ord. 96-77] From the mid-block alley west to the
eastern curb line of Fifth Street along
the south side of Monroe Street
Monroe Street [Ord. 98-452] Beginning at a point 125 feet east of
Fourth Street east 45 feet on the north
side of Monroe Street
Monroe Street [Ord. 06-169] From North Fourth Street east 128
feet on the north side
Monroe Street [Ord. 93-226] From Second Street east 51 feet on
the north side of Monroe Street
Montclair Tower Drive [Ord.
12-136]
From the southern curb line of
Friedens Road south 130 feet to the
northern curb line of Le Beau Lane
Muegge Road [Ord. 83-16] From Mexico Road to Old Highway 94
South on both sides of Muegge Road
Mueller Road [Ord. 83-5] From the western edge of
Boschertown Road west to the eastern
edge of Airport Road on the south side
of Mueller Road
Table III-A ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Table III-A
100:734
Street Restriction
Mueller Road [Ord. 97-167] 200 feet on either side of the Sysco
Food Services truck entrance on the
north side of Mueller Road
Mueller Road [Ord. 06-19] From New Town Boulevard to
Boschertown Road on both sides of
Mueller Road
MO 370 and Elm Street/New
Town Boulevard [Ord. 06-249]
Westbound MO 370 off-ramp to Elm
Street/New Town Boulevard, a
distance of 0.23 miles
Westbound MO 370 on-ramp from Elm
Street/New Town Boulevard, a
distance of 0.16 miles
Eastbound MO 370 off-ramp to Elm
Street/New Town Boulevard, a
distance of 0.20 miles
Eastbound MO 370 on-ramp from Elm
Street/New Town Boulevard, a
distance of 0.30 miles
Nathan Avenue [Ord. No. 17-040
§ 1, 3-7-2017]
On the west side from the southern
curbline of West Clay Street to the
northern curbline of Powell Street
New Town Lake Drive [Ord.
13-193]
On the north side from the eastern
curbline of Rue Royale Street east 50
feet
New Town Lake Drive [Ord.
14-272]
On the south side from the eastern
curbline of Rue Royale Street east 30
feet
New Town Lake Drive [Ord.
13-193]
From the western curbline of South
Shutten Court west 50 feet
Ninth Street [Ord. 99-275] From First Capitol Drive north 118
feet on the west side of Ninth Street
North Second Street [Ord. No.
15-116 §1, 5-19-2015]
On the west side from West Clark
Street to Decatur Street
North Shire Lane [Ord. 11-221] Along the east side from the north
curbline of John Kirby Street north to
its terminus
Oak Street [Ord. 85-72] From First Capitol Drive south 150
feet on the west side of Oak Street
Old Highway 94 South [Ord.
86-228]
From Sherman Drive north
approximately 200 feet to its terminus
on both sides of Old Highway 94 South
Table III-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table III-A
100:735
Street Restriction
Olive Street [Ord. 83-59] From the eastern curbline of Fourth
Street east to the western curbline of
Third Street on the south side of Olive
Street
Olive Street [Ord. 19-215] On the south side from the eastern
curb line of North Second Street to the
Katy Trail
Olson Drive [Ord. 85-234] On the north side of the street
Pam Avenue [Ord. 98-281] From Elm Street south 65 feet on the
west side of Pam Avenue
Penbrooke Lane [Ord. 12-228] From the western curbline of Zumbehl
Road west 120 feet
Perry Street [Ord. 84-79] From the west curbline of Fifth Street
west 150 feet on the north side of
Perry
Perry Street [Ord. 84-79] From the west curbline of Fifth Street
west 60 feet on the south side of Perry
Street
Perry Street [Ord. 15-046; Ord.
No. 19-066, 3-19-2019]
Along the south side from the western
curbline of Sixth Street west 170 feet
Perry Street [Ord. 84-160] From the eastern curbline of Seventh
Street east 36 feet on the south side of
Perry Street
Pike Street [Ord. 92-277] From Fifth Street west 175 feet along
the south side of Pike Street
Pike Street [Ord. 04-201] From South Main Street west 165 feet
(south side)
Randolph Street [Ord. 10-237] On the south side from the western
curbline of Madonna Drive west 158
feet
Reed Crossing Street [Ord.
14-276]
Along the north side from the
westernmost end of the curb return at
Civic Green Drive east to the
easternmost end of the street at South
Civic Green Way
Riverchase Parkway [Ord.
05-132]
South side from the western curb line
of Foxborough Circle west 105 feet
Riverside Drive [Ord. 05-188] From Boone's Lick Road north to a
point 105 feet north of First Capitol
Drive on the east side of Riverside
Drive
Table III-A ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Table III-A
100:736
Street Restriction
Riverside Drive [Ord. 05-188] From North Main Street south to a
point 87 feet south of Monroe Street
on the east side of Riverside Drive
Riverside Drive [Ord. 05-188] From North Main Street south to a
point 46 feet south of First Capitol
Drive on the west side of Riverside
Drive
Riverside Drive [Ord. 05-188] From a point 835 feet south of First
Capitol Drive south 285 feet on the
west side of Riverside Drive
Riverside Drive [Ord. 05-188] From Boone's Lick Road north 685 feet
on the west side of Riverside Drive
South Riverside Drive [Ord.
18-234]
On the west side beginning at a point
828 feet from the northern curb line of
Boone's Lick Road north 66 feet to a
point 894 feet from the northern curb
line of Boone's Lick Road
Rosebrae Drive [Ord. 86-248] From Dardenne Street to Esterling
Drive on the south side of Rosebrae
Drive
Rosewall Drive [Ord. 90-139] Along the north side of Rosewall Drive
Rue Royale Street [Ord. 13-193] From the northern curbline of Civic
Circle (southern intersection) north 50
feet
Rue Royale Street [Ord. 13-193] From the southern curbline of Civic
Circle (southern intersection) south 50
feet
Rue Royale Street [Ord. 14-271] On the east side from the southern
curb line of New Town Lake Drive
south 50 feet
St. Charles Avenue [Ord. 14-033] 57 feet south of the stop bar on the
east side of St. Charles Avenue and 50
feet south on the west side of St.
Charles Avenue
St. George Lane [Ord. 03-274] From Duchesne Drive east 93 feet on
the south side of St. George Lane
Schattdecor Drive [Ord. No.
15-126 §1, 6-2-2015]
On the east and west sides from
Fountain Lakes Boulevard to the street
terminus
Second Street [Ord. 93-226] From Adams Street to Monroe Street
on the east side of Second Street
Table III-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table III-A
100:737
Street Restriction
Second Street [Ord. 83-5] From the northern curb line of Boone's
Lick Road north to the southern curb
line of McDonough Street on the west
side of Second Street
Second Street [Ord. 93-254] From a point 47 feet south of Howard
Street south 87 feet on the west side
of Second Street
Second Street [Ord. 86-149] From Jackson Street south 50 feet
along the west side of Second Street
Second Street [Ord. 97-82] From Pike Street south 75 feet on the
east side of Second Street
Second Street [Ord. 85-220] On the west side of Second Street,
from Wilkinson Street south 65 feet
(1731 North Second Street)
Shadow Wood Drive [Ord.
84-161]
From Bogey Estates Drive south 430
feet on both sides of Shadow Wood
Drive
Shady Wood Court [Ord. 94-92] On the north side of the street and
within the cul-de-sac portion of Shady
Woods Court
Sherman Drive [Ord. 85-72] From Highway 94 South east 500 feet
on both sides of Sherman Drive
Shire Lane [Ord. 11-221] Along the east side from the south
curb line of John Kirby Street south to
the north curb line of Barter Street
Shutten Street [Ord. 08-111] Along the west side beginning at a
point 119 feet north of the northern
curb line of Galt House Drive
northwardly 30 feet
Sibley Street [Ord. 84-110] From the east curb line of Duchesne
Drive east to the west curb line of
Briarwood Court on the south side of
Sibley Street
Sibley Street [Ord. 84-110] From the east curb line of Duchesne
Drive east 250 feet on the north side of
Sibley Street
Sibley Street [Ord. 00-318] From Gamble Street west to College
Drive on the south side of Sibley
Street
Sibley Street [Ord. 82-19] From the western curb line of Houston
Street to the eastern curb line of
Anderson Street on the south side of
Sibley Street
Table III-A ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Table III-A
100:738
Street Restriction
Sibley Street [Ord. 07-259] On the north side from the western
curb line of Kingshighway westwardly
75 feet
Sixth Street [Ord. 94-25] From the northeast corner of Sixth and
Jefferson north 18 feet on the east side
of Sixth Street
Sixth Street [Ord. 83-16] From the north curb line of Morgan
Street north 145 feet on the west side
of Sixth Street
Sixth Street [Ord. 86-109] 75 feet north and 75 feet south of its
intersection with Monroe Street on
both sides of Sixth Street
Sixth Street [Ord. 93-94] From the north curb line of Perry
Street north 115 feet on the west side
of Sixth Street
Sixth Street [Ord. 03-222] From a point 70 feet north of the
northern curb line of Morgan Street,
north 70 feet on the east side of Sixth
Street
South Drive [Ord. 91-155] Boone's Lick Road to its terminus at
the Interstate 70 right-of-way, along
the west side of South Drive
South Main Street [Ord. 13-012] On the east and west side 135 feet
north from the northern curb line of
the intersection of Reservoir Avenue
On the west side 50 feet south from
the southern curb line of the
intersection of Barbour Street
On the west side 30 feet north from
the northern curb line of the
intersection of Barbour Street
On the east side 20 feet south from the
southern curb line of the intersection
of Barbour Street
On the east side 15 feet north from the
northern curb line of the intersection
of Barbour Street
South Service Road (Bogey Road)
[Ord. 85-87]
500 feet on either side of the entrance
to the San Miguel Apartments on the
south side of the South Service Road
South Seventh Street [Ord.
09-212]
On the east side from the southern
curb line of First Capitol Drive south
80 feet
Table III-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table III-A
100:739
Street Restriction
Spring Avenue [Ord. 14-033] 350 feet south of the center line of
West Clay Street
Summit Pointe Court [Ord. No.
16-258 §1, 12-6-2016]
Along the east side beginning at the
eastern curbline of Old Elm Street and
ending at a point 925 feet South
Sunset Drive [Ord. 07-132] On the south side from the west curb
line of St. Charles Avenue west 90 feet
Tenth Street [Ord. 89-210] From Jefferson Street to Washington
Street on the east side of Tenth Street
Terrie Lane [Ord. 86-109] From Zumbehl Road north
approximately 80 feet on both sides of
Terrie Lane
Third Street [Ord. 97-83] From Monroe Street north 30 feet on
the west side of Third Street
Third Street [Ord. 83-15] From the southern curb line of
Tecumseh Street south 150 feet on the
west side of Third Street
Third Street [Ord. 83-15] From the southern curb line of
Tecumseh Street south 100 feet on the
east side of Third Street
North Third Street [Ord. 01-240] West side both 100 feet north and
south of its intersection with Emmons
Avenue and Barthel Avenue
North Third Street [Ord. 88-176] From Tecumseh Street north 200 feet
on the west side of North Third Street
North Third Street [Ord. 90-54] From Washington Street south 65 feet
along the east and west side of North
Third Street
North Third Street On the west side beginning at a point
62 feet north of Bainbridge Street
northwardly 246 feet
Timbercross Place [Ord. 12-157;
Ord. No. 15-170 §§1 — 2,
8-6-2015]
On the south side 600 feet west of the
western curb line of Charlestowne
Parkway west
Timberidge Drive [Ord. 92-278] Within the circular portion of the culde-
sac at the western end of
Timberidge Drive
Tompkins Street [Ord. 03-116] From the east curb line of First Capitol
Drive east 210 feet on the north side of
Tompkins Street and 240 feet on the
south side of Tompkins Street
Table III-A ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Table III-A
100:740
Street Restriction
Vine Street [Ord. 84-15] From a point 430 feet south of
Gallaher Street north 40 feet on both
sides of Vine Street
Water Street [Ord. No. 17-012
§ 1, 1-17-2017]
Along the south side from the western
curb line of the alley which runs in
between and parallel to South Main
Street and South Second Street
westwardly to the eastern curb line of
South Second Street
Water Street [Ord. 88-80] From Fifth Street west to the alley on
the north side of Water Street
Water Street [Ord. 89-210] From Fifth Street to Benton Avenue on
both sides of Water Street
Water Street [Ord. 90-265] From Main Street west to the alley
which runs in between and parallel to
Main Street and Second Street on both
sides of Water Street
Water Street [Ord. 02-293] On the south side from South Fourth
Street west 170 feet
Watson Street [Ord. 86-64] From the east curb line of Gamble
Street east 100 feet on the north side
of Watson Street
Watson Street [Ord. 06-138] From the western curb line of Houston
Street west 20 feet on the south side
Watson Street [Ord. 06-138] From the eastern curb line of Houston
Street east 20 feet on the south side
Watson Street [Ord. 97-76] Between Houston and Lindenwood
from the west edge of the entrance to
the Lindenwood University parking lot
west 25 feet on the south side of
Watson Street
Watson Street [Ord. 93-145] From Kingshighway west 80 feet on
both sides of Watson Street
Watson Street [Ord. 07-194] On the south side beginning at a point
290 feet west of the western curb line
of Kingshighway westwardly 110 feet
Wentworth Court [Ord. 13-191;
repealed by Ord. 13-234]
Wentworth Court [Ord. 14-048] Along the west side from Whitby Lane
south to the cul-de-sac return
Wentworth Drive [Ord. 13-191;
repealed by Ord. 13-234]
Table III-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table III-A
100:741
Street Restriction
Wentworth Drive [Ord. 14-048] Along the west side from Westborough
Drive to Whitby Lane
West Adams Street [Ord. 92-56] 18 feet east and west of the alley
which runs in between and parallel to
Kingshighway and Houston Street
along the north and south side of West
Adams Street
Westborough Drive [Ord.
02-252]
On either side from the northern curb
line of Droste Road north 100 feet
Westborough Drive [Ord. 13-191;
repealed by Ord. 13-234]
Westborough Drive [Ord.
14-048]
Along the east and north side from
Droste Road to Wentworth Drive
Westbury Drive [Ord. 84-70] From Chartom-Mar Drive west 710
feet on the south side of Westbury
Drive
Westbury [Ord. 85-149] From the eastern intersection of West
Clay Street and Westbury Drive south
150 feet on both sides of Westbury
Drive
West Clay Street [Ord. 85-72] From a point 100 feet west of the
western edge of Zumbehl Road west
200 feet on the north side of West Clay
Street
West Clay Street [Ord. 85-72] From a point 850 feet west of the
western edge of Zumbehl Road west
400 feet to the eastern edge of
Campus Drive on the north side of
West Clay Street
West Randolph Street [Ord.
85-72]
From Boschertown Road east to the
Norfolk & Southern Railway Crossing
on both sides of West Randolph Street
Whitby Lane [Ord. 13-191;
repealed by Ord. 13-234]
Whitby Lane [Ord. 14-048] Along the south side from Wentworth
Drive to Westborough Drive
Whitelake Drive [Ord. 03-5] From a point 235 feet east of Black
Forest Drive east and south 135 feet
on the south and west side of
Whitelake Drive
Wild Goose Run [Ord. 98-164] From Country Club Road south 110
feet on the west side of Wild Goose
Run
Table III-A ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Table III-A
100:742
Street Restriction
Wilshire Valley Drive [Ord.
97-338]
From Wilshire Valley Boulevard north
to its terminus on the east side of
Wilshire Valley Drive
Zumbehl Road [Ord. 86-149] Between West Clay Street and Campus
Drive on all City portions of Zumbehl
Road
Table III-B. No Parking At Certain Times and Days.
Location Restriction
Clover Blossom Trail on the east
side of Clover Blossom Trail [Ord.
95-228]
8:00 A.M. to 12:00 Noon Monday
through Friday, excluding holidays,
September through May
Diekamp Farm Trail from the
main entrance across from
Francis Howell North High School
including the cul-de-sac area
[Ord. 95-228]
8:00 A.M. to 12:00 Noon Monday
through Friday, excluding holidays,
September through May
Diekamp Farm Trail from the
Diekamp Farm Trail entrance to a
point approximately 100 feet
south of Shady Woods Court on
the west side of Diekamp Farm
Trail [Ord. 95-228]
8:00 A.M. to 12:00 Noon Monday
through Friday, excluding holidays,
September through May
Diekamp Farm Trail in the 2900
Block on the north side of
Diekamp Farm Trail [Ord.
95-228]
8:00 A.M. to 12:00 Noon Monday
through Friday, excluding holidays,
September through May
Diekamp Farm Trail from 2833
Diekamp Farm Trail through 2869
Diekamp Farm Trail on the east
side of Diekamp Farm Trail [Ord.
95-228]
8:00 A.M. to 12:00 Noon Monday
through Friday, excluding holidays,
September through May
Red Clover Court in the area
which currently has unrestricted
parking [Ord. 95-228]
8:00 A.M. to 12:00 Noon Monday
through Friday, excluding holidays,
September through May
Shady Woods Court within the culde-
sac portion of Shady Woods
Court on the north side of Shady
Woods Court [Ord. 95-228]
8:00 A.M. to 12:00 Noon Monday
through Friday, excluding holidays,
September through May
Shirewood Drive from the first
Woodbriar Lane intersection to
the second Woodbriar Lane on
both sides of Shirewood Drive
[Ord. 94-251]
8:00 A.M. to 12:00 Noon Monday
through Friday, excluding holidays,
September through May
Table III-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table III-B
100:743
Location Restriction
East Timothy Lane along both
sides of East Timothy Lane [Ord.
94-282]
8:00 A.M. to 12:00 Noon Monday
through Friday, excluding holidays,
September through May
West Timothy Lane on the east
side of cul-de-sac area [Ord.
02-294]
8:00 A.M. to 12:00 Noon Monday
through Friday, excluding holidays,
September through May
Treebeard Circle along both sides
of Treebeard Circle [Ord.
99-930]
8:00 A.M. to 12:00 Noon Monday
through Friday, excluding holidays,
September through May
On the east side of Westborough
Drive from Droste Road to Whitby
Lane [Ord. 03-302; repealed by
Ord. 13-191; Ord. 13-234]
Wagon Master on the east side of
Wagon Master [Ord. 95-228]
8:00 A.M. to 12:00 Noon Monday
through Friday, excluding holidays,
September through May
Woodbriar Lane from Hackmann
Road to the second Shirewood
Drive intersection on both sides of
Woodbriar Lane [Ord. 94-251]
8:00 A.M. to 12:00 Noon Monday
through Friday, excluding holidays,
September through May
Harvest Ridge Drive from Kunze
Drive south 450 feet on the east
side of Harvest Ridge Drive [Ord.
03-140]
7:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M. except
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays
Kunze Drive from Pralle Lane to
Harvest Ridge Drive on the north
side of Kunze Drive [Ord. 00-62]
7:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M. except
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays
Second Street from the northern
curb line of Jackson Street north
to First Capitol Drive on the west
side of Second Street [Ord.
82-17]
7:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M. except
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays
First Capitol Drive from Second
Street to Fourth Street on the
south side of First Capitol Drive
[Ord. 85-95]
Anytime on Monday through Saturday
and anytime on Sunday except
between 6:00 A.M. and 1:00 P.M.
Bluestone Drive for a point 112
feet south of Pralle Lane south
239 feet on the west side of
Bluestone Drive [Ord. 98-338]373
2:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
373. Editor’s Note: Former parking restriction on Ferguson Street from Bennett Street to Park
Avenue, 8:00 a.m. to 2:30 p.m., which immediately followed, was repealed 9-20-2016 by §1
of Ord. No. 16-184.
Table III-B ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Table III-B
100:744
Location Restriction
Nantucket Drive from
Mockingbird Drive to Norwich
Drive (400 block of Nantucket
Drive) [Ord. 04-260]
11:00 P.M. to 6:00 A.M. excluding
Sundays and holidays
Gallagher Avenue [Repealed by
Ord. 18-78]
Table III-C. Time Limits At Certain Times and On Certain Days.
Location Restriction
Adams Street from Riverside
Drive to Second Street on both
sides of Adams Street [Ord.
99-334]
2 hour limit, 9:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
excluding Sundays and holidays
Fourth Street from a point 18 feet
south of First Capitol Drive south
130 feet on the east side and on
the west side of Fourth Street
from a point 18 feet south of First
Capitol Drive south 125 feet [Ord.
04-200]
2 hour limit 9:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
excluding Sundays and holidays
Clark Street along the south side
from a point 100 feet west of
Fourth Street west to Fifth Street
[Ord. 07-252]
2 hour limit 9:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
excluding Sundays and holidays
First Capitol Drive along both
sides from Fifth Street to
Kingshighway [Ord. 07-252]
2 hour limit 9:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
excluding Sundays and holidays
Jefferson Street along the north
side from a point 22 feet west of
the western curb line of Riverside
Drive to 87 feet west of Riverside
Drive [Ord. 13-026]
15 minute limit (loading zone) 5:00
P.M. to 1:00 A.M. Thursday through
Sunday
Jefferson Street from the alley
which runs in between and
parallel to Main Street and
Second Street to Third Street
along both sides of Jefferson
Street [Ord. 82-7]
2 hour limit 9:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
excluding Sundays and holidays
Madison Street from Main Street
to Second Street along both sides
of Madison Street [Ord. 82-7]
2 hour limit 9:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
excluding Sundays and holidays
Table III-B GENERAL PROVISIONS Table III-C
100:745
Location Restriction
Main Street from a point 50 feet
north of Adams Street north to
Clark Street along the east side of
Main Street [Ord. 82-7]
2 hour limit 9:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
excluding Sundays and holidays
Main Street from the south curb
line of Adams Street south to a
point 315 feet south of Jefferson
Street on the east side of Main
Street [Ord. 93-23]
2 hour limit 9:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
excluding Sundays and holidays
Main Street from the south curb
line of Adams Street south to the
north curb line of Jefferson Street
on the west side of Main Street
[Ord. 93-23]
2 hour limit 9:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
excluding Sundays and holidays
2 hour limit 9:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
excluding Sundays and holidays
Main Street from Clark Street
south 100 feet along the west side
of Main Street [Ord. 82-7]
Main Street from the north curb
line of First Capitol Drive north
435 feet on the west side of Main
Street [Ord. 93-23]
2 hour limit 9:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
excluding Sundays and holidays
Montgomery Street from Second
Street west to the alley on the
south side of Montgomery Street
[Ord. 90-3]
2 hour limit 9:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
excluding Sundays and holidays
Along the west side of North Main
Street from the north curb line of
Adams Street, north 180 feet
[Ord. 89-65]
2 hour limit 9:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
excluding Sundays and holidays
North Second Street along both
sides from the the intersection of
Montgomery Street to 135 feet
north of the intersection of
Franklin Street [Ord. 13-010;
Ord. No. 13-148 §2, 8-6-2013]
2 hour limit 9:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
Excluding Sundays and holidays
Second Street from a point 50 feet
south of Madison Street south 163
feet on the west side of Second
Street [Ord. 93-269]
2 hour limit 9:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
excluding Sundays and holidays
Second Street from Franklin
Street to Montgomery Street
along both sides of Second Street
2 hour limit 9:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
excluding Sundays and holidays
Table III-C ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Table III-C
100:746
Location Restriction
Second Street from Jefferson
Street north 185 feet along the
east side of Second Street [Ord.
82-7]
2 hour limit 9:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
excluding Sundays and holidays
Second Street from a point 50 feet
north of Madison Street to
Monroe Street along the west side
of Second Street [Ord. 82-7]
2 hour limit 9:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
excluding Sundays and holidays
On the north side of Sibley Street
from the alley which runs parallel
to and between Kingshighway and
Houston Street westwardly to the
eastern line of Houston Street
[Ord. 88-42]
2 hour limit 9:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
excluding Sundays and holidays
Washington Street from Second
Street to Third Street along the
south side of Washington Street.
[Ord. 82-7]
2 hour limit 9:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
excluding Sundays and holidays
Ferguson Street from Bennett
Avenue to Park Avenue, on the
east side of Ferguson Street [Ord.
94-308]
2 hour limit 8:00 A.M. to 2:00 P.M.
Monday through Friday, excluding
holidays
Washington Street from a point 30
feet east of Fifth Street east 50
feet on the north side of
Washington Street [Ord. 97-236]
2 hour limit 8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M.
Monday through Friday, excluding
holidays
Fifth Street from a point 180 feet
north of Randolph Street north 24
feet on the west side of Fifth
Street [Ord. 99-68]
15 minute limit 3:00 P.M. to 6:00 P.M.
Alley which runs in between and
parallel to Main Street and
Second Street from the north curb
line of First Capitol Drive north
160 feet on the east side of the
alley [Ord. 88-230]
30 minute limit (loading zone)
South Second Street from a point
43 feet north of First Capitol
Drive north 80 feet on the west
side [Ord. 04-247]
30 minute limit (loading zone)
Table III-C GENERAL PROVISIONS Table III-C
100:747
Location Restriction
East side of South Third Street
starting at the northern curb line
of Jackson Street north 120 feet
[Ord. No. 16-212 §2,
10-18-2016]
2 hour limit 9:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.,
excluding Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays
Madison Street on the south side
from a point 18 feet east of the
eastern curb line of Kingshighway
east 88 feet, and along the north
side of Madison Street from a
point 68 feet east of the eastern
curb line of Kingshighway east 43
feet [Ord. 01-55]
2 hour limit 9:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
Monday through Friday, excluding
holidays
South side of Madison Street
starting at a point 30 feet west of
the stop sign at Seventh Street
and continuing westwardly 22 feet
[Ord. 87-125]
2 hour limit 8:30 A.M. to 3:30 P.M.
Second Street on the west side
from a point 100 feet north of the
northern curb line of Jackson
Street north 27 feet [Ord. 04-43]
15 minute limit (loading zone)
Sixth Street on the west side from
a point 18 feet north of the
northern curb line of Water Street
north 42 feet [Ord. 07-60]
15 minute limit (loading zone)
Nantucket Drive from
Mockingbird Drive to Norwich
Drive (400 block of Nantucket
Drive) [Ord. 04-260]
2 hour limit 6:00 A.M. to 11:00 P.M.
excluding Sundays and holidays
Waverly Street, north side from a
point of the southern curb line of
Lindenwood Avenue south 220
feet [Ord. 13-011]
15 minute loading zone 6:30 A.M. to
4:00 P.M. Monday through Friday,
except holidays
Waverly Street, south side from a
point 18 feet east of Lindenwood
Avenue east 72 feet
15 minute loading zone 8:00 A.M. to
3:00 P.M. Monday through Friday,
except holidays
Table III-C ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Table III-D
100:748
Table III-D. Angle Parking.
Location Restriction
Third Street between Washington
and Jefferson Streets along the
east side of Third Street [Ord.
94-327]
45 degree angle
Monroe Street from the alley west
of Main Street to Second Street
on the north side of Monroe
Street [Ord. 96-11]
60 degree angle with a 1 hour limit on
Monday through Friday 9:00 A.M. to
6:00 P.M.
Evergreen Drive cul-de-sac [Ord.
08-156]
90 degree angle
Table III-E. Police Parking Only.
Location Restriction
Adams Street on the south side
beginning at a point 30 feet east
of Second Street heading east 95
feet [Ord. 03-236]
Police parking only 8:00 A.M. to 5:00
P.M. Monday through Friday
Table III-F. Taxicab Loading Zone.
Location Restriction
Monroe Street on the north side
from a point 23 feet east of the
eastern curb line of Main Street to
a point 150 feet east of the
eastern curb line of Main Street
[Ord. 13-025]
Taxicab parking only 10:00 P.M. to
2:30 A.M.
Table III-G. No-Parking Loading Zone.
Location Restriction
Perry Street on the north side from
Fifth Street to Sixth Street [Ord.
14-143]
No-parking loading zone
East side of Second Street starting
60 feet north of the northern curb
line of Madison Street ending 114
feet south of the southern curb of
Jefferson Street [Ord. No. 16-213
§2, 10-18-2016]
No-parking loading zone
West side of the alley from Pike
Street to First Capitol Drive. [Ord.
No. 15-292 § 1, 12-15-2015]
No-parking loading zone
Table III-D GENERAL PROVISIONS Table III-G
100:749
Location Restriction
W. Randolph Street on the south
side from 285 feet west of the
western curbline of Madonna Street
to 90 feet east of the eastern
curbline of Madonna Street. [Ord.
No. 18-172, 8-7-2018]
No Parking Loading Zone — expiring
May 25, 2019
Table III-H. Residential Permit Parking District. [Ord. No. 16-250
§1, 12-6-2016374]
When signs are posted designating the Residential Permit Parking District,
no person shall park an automobile not having a parking permit sticker
during the hours of 7:00 A.M. to 2:30 P.M., Monday through Friday, inclusive
when school is in session.
Schedule IV
MUNICIPAL PARKING LOT RESTRICTIONS
Table IV-A. Municipal Parking Lot Restrictions.375 [R.O. 2009 Ch. 78
Schedule I; CC 1981 §§18-325—18-326, 18-328—18-329; Ord. No.
92-36, 3-4-1992; Ord. No. 99-226, 6-21-1999; Ord. No. 99-354,
10-7-1999; Ord. No. 00-269, 9-21-2000; Ord. No. 03-192, 8-4-2003;
Ord. No. 04-227, 9-10-2004; Ord. No. 05-06, 1-11-2005; Ord. No.
14-168 §1, 8-19-2014]
A. Restricted Parking Lots. When signs are erected giving plainly visible
notice, no person shall park a vehicle on the following municipally
owned, leased or operated parking lots as follows: [Ord. 14-168]
Location Restrictions
East side of the 300 block of
North Main Street (Bandbox
Lot) [Ord. 99-226]
No longer than 3 consecutive
hours per day Monday through
Friday from 8:00 A.M. to 4:00
P.M.
230 South Main Street (Foundry
Art Centre Parking Lot south of
the south edge of the Art Centre
building east to the KATY Trail)
[Ord. 14-168; Ord. No.
15-177 §1, 8-11-2015; Ord.
No. 17-061 § 1, 3-21-2017]
No parking from 1:00 A.M. to
5:00 A.M. on Saturday beginning
the second Saturday in May to
November 1 (vehicle subject to
towing at owner's expense)
374. Editor's Note: Section 5 also provided an effective date of 1-1-2017.
375. Cross Reference—As to municipal parking lots and garages—regulations, prohibitions,
fees and the like, §350.050.
Table III-G ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Table IV-A
100:750
Location Restrictions
Riverside Drive and north of
First Capitol Drive (Tourism Lot)
[Ord. 99-226]
No longer than 3 consecutive
hours per day Monday through
Friday, 8:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M.
Along Riverside Drive south of
First Capitol Drive to Pike
Street (Riverside Lot) [Ord.
99-226]
No longer than 6 consecutive
hours per day from 7:00 A.M. to
5:00 P.M.
West of Riverside Drive at
Jefferson Street (Jefferson
Street Parking Lot) [Ord.
03-192, 05-06]
The 51 westernmost parking
spaces are designated as 3-hour
parking from 8:00 A.M. to 4:00
P.M. Monday through Friday
East of Riverside Drive at
Monroe Street (Farmers Market
Lot) [Ord. 99-226, 00-269,
04-227, 05-06]
The 27 westernmost parking
spaces are designated as 3-hour
parking from 8:00 A.M. to 4:00
P.M. Monday through Friday
St. Charles (O'Dell) Senior
Center 1455 Fairgrounds Road
[Ord. No. 16-263 § 1,
12-20-2016]
No parking from 7:00 P.M. to
6:00 A.M. Monday through
Friday. No parking on Saturday
and Sunday.
West of Riverside and south of
Monroe Street (Old Gas Lot
Parking Lot) [Ord. 99-354]
Parking for all spaces on the
southwest corner of Riverside
Drive and Monroe Street shall be
no longer than 3 consecutive
hours per day Monday through
Friday from 8:00 A.M. to 4:00
P.M.
East of Second Street between
Jefferson Street and Madison
Street (Old County Jail Parking
Lot) [Ord. 99-226, 00-269]
Permit parking only from 8:00
A.M. to 4:00 P.M. Monday
through Friday
B. Unrestricted Parking Lots. The following parking lots have no time
restrictions on parking:
Location Restrictions
Riverside Drive and Perry Street
[Ord. 92-36]
None
East of Second Street at the
corner of Second and Water
Streets [Ord. 92-36]
None
Table IV-A GENERAL PROVISIONS Table IV-A
100:751
Schedule V
ONE-WAY STREETS
Table V-A. One-Way Streets.
As authorized by and in accordance with Chapter 340 of this Title, no person
shall drive or operate, or cause or permit a vehicle to be driven or operated
in violation of the directional restriction imposed below. (Note: This list
contains only those locations prescribed after August 6, 2013. Even though
they are not listed in this Schedule, all one-way streets and alleys adopted
by ordinance prior to August 6, 2013, are still in effect.)
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Location
McDonough Street [Ord.
No. 13-145 §1,
8-6-2013]
East From Second Street to Main
Street
Chapter 400
ZONING CODE
Location Restrictions
West of Second Street at Second
N one and Water Streets (except
for the necessary spaces to be
used for bus parking as
indicated by the proper bus
parking signs) [Ord. 92-36]
None
C. Bus Parking. No buses shall be parked in any of the municipal parking
lots, except in the properly posted spaces in the parking lot as follows:
Location
Riverfront Parking Lot located near Riverside Drive and South
Main Street [Ord. 92-36]
West of Second Street at Second and Water Street [Ord. 92-36]
West of Riverside Drive and North of First Capitol Drive [Ord.
92-36]
D. Penalty. Any person who parks in the area in excess of the posted time
limits, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than ten dollars
($10.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00). In addition, the vehicle
shall be subject to towing at the owner's expense. [Ord. 14-168]
Table IV-A ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Table V-A
100:752
Article I
General Provisions
Section 400.010. Title. [R.O. 2009 §156.001; CC 1981 §30-1; Ord.
No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998]
This Chapter shall be known as the "Zoning Ordinance for the City of St.
Charles, Missouri".
Section 400.020. Applicability. [R.O. 2009 §156.002; CC 1981 §30-2;
Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998]
For the purpose of promoting health, safety, morals and the general welfare
of the community, the City Council hereby places regulations and
restrictions upon the height, number of stories and size of buildings and
other structures, the percentage of lot that may be occupied, the size
of yards, courts and other open spaces, the density of population, the
preservation of features of historical significance and the location and use
of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence or other
purposes.
Section 400.030. Purpose. [R.O. 2009 §156.003; CC 1981 §30-3;
Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998]
Section 400.040. Conflicting Provisions. [R.O. 2009 §156.004; CC
1981 §30-4; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998]
Whenever any provision of these regulations imposes more stringent
requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or
required by the provisions of any other law or ordinance, the provisions of
these regulations shall govern.
A. These regulations are intended to be in general accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan and are designed to:
1. Lessen congestion in the streets;
2. Secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers;
3. Promote health and the general welfare;
4. Provide adequate light and air;
5. Prevent the overcrowding of land;
6. Avoid undue concentration of population;
7. Preserve features of historical significance;
8. Facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water,
sewerage, sewage, schools, parks and other public services.
Section
400.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.050
100:753
Section 400.050. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §156.005; CC 1981 §30-5;
Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 89-35, 2-23-1989; Ord. No.
90-188, 7-18-1990; Ord. No. 92-70, 4-21-1992; Ord. No. 92-271,
11-12-1992; Ord. No. 92-308, 12-23-1992; Ord. No. 93-183,
8-25-1993; Ord. No. 93-210, 9-1-1993; Ord. No. 95-344, 12-8-1995;
Ord. No. 96-6, 1-16-1996; Ord. No. 96-256, 9-19-1996; Ord. No.
98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 99-53, 2-4-1999; Ord. No. 99-205,
6-3-1999; Ord. No. 99-322, 9-23-1999; Ord. No. 00-78, 4-5-2000;
Ord. No. 01-156, 7-19-2001; Ord. No. 03-98, 5-13-2003; Ord. No.
04-176, 8-4-2004; Ord. No. 04-216, 9-10-2004; Ord. No. 05-65,
3-7-2005; Ord. No. 05-319, 12-22-2005; Ord. No. 06-106, 4-26-2006;
Ord. No. 06-163, 6-30-2006; Ord. No. 06-357, 12-20-2006; Ord. No.
07-167, 6-13-2007; Ord. No. 07-212, 8-22-2007; Ord. No. 09-47,
3-20-2009; Ord. No. 10-74 §1, 4-22-2010; Ord. No. 10-244 §1,
11-18-2010; Ord. No. 11-26 §1, 2-4-2011; Ord. No. 12-165 §1,
9-28-2012; Ord. No. 12-189 §1, 10-18-2012; Ord. No. 13-116 §1,
6-20-2013]
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE — An item is
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative if it meets one (1) or more
of the following criteria:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A freestanding, separate building which is
devoted exclusively to an accessory use. Any building that is customarily
incidental to an agricultural use is an accessory building even though it may
not be on the same lot as the main building. See Figure 1 following this
Section. In residential zoning districts, accessory buildings shall include,
but are not limited to, greenhouses, tool sheds, swimming pool cabanas,
gazebos, unattached carports and unattached garages.
ACCESSORY USE — A use which is incidental or customary to the principal
use and is on the same lot as the principal use.
Does not possess an engine, when an engine is necessary for its
operation as designed.
1.
2. Has one (1) or more flat or missing tires.
3. Is incapable of being operated for lack of a major component.
Is missing significant body parts such as the hood, fender, cab, door or
trunk lid.
4.
Is a vehicle which does not have lawfully affixed thereto an unexpired
license plate and a current motor vehicle safety inspection certificate.
5.
6. Is a boat or a trailer which is not currently licensed.
7. Windows are broken or missing.
8. The body of the vehicle is significantly rusted.
Section
400.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.050
100:754
ADULT DAY CARE FACILITY — A facility designed to provide care and
supervision to meet the needs of five (5) or more functionally impaired
adults for periods of less than twenty-four (24) consecutive hours, but more
than two (2) hours per day in a place other than the adult's home.
AGRICULTURAL USE — The growing of crops or the raising of livestock
or poultry. The feeding or disposal of community or collected garbage shall
not be deemed an agricultural use, nor shall the raising of fur-bearing
animals, riding academies, livery or boarding stables or dog kennels be so
considered.
ALLEY — A public or private road which has neither a designated name nor
postal address.
ALTERATION — See "STRUCTURAL ALTERATION".
ANTIQUE SALES — A retail establishment offering antiques for sale. An
antique, for the purposes of this Chapter, shall be a work of art, pieces of
furniture, decorative objects or the like, or belonging to the past, at least
thirty (30) years old.[Ord. No. 18-283, 12-18-2018]
APARTMENT — One (1) of two (2) or more units within a single structure
with each unit containing one (1) or more rooms used as a single-family
dwelling.
ARBORIST — A person trained in the art and science of planting, caring for
and maintaining individual trees.
ARCADE — A building housing an amusement place with pinball, skee ball,
video games or similar activities.
AUDITORIUM — A building or structure designed or intended for use of
gathering of people as an audience to hear music, lectures, plays and
other presentations. Shall not include a meeting facility.[Ord. No. 18-283,
12-18-2018]
AUTOMOBILE — Shall have the same meaning as "motor vehicle" defined
in Section 300.010 of this Code.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION — Any place of business with pumps
and underground storage tanks, primarily engaged in the retail servicing
of motor vehicles with fuels and lubricants. Convenience stores with fuel
pumps are also regulated as automobile service stations.
BASEMENT — A portion of the building partly underground, but having less
than half its clear height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
See "CELLAR" and Figure 2 following this Section.
BED AND BREAKFAST — A building having not more than six (6) guests,
where travelers for compensation are lodged for sleeping purposes and may
be provided a morning meal.[Ord. No. 19-191, 9-17-2019]
BLOCK — Land generally surrounded on all sides by streets or other
physical barriers to the continuity of development. See "BLOCK" and Figure
7 following this Section.[Ord. No. 18-231, 10-16-2018]
Section
400.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.050
100:755
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — A body of persons which may determine
and vary this Chapter in accordance with the rules contained in Sections
400.1060 et seq.
BOARDING HOUSE — A building occupied as a single housekeeping unit,
where lodging or meals are provided for more than three (3) persons for
compensation, pursuant to previous arrangements, but not for the public or
transients; or a building occupied as a group home by more than three (3)
persons, each of whom is either a recovering alcoholic or a recovering drug
addict.
BOAT — Any device used or capable of being used for navigation on water.
BREWERY — An industrial use that brews ales, beers, meads, and/or similar
beverages on site.[Ord. No. 18-283, 12-18-2018]
BUILDABLE AREA — The space remaining after the minimum open space
requirements of these regulations have been complied with.
BUILDING — Any structure, having a roof supported by columns or walls,
for the housing or enclosure of persons, animals or properties. "Building"
or "structure" includes any part thereof and "building" includes "structure".
See also "STRUCTURE".
BUILDING CONTRACTOR'S ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment used
for the indoor storage of equipment, contractor vehicles or materials and
may include the contractor's business office.[Ord. No. 18-283,
12-18-2018]
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF — See "HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS".
BUILDING LINE — A line parallel to the street right-of-way line and distant
from it at least the minimum depth of the required front yard. See Figure 1
following this Section.[Ord. No. 18-231, 10-16-2018]
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL OR MAIN — The building on a lot which houses the
principal use of the lot.
CAMPER SHELL — Any unit primarily designed as temporary living
quarters for recreation, camping, travel use or an enclosed space which is
capable of being occupied and is attached or designed to be attached to the
bed or frame of a truck or similar self-powered vehicle.
CAR WASH — A building or portion thereof, the primary purpose of which
is that of washing motor vehicles.
CELLAR — The portion of the building, partly underground, having half or
more than half of its clear height below the average grade of the adjoining
ground. See Figure 2 following this Section.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — A certificate issued by the
HLPARB indicating its approval of plans for alteration or construction of a
landmark or of a structure within a historic district or a certificate issued
by the Planning and Zoning Commission indicating its approval of plans for
construction of structures in areas outside the historic districts.
Section
400.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.050
100:756
CERTIFICATE OF DEMOLITION OR REMOVAL — A certificate of
appropriateness issued by the HLPARB authorizing the demolition or
removal of a landmark or of a structure within a historic district.
CERTIFIED ARBORIST — An arborist certified by the International Society
of Arboriculture (ISA). Certification requires a minimum of three (3) years
experience and passing a comprehensive examination administered by ISA.
CHURCH — A building principally used for religious purposes, which shall
include, but not be limited to, rectories, parish houses, convents and
monasteries, temples and synagogues.
CLINIC — A building used by two (2) or more health practitioners or
chiropractors for consulting and treating patients who are not lodged
overnight in the building.
CLOTHING DROP BOX — A box, building, trailer or other receptacle that
is intended for use as a collection point for donated clothing or other
household materials at times when no employee or representative of the
sponsoring company or organization is present to accept donations.
CLUB, PRIVATE — Buildings and facilities owned or operated by a
corporation, association or person for members to engage in social,
educational or recreational activities and not accessible to persons other
than members or their guests.
COMMUNITY SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment whose sole
activity is the provision of assistance to individuals in need. Similar land
uses permitted under this category, include, but are not limited to; basic
medical care, legal aid, free food distribution, laundry facilities, job training,
clothing distribution, and other similar services. This use shall not include
temporary or permanent living facilities.[Ord. No. 17-072 § 1, 4-18-2017]
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A plan as defined by the State Statutes and
State courts under State zoning laws.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use listed as such in this Chapter and which
may be permitted in a specified district as set forth; such conditions shall
be determined in each case by the terms of this Chapter with the
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission and approval
of the City Council and in accordance with the procedures specified in
Sections 400.980 et seq.
CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT — Any development of property,
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 448, RSMo., which now exists or
hereafter shall exist.
CONGREGATE CARE FACILITY — An establishment used as a dwelling
place by the aged, infirm, chronically ill or incurably afflicted persons
in which not less than eight (8) persons live or are provided for on the
premises, for compensation. Such facilities include nursing homes, skilled
nursing facilities, convalescent homes, rehabilitation facilities, assisted
living, and memory care but do not include similar facilities otherwise listed
or defined within this Chapter.[Ord. No. 15-069 §1, 4-21-2015]
Section
400.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.050
100:757
CONSTRUCTION — The erection, alteration, repair, renovation, demolition
or removal of any building or structure; and the excavation, filling, grading
and regulation of lots in connection therewith.
CONTRACTOR'S EQUIPMENT — The construction machinery, tools,
derricks, hoists, scaffolds, platforms, runways, ladders and all material
handling equipment safeguards and protective devices used in construction
operations.
CONVALESCENT HOME — See "CONGREGATE CARE FACILITY".
COURTYARD — An open space around which is a single building or a group
of related buildings.
CURB LEVEL — The mean level of the curb in front of the lot or, in case
of a corner lot, along that abutting street where the mean curb level is the
highest.
DAY CARE FACILITY — A place for reception, care, training or instruction
of five (5) or more children, not of common parentage, residing therein,
regardless of sex, under the age of eighteen (18) years, for compensation
or otherwise, provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed as
applying to the regularly established public or parochial schools, colleges,
universities, academies or seminaries or other schools of institutions
organized under and by virtue of the laws of the United States or the State
of Missouri and under the supervision of the duly constituted authorities
thereof. Examples of such uses include:
Family day care homes;
Day care centers;
Preschool centers;
Nursery schools;
Child play centers,
Child education centers; and
Child experiment stations or child development institutions.
DAY SPA — A business establishment which provides personal care
treatments such as massages, body wraps, aromatherapy, facial cleansing,
manicures, pedicures and hair styling. A day spa is only visited for the
duration of the treatment.
DBH — The diameter of a tree at breast height which shall be measured at
four and one-half (4½) feet above ground.
DEMOLITION — Any act or process which destroys, in part or the majority
of, any structure.
DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT — The omission of maintenance or repair to a
structure which threatens to destroy that structure.
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units erected or permitted on an acre
of land.
Section
400.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.050
100:758
DESIGN GUIDELINE — A standard of appropriate activity that will preserve
the historic and architectural character of a structure or area.
DISTILLERY — An industrial facility where liquor is manufactured, stored,
bottled, and sold in sealed containers at wholesale.[Ord. No. 18-283,
12-18-2018]
DISTRICT — An area designated by the City Council as an area in which
only certain zoning regulations apply.
DIVERSION — A channel with or without a supporting ridge on the lower
side constructed across or at the bottom of a slope.
DOG KENNEL, COMMERCIAL — A facility which houses, boards, breeds or
trains three (3) or more dogs.
DORMITORY — A building devoted exclusively to living facilities, in which
each person residing in each living unit shall be a duly registered student in
any accredited school, college or university, the spouse of such student or
a management employee. Such living facilities may contain sleeping rooms
for use of one (1) or more persons, provided that there is at least one
hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space for the first (1st) occupant
thereof and at least one hundred (100) additional square feet of floor space
for every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be calculated on
the basis of total habitable room area.
DRAINAGEWAY — Any waterway, ditch or course, either natural or
artificial, which collects and drains surface water.
DRIVE-IN — A structure or facility which is used to provide service to a
patron while seated in or on a vehicle.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A building containing three (3) or more
dwelling units, but not including group living arrangements, hotels, motels,
apartment hotels, rooming houses, boarding houses, nursing homes, town
houses or row dwellings.
DWELLING, ROW OR TOWN HOUSE — A building containing three (3) or
more dwelling units having no common entrances or hallways with each
dwelling unit having a front and rear entrance.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A building containing only one (1) dwelling
unit.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building containing two (2) dwelling units,
independent of each other.
DWELLING UNIT — One (1) or more rooms designed, occupied or intended
for occupancy as separate living quarters with cooking, sleeping and
sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of
a single family maintaining a household.
EASEMENT — A designated parcel of land on, over or under which a
liberty, privilege or advantage for use of land is dedicated and distinct from
ownership of the land and granted either to the public, a particular person
or firm or a combination of both.
Section
400.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.050
100:759
EFFICIENCY UNIT — A dwelling unit consisting of one (1) room exclusive of
bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets or dining alcove directly off the principal
room.
ERECTED — Construction or reconstruction of a building or structure
including excavating, land filling, pouring concrete or cutting, forming or
altering building materials on the lot where the building is located or is to
be located.
EROSION — The wearing away of the land surface by the action of wind,
water or gravity.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities, governmental departments or commissions
of underground, surface or overhead gas, communication, electrical, steam,
fuel or water transmission or distribution systems, sewers, pipes, conduits,
cable, fire alarm and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar
accessories in connection therewith, but not including buildings which
are necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities,
governmental departments or commissions for the general public health,
safety, convenience or welfare.
ESTABLISHMENT — An economic unit where business is conducted or
services or industrial operations performed.
EXCAVATION OR CUT — The removal, stripping or disturbance of soil,
earth, sand, rock, gravel or other similar substances from the ground.
EXEMPTED QUANTITY — For each hazardous substance, a weight less than
the Final Reportable Quantity listed on the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency's List of Hazardous Substances, 40 CFR 302.4. For each extremely
hazardous substance, a weight less than the Reportable Quantity listed on
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's List of Extremely Hazardous
Substances, 40 CFR 355, Appendix A. For any liquid petroleum product
not listed as a hazardous or extremely hazardous substance, a quantity of
sixty (60) gallons or less. Where regulated substances are dissolved in or
mixed with other non-regulated substances, only the actual quantity of the
regulated substance present shall be used to determine compliance with the
provisions of this Chapter. The exempted quantity shall be measured as the
total quantity of that substance per facility at any one (1) time.
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL APPEARANCE — The architectural character
and general composition of the exterior of a structure including, but not
limited to, the kind, color and texture of the building material and the
type, design and character of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs and
appurtenant elements.
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE — Decoration or supporting
member of a structure, such as porches, porch rails, brackets, cornices,
which display accoutrements or characteristics of a special architectural
style or school.
EXTREMELY HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — See "REGULATED
SUBSTANCE".
Section
400.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.050
100:760
FACILITY — All buildings, equipment, structures and other stationary items
that are located on a single site or on contiguous or adjacent sites and
which are owned or operated by the same person (or by any person which
controls, is controlled by or under common control with such person).
The term "facility" shall include manmade structures in which chemicals
are purposefully placed or removed through human means such that it
functions as a containment structure for human use. For the purposes
of Section 400.320 Wellhead Protection District, the term includes motor
vehicles, rolling stock and aircraft.
FAMILY — One (1) or more persons who are related by blood, marriage
or adoption, living together and occupying a single housekeeping unit with
single kitchen facilities or a group of persons living together and occupying
a single housekeeping unit with single kitchen facilities, of which group no
person shall be unrelated to more than two (2) persons in the group or any
group of people related by blood, marriage or adoption and one (1) other
unrelated person.
FARM — A tract of land used for agricultural activities having thereon an
agricultural use.
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier erected to enclose, divide or
screen areas of land. Ornamental dividers of plastic, chains, posts or like
materials erected along driveway or sidewalks shall not be considered a
fence.
FILLING — The depositing or dumping of any matter on or into the ground,
except the deposits resulting from common household gardening or
deposits on farms for agricultural use.
FILLING STATION — See "AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION".
FLOOR AREA — The square feet of floor space within the perimeter formed
by the inside surface of exterior walls and including the total of all floor
space on all stories of a building including a finished basement. It does not
include porches, garages, cellars, utility areas, unfinished attics, accessory
buildings or space in a basement, when such space is used for storage or
incidental uses.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The total square feet of floor area in a structure
divided by the total square feet of land area in the lot or tract on which the
structure is located. See Figure 3 following this Section.376
FRATERNITY HOUSE — A building used as group living quarters for
students of a college, university or seminary, who are members of a
fraternity/sorority that has been officially recognized by the college,
university or seminary. See also "sorority house."[Ord. No. 18-283,
12-18-2018]
FRONTAGE — All property on one (1) side of a street between two (2)
intersecting streets (crossing or terminating) measured along the right-ofway
line of the street; or, if the street is dead-ended, then all of the property
376. Editor’s Note: The definition of “Free Food Distribution,” which immediately followed, was
repealed 4-18-2017 by § 1 of Ord. No. 17-072.
Section
400.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.050
100:761
abutting on one (1) side between an intersecting street and the dead-end of
the street.
GARAGE, PARKING — A building or portion thereof, except a private
garage, providing parking and/or storage for motor vehicles.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building for parking or storage of motor
vehicles.
GENERATOR — A machine that converts mechanical energy into electrical
energy. A generator may be permanently installed on the site on which it is
to serve.
GRADE ELEVATION — The elevation determined by averaging the
elevations of the finished ground at all the corners of the perimeter walls of
the building.
GRADING — Any excavation or filling or combination thereof.
GREENBELT — A visual barrier composed of evergreen plants, trees and
grass arranged to form both a low level and a high level screen. No
dedicated right-of-way shall be used as a part of any greenbelt.
GROUND WATER — Underground water which is at an elevation below the
water table and within the zone of saturation.
GROUP LIVING ARRANGEMENT — A facility for the care or treatment of
persons under supervision either for or not for compensation. "Group living
arrangements" include, but are not limited to the following:
GROUP CARE HOME FOR MENTALLY HANDICAPPED CHILDREN: A
facility which provides care, treatment or custody for four (4) to nine
(9) mentally handicapped children under the age of sixteen (16) years
and affords the opportunity for utilization of community educational,
recreational and health facilities and which is licensed as a group care
home under Chapter 202, RSMo.
1.
GROUP HOME FOR FOSTER CARE: Any private residence licensed
by the Division of Family Services or Department of Mental Health
to provide foster care to one (1) or more but less than seven (7)
children who are unrelated to either foster parent by blood, marriage
or adoption.
2.
GROUP HOME FOR MENTALLY OR PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED: Any
home in which eight (8) or fewer mentally or physically handicapped
persons reside and may include two (2) additional persons acting as
houseparents or guardians who need not be related to each other or to
any of the mentally or physically handicapped persons residing in the
home.
3.
RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY: A residential institution, whether
operated for profit or not, which provides personal care, custody or
treatment for five (5) or more individuals not related to the operator,
who, for reasons of illness, mental handicap, advanced age or physical
handicaps, are unable to care for themselves.
4.
Section
400.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.050
100:762
GUEST HOUSE — A building arranged or used for lodging for
compensation, with or without meals, and not occupied as a single-family or
two-family unit.
HALFWAY HOUSE — A residential facility primarily for persons who have
been institutionalized for various reasons and released and require the
temporary protection of a group setting to facilitate the transition to society.
HALFWAY HOUSE FOR YOUNG OFFENDERS — A not-for-profit institution
which primarily serves individuals between the ages of seventeen (17)
and twenty-five (25) who have not been imprisoned (except for "shock
probation" terms) and have not been convicted of adult or juvenile violent
crimes (as defined by the Missouri Department of Corrections), which has
twenty-four (24) hour on-duty staff and which is designed to provide an
alternative to prison for young offenders.
HANDBILL — An announcement of an activity printed on paper and
intended to be "handed out".
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — See "REGULATED SUBSTANCE".
HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS — The vertical distance measured from the
highest of the following three (3) levels:
HISTORIC DISTRICT — An area designated as a historic zoning district
overlay by an ordinance of the City Council and which may contain within
definable geographic boundaries one (1) or more landmarks and which
may have within its boundaries other properties or structures which, while
not of such historic and/or architectural significance to be designated as
landmarks, nevertheless contribute to the overall visual characteristics of
the landmark or landmarks located within the historic district.
HISTORIC LANDMARKS PRESERVATION AND ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW
BOARD — A body of persons which shall have only those powers granted
to them by the Code of Ordinances of the City of St. Charles, Missouri,
including the power to review, inspect, investigate and study any site,
building or historical structure which is a historical or architectural
landmark, in accordance with this Code of Ordinances. Whenever the term
"HLPARB" is used in this Chapter, such words shall mean the Historic
Landmarks Preservation and Architectural Review Board.
1. Street curb level;
2. Center of the street in case of no street curb; or
Grade elevation.
To one (1) of the following:
1. For flat roofs with a 1:12 pitch or less, the highest point of the roof;
or
2. For all other roofs, the mean (average) height level of the top of
the wall and the main ridge of the roof.
3.
Section
400.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.050
100:763
HLPARB — The St. Charles Historic Landmarks Preservation and
Architectural Review Board.
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation which is incidental and secondary to
the use of the premises for dwelling purposes. See Section 400.430.
HOMELESS SHELTER — See "TEMPORARY SHELTER".
HOSPITAL — A building having room facilities for overnight medical
patients, a staff of physicians and nurses, surgical facilities and other
related services.
HOTEL, MOTEL, MOTOR COURT OR MOTOR LODGE — A building or
group of buildings containing six (6) or more guest rooms in which lodging
or accommodation is offered to the public for compensation and is provided
to transients. Such building or group of buildings may include restaurants,
taverns or club rooms, public banquet halls, ballrooms and meeting rooms
as subordinate uses.
INDOOR FIREARM RANGE — Any rifle, pistol, silhouette, skeet, trap,
blackpowder or similar range located inside a completely enclosed facility
used for discharging firearms in a sporting event or for practice or
instruction in the use of a firearm.
INTENSITY OF USE — The level of activity, number of persons residing or
employed on the premises, percent of open space occupied or amount of
floor space or land occupied by a particular land use at a specific address or
location.
IN-VEHICLE SALES/SERVICE — Land uses which perform sales and/or
services to persons in vehicles or to vehicles which may be occupied at
the time of such activity. Such land uses often have traffic volumes which
exhibit their highest levels concurrent with peak traffic flows on adjacent
roads. Examples of such land uses include drive-in, drive-up and drivethrough
facilities, vehicular fuel stations and all forms of car washes.[Ord.
No. 18-283, 12-18-2018]
JUNK — Shall include but not be limited to, old or scrap copper, brass, rope,
rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber debris, waste, or junked, dismantled,
or wrecked automobiles, or parts thereof, iron, steel, and other old or scrap
ferrous or nonferrous material.
JUNK YARD — An establishment, area, or place of business maintained,
operated, or used for the storing, keeping, buying, or selling of junk or for
the operation of an automobile graveyard, garbage dump or sanitary fill.
LABORATORY — A building or portion thereof devoted exclusively to
experimental, applied or basic research and development or for testing and
analysis.
LANDFILL — Land used or intended to be used, let, leased, rented or sold as
a site for final disposal or deposition of solid or liquid waste, which conforms
with State Statutes governing sanitary landfills.
LANDMARK — A property or structure designated as a "landmark" by
ordinance of the City Council, pursuant to procedures prescribed herein,
Section
400.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.050
100:764
which is worthy of rehabilitation, restoration and preservation because of
its historic and/or architectural significance. Also a property or structure
designated as a "landmark" by the Landmarks Board, pursuant to City
ordinances, prior to the enactment of this Chapter.
LANDMARKS BOARD — The Historic Landmarks Preservation and
Architectural Review Board.
LAUNDROMAT — A building or a part thereof where clothes or household
articles are cleaned and/or dried in self-service, coin-operated machines.
LAUNDRY OR DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENT — A building or part
thereof wherein employees provide a service of washing, cleaning, drying
and/or ironing clothes or other articles.
LIMIT OF DISTURBANCE — A line showing the limit of construction,
grading or excavation activity. This line will typically delineate the tree
preservation area.
LIQUID PETROLEUM PRODUCT — See "REGULATED SUBSTANCE".
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space within the main building or on the
same lot providing for the standing, loading or unloading of vehicles.
LOT — A parcel of land under common ownership, described as one (1) unit
of land, except land used as a farm.
LOT AREA — The total square footage within the lot lines. For lots fronting
or lying adjacent to private streets, the lot area shall be interpreted to mean
that area within the lot lines separating the lot from the private street and
not the centerline of such street.
LOT, CORNER — A lot bordering on two (2) streets which intersect. See
Figure 4 following this Section.
LOT COVERAGE — The part or percent of the lot occupied by buildings
or structures including accessory buildings or structures. See also "FLOOR
AREA RATIO" and "BUILDABLE AREA".
LOT DEPTH — The average distance between the front and rear lot lines.
See Figure 4 following this Section.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE — A lot, other than a corner lot, which has
frontage on two (2) streets. See Figure 4 following this Section.
LOT, INTERIOR — Any lot other than a corner lot. See Figure 4 following
this Section.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The line separating the lot from the right-of-way of
the street on which it fronts. See Figure 4 following this Section.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot
line. On a corner lot, only one (1) lot line shall be considered a rear lot line.
See Figure 4 following this Section.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. See Figure
4 following this Section.
Section
400.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.050
100:765
LOT OF RECORD — A lot shown upon a plan of a subdivision or upon a
plat, which is attached or to which reference is made, in a deed described
by metes and bounds or in a deed recorded in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds of the County.
LOT WIDTH — The distance between side lot lines measured along the
building line. See Figure 4 following this Section.
MAJOR THOROUGHFARE — A street delineated on the land use plan and
major streets plan map adopted by the City Council.
MANUFACTURED HOME (MOBILE HOME) — A factory-built structure as
defined in Chapter 700, RSMo., which displays a seal issued by the Public
Service Commission, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
or its agent to evidence compliance with the Code.
MARIJUANA-INFUSED PRODUCTS MANUFACTURING FACILITY — A
facility licensed by the State of Missouri Department of Health and Senior
Services, or its successor agency, to acquire, store, manufacture, transport,
and sell marijuana-infused products to a medical marijuana dispensary
facility, a medical marijuana testing facility, or to another medical
marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility.[Ord. No. 19-118,
5-21-2019]
MARINA — A place for docking pleasure boats or providing services to
pleasure boats and the occupants thereof.
MATERIALS RECOVERY FACILITY — A waste transfer facility at which solid
waste is collected and sorted for the purpose of resource recovery, but shall
not include a trash transfer station which collects solid waste for transport
to a landfill. For the purposes of Section 400.320, Wellhead Protection
District, a materials recovery facility is a facility that only accepts, sorts,
or distributes non-hazardous recyclable construction or demolition waste
within an enclosed building, and may include sorting, packaging and
storage of material within sealed containers on the premises.[Ord. No.
18-013, 1-16-2018]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION FACILITY — A facility licensed by
the State of Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services, or its
successor agency, to acquire, cultivate, process, store, transport, and sell
marijuana to a medical marijuana dispensary facility, medical marijuana
testing facility, or to a medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing
facility.[Ord. No. 19-118, 5-21-2019]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY FACILITY — A facility licensed by
the State of Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services, or its
successor agency, to acquire, store, sell, transport and deliver marijuana,
marijuana-infused products and drug paraphernalia used to administer
marijuana as provided for in this Section to a qualifying patient, a primary
caregiver, another medical marijuana dispensary facility, a medical
marijuana testing facility, or a medical marijuana-infused products
manufacturing facility.[Ord. No. 19-118, 5-21-2019]
Section
400.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.050
100:766
MEDICAL MARIJUANA FACILITY — A medical marijuana cultivation facility,
marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility, medical marijuana
testing facility or medical marijuana dispensary facility, or any combination
thereof, or any business related to the possession, sale, use, cultivation or
manufacture of marijuana.[Ord. No. 19-118, 5-21-2019]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA TESTING FACILITY — A facility certified by the
State of Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services, or its
successor agency, to acquire, test, certify, and transport marijuana.[Ord.
No. 19-118, 5-21-2019]
MEETING FACILITY — A building designed for public assembly. This shall
include wedding chapels, banquet halls, convention centers; however, shall
not include auditoriums.[Ord. No. 18-283, 12-18-2018]
MICROBREWERY — A business whose primary activity is the brewing and
selling of beer with an annual production of ten thousand (10,000) barrels
or less. A microbrewery may sell beer by the drink for consumption on the
brewery premises, in the original package for off-premises consumption and
to duly licensed wholesalers subject to applicable State liquor laws.[Ord.
No. 13-231 §1, 11-19-2013]
MINIMUM MAINTENANCE — The minimum regulations governing the
conditions and maintenance of all existing structures, as set out in the
International Property Maintenance Code, as published by the International
Code Council, Inc., and adopted by reference, with certain amendments
thereto, by the City Council of the City, as such Existing Structures Code
shall be amended from time to time by the City.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Land used or intended to be used, let, leased,
rented or sold for occupancy by two (2) or more manufactured homes
(mobile homes).
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR — General repair, engine rebuilding, rebuilding
or reconditioning of motor vehicles.
NEIGHBORHOOD HEALTH AND FITNESS CENTER — A commercial
establishment of three thousand (3,000) square feet or less, whose primary
purpose is to provide facilities for individual physical health activities such
as aerobic exercise, running and jogging, use of exercise equipment,
saunas, showers and lockers, but are not open for business between the
hours of 10:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M.
NON-CONFORMING LOT — A lot which does not meet the minimum design
standards for the zoning district in which it lies but which existed at the
time of the adoption of the zoning ordinance or at the time of the rezoning
of the property or which was diminished by the exercise of the power of
eminent domain or under the threat of use of the power of eminent domain
in the acquisition of land by any public authority having such power.
NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure which does not meet the
minimum design standards for structures in the zoning district in which it
lies but which existed at the time of the adoption of the zoning ordinance or
at the time of the rezoning of the property or which was diminished by the
Section
400.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.050
100:767
exercise of the power of eminent domain or under the threat of use of the
power of eminent domain in the acquisition of land by any public authority
having such power.
NON-CONFORMING USE — The lawful use of land or a building or a
portion thereof, which use does not conform with the use regulations of
the district in which it is located and which use existed at the time of the
adoption of this Chapter or as a result of subsequent amendments of this
Chapter or which use does not conform as a result of the exercise of the
power of eminent domain or under the threat of use of the power of eminent
domain in the acquisition of land by any public authority having such power.
See Sections 400.750 et seq.
NURSERY — An area or establishment devoted to the raising and care of
trees, shrubs or similar plant materials.
OFFICE — A room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of a
business, profession, service industry or government. Land uses including,
but not limited to, accounting agencies, data processing centers, insurance
agencies, real estate office and medical offices.[Ord. No. 18-283,
12-18-2018]
OWNER OF RECORD — The person, corporation or other legal entity listed
as owner on the records of the County Recorder of Deeds.
PARKING LOT — A paved facility providing vehicular parking spaces, along
with adequate drives and aisles for maneuvering, so as to provide access
for entrance and exit for the parking of more than two (2) automobiles, but
excluding display or storage of vehicles for sale or rent.
PARKING SPACE — A paved area permanently reserved for the temporary
parking of one (1) motor vehicle, located within either a private or public
parking area and connected to a street, alley or other designated roadway
by a surfaced aisle or driveway. The dimensions and layout of parking
spaces and aisles shall be in accordance with the requirements set forth in
Section 400.700(B) Parking Dimensions.
PARKING WELL — A paved parking area where each parking space has
direct access to a public or private street.
PAVED SURFACE AREA — Ground surface covered with cobblestones, clayfired
bricks, concrete precast paver units (including, but not limited to,
grasscrete), poured concrete with or without decorative surface materials,
blacktop or other asphaltic or rubber mixture which may include sand or
gravel as an ingredient and which creates a hard surface. A graded natural
surface or one covered with rolled stone or overlaid with loose gravel is not
considered a paved surface.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (PD) — A single parcel or contiguous
parcels of land to be planned and developed as a single entity in accordance
with an overall design plan which may or may not have a mixture of land
uses.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) — See "PLANNED
DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (PD)".
Section
400.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.050
100:768
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION — A body of persons who
recommends the boundaries of zoning districts and determines appropriate
requirements relative to site plan review in accordance with the rules
contained in Sections 400.970 et seq.
PREMISES — A lot, together with all buildings and structures thereon.
PRIVATE DINING SERVICE — A private dining service (hereinafter
"service") is a service that prepares and serves meals for payment to eight
(8) or less persons at any one (1) meal in a private residence pursuant
to contract or similar pre-arranged agreement. The service shall only be
provided by the property owner, occupant or family members thereof who
reside in the residence. The service shall not be offered to the general
public and shall only be offered between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 7:00
P.M. No extraordinary food storage or preparation equipment shall be
installed in the residence for the service. All meals served at a service shall
be prepared on-site. A service shall not provide more than one (1) meal in
any twenty-four (24) hour period and the duration of the mean shall not
exceed three (3) hours.
PUBLIC BUILDING — A building or part thereof owned or leased and
occupied and used by an agency or political subdivision of the Federal, State
or local government.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — The area on, below or above a public roadway,
highway, street or alleyway in which the political subdivision has an
ownership interest, but not including:
PUBLIC WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS — A water or sewer system owned
and operated by a municipality or County or owned and operated by a
private individual or a corporation approved by the City Council and
properly chartered and certified by the appropriate State agency and
subject to special regulations as herein set forth.
RECOGNIZED NEIGHBORHOOD REVIEW GROUPS — An incorporated notfor-
profit corporation established under the laws of Missouri and acting
pursuant to the powers set forth in this Article.
The airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to cellular or
other non-wire telecommunications or broadcast service;
1.
Easements obtained by utilities or private easements in platted
subdivisions or tracts;
2.
Railroad rights-of-way and ground utilized or acquired for railroad
facilities; or
3.
Poles, pipes, cables, conduits, wires, optical cables, or other means of
transmission, collection or exchange of communications, information,
substances, data, or electronic or electrical current or impulses utilized
by a municipally owned or operated utility pursuant to Chapter 91,
RSMo., or pursuant to a charter form of government.
4.
Section
400.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.050
100:769
RECREATIONAL USES, INDOOR — An establishment whose main purpose
is to provide the general public with indoor commercial recreational
activities. Such uses include, but are not limited to, bowling alleys, batting
cages, gymnasiums, fitness centers, health spas, and indoor skating rinks.
This use shall not include archery ranges.[Ord. No. 18-283, 12-18-2018]
RECREATIONAL USES, OUTDOOR — An establishment whose main
purpose is to provide the general public with outdoor commercial
recreational activities. Such uses include, but are not limited to, baseball
diamonds, tennis courts, outdoor skating rinks, and golf driving
ranges.[Ord. No. 18-283, 12-18-2018]
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Any unit primarily designed as temporary
living quarters for recreation, camping or travel use which either contains
its own motive power as in the case of, but not limited to, motor homes,
motor coaches, mini-motor homes or recreational vans or is permanently
mounted on a vehicle such as, but not limited to, a truck camper or pickup
camper.
REGIONAL COMMERCIAL USE — A center planned, constructed, zoned
and managed as a single entity which provides services to and pulls from
a regional marketplace. Centers may include more than one (1) structure.
Such uses include, but are not limited to, universities, hospitals, and
shopping centers.[Ord. No. 18-283, 12-18-2018]
REGULATED SUBSTANCE — Any hazardous substances, extremely
hazardous substances or liquid petroleum products which are more
particularly defined as follows:
REMOVAL — Any relocation of a structure on its site or to another site.
REPAIR — Any change that is not construction, removal or alteration.
RESTAURANT — A structure in which the principal use is the preparation
and sale of food and beverages.[Ord. No. 18-283, 12-18-2018]
RETAIL — The selling of goods, wares, merchandise and/or services directly
to the ultimate consumer or persons. Retail uses shall include, but not
Extremely hazardous substance. Any substance so designated by the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency on their official "List of
Extremely Hazardous Substances", 40 CFR 355 Appendix A, as last
amended, and which is either a solid (including granular and gel) or
liquid at room temperature.
1.
Hazardous substance. Any substance so designated by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency on their official "List of Hazardous
Substances", 40 CFR 302.4, as last amended, and which is either a solid
(including granular and gel) or liquid at room temperature.
2.
Liquid petroleum product. Any flammable liquid hydrocarbon product
refined from bituminous materials including, but not limited to,
gasoline, diesel fuel, benzene, toluene, lubricants for internal
combustion engines, home heating oil, kerosene, creosote, coal oil and
naphtha.
3.
Section
400.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.050
100:770
be limited to, hobby shops, garden shops, bakeries, grocery stores and
home improvement centers. However, shall not include secondhand sales or
wholesale.[Ord. No. 18-283, 12-18-2018]
ROOM TEMPERATURE — A temperature between sixty degrees Fahrenheit
(60°F) (15.6°C) and seventy-eight degrees Fahrenheit (78°F) (25.6°C).
SAW MILL — A facility where logs are sawn, split, shaved, stripped,
chipped, or otherwise processed to produce wood products.[Ord. No.
18-283, 12-18-2018]
SECONDHAND SALES — A business with more than twenty-five percent
(25%) of its inventory which is not in new condition and are sold either by
consignment or direct sale and are not otherwise regulated by the zoning
ordinance such as vehicles.
SENIOR HOUSING FACILITY — A premises consisting of age-restricted
dwelling units designed especially for and occupied exclusively by persons
fifty-five (55) years of age and older who are in good health and do not
require medical or skilled nursing. In the case of individuals residing
together either by marriage or domestic partnership, at least one (1) of the
residents must be fifty-five (55) years of age or older. Such facilities include
independent living apartments, senior apartments, retirement homes, or
similar uses but do not include assisted living, memory care, nursing homes,
skilled nursing facilities, convalescent homes, rehabilitation facilities,
hospitals, Congregate Care Facilities or any other uses which provide
medical care to residents or other uses listed or defined elsewhere within
this Chapter.[Ord. No. 15-069 §1, 4-21-2015]
SERVICE — Any establishment whose primary activity is the provision
of assistance, as opposed to products, to individuals, business, industry,
government and other enterprises. Such uses include, but are not limited
to, barber shops, hair and nail salons, morticians/funeral homes, printing
establishments, tailors and dressmaking.[Ord. No. 18-283, 12-18-2018]
SERVICE STATION — See "AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION".
SHALL — Is always mandatory; MAY: Is permissive.
SHELTER, HOMELESS — See "TEMPORARY SHELTER".
SHIPPING CONTAINER — A portable storage container designed and
manufactured according to specifications from the International Standards
Organization (ISO) as a standard, reusable vessel intended to be loaded on a
truck, rail car or ship, used primarily for shipping goods.[Ord. No. 16-266
§1, 12-20-2016]
SHIPPING CONTAINER HOME — A dwelling constructed of one (1) or more
shipping containers that have been modified for residential use.[Ord. No.
16-266 §1, 12-20-2016]
SHIPPING CONTAINER STRUCTURE — A structure constructed of one (1)
or more shipping containers.[Ord. No. 16-266 §1, 12-20-2016]
SHORT TERM RENTAL — A rental of any legally permitted dwelling unit, or
a portion of such a legally permitted dwelling unit, located in a single-family,
Section
400.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.050
100:771
two-family or multi-family zoning district for a period of less than thirty (30)
consecutive calendar days, does not serve meals, and is in compliance with
the terms of this Chapter.[Ord. No. 19-198, 10-1-2019]
SHORT TERM RENTAL PROPERTY — The property on which a short term
rental is located.[Ord. No. 19-198, 10-1-2019]
SITE — Same as "TRACT".
SITE PLAN — A drawing illustrating a proposed development and prepared
in accordance with the specifications outlined in this Chapter.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials including,
but not limited to, solid and semi-solid waste materials resulting from
industrial, commercial, agricultural, governmental and domestic activities,
but does not include hazardous waste as defined in Sections 260.360 to
260.432, RSMo., recovered materials, overburden, rock, tailings, matte,
slag or other waste material resulting from mining, milling or smelting.
SORORITY HOUSE — See "fraternity house."[Ord. No. 18-283,
12-18-2018]
SPECULATIVE SHOPPING CENTER — A building or group of buildings
constructed for multiple tenants with no formal commitment from the end
users of the finished product.
STABLE, PRIVATE — An accessory building, not related to the ordinary
operation of a farm, for the housing of horses or mules owned by a person
living on the premises and which horses or mules are not for hire or sale.
STABLE, PUBLIC — Any stable for the housing of horses or mules operated
for remuneration, hire, sale or stabling, whether or not the horses or mules
are owned by persons residing on the premises.
STOP WORK ORDER — Notice to the owner or occupant of a building or
structure from the Director of Community Development or designee that
work on any building or structure is being contrary to the laws of the City
and that such work or action shall stop immediately.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor above it or, if there is not a floor above it,
then the space between such floor and the ceiling.
STORY, GROUND — The lowest story of a building, the floor of which is not
more than twelve (12) inches below the ground level. A basement shall be
counted as a story if its ceiling is over five (5) feet above the level from
which the height of the building is measured or if it is used for purposes
other than storage. See Figure 5 following this Section.
STORY, HALF — A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall
plates of which, on at least two (2) opposite exterior sides, are not more
than two (2) feet above the floor of such story.
STREET — A public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal
means of access to abutting properties.
Section
400.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.050
100:772
STREET, CENTERLINE — The centerline of a street shall mean the
centerline thereof as shown in any of the official records of the County or
the City or as established by the City Engineer or by the State. If no such
centerline has been established, the centerline of a street shall be a line
lying midway between the side lines of the right-of-way thereof.
STREET, PRIVATE — A street not dedicated to public use.
STREET, PUBLIC — A street accepted by dedication or otherwise by the City
Council.
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE — The line separating a lot, tract or parcel
of land from a contiguous street right-of-way. See Figure 6 following this
Section.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in the supporting members of
a building or structure including bearing walls, partitions, columns, beams,
girders or similar parts of the building or structure and/or any substantial
change in the roof of a building.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a
permanent location on the ground including, but without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, buildings, fences, mobile homes, signs,
billboards, telecommunication towers, gazebos, sheds, swimming pools and
backstops for tennis courts. See also "BUILDING".
SUBDIVISION REGULATION — Regulations as adopted by the City Council
regulating the sub-division of the land as set forth in Chapter 405 of this
Code of Ordinances.
SWIMMING POOL — Any portable pool or permanent structure containing
a body of water twenty-four (24) inches or more in depth or two hundred
fifty (250) square feet or more of water surface area and intended for
recreational purposes.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER — A self-supported structure of at least
thirty (30) feet, other than a building, water tower or water tank, which
supports communication (transmit or receive) equipment utilized by
commercial, governmental or other public and quasi-public users. This does
not include private home use of satellite dishes and television antennas,
or amateur radio operators as licensed by the Federal Communications
Commission.
TEMPORARY ENCLOSURE — A temporary structure used in conjunction
with and located on the same property as a permitted use without any
foundation or footing and with walls and a roof constructed of heavy hardwearing
waterproof fabric made of canvas or similar material coated with
tar, wax or paint for outdoor use as a protective covering against wind,
moisture and other elements.[Ord. No. 15-040 §1, 2-17-2015]
TEMPORARY SHELTER — A residential facility that primarily provides
temporary housing with accommodations for three (3) or more people for
little or no financial compensation and that is operated in a manner that
provides staff supervision and other support services. The length of time
Section
400.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.050
100:773
that such persons may stay at the shelter may be indefinite but is not
intended to be permanent.
TEMPORARY TENT — A temporary structure without any foundation or
footing that is removed when the designated time period, activity, or use for
which the temporary structure was erected has ceased.
TRACT — The total area of a parcel, site, lot or ownership of land upon
which development or land disturbance is proposed irrespective of the
actual limits or size of the proposed development or land disturbance
activity.
TRAILER — Any vehicle designed or utilized for the transportation of a
boat, auto, snowmobile or similar items or as temporary living quarters for
recreation, camping or travel use, such as, but not limited to, a travel, tent,
camp, pop-up or fifth wheel trailer, which does not have motive power of its
own, but is designed to be drawn by another vehicle.
TRANSIENT — Any person who occupies any rooms or accommodations
within a short term rental property for a period of less than thirty (30)
continuous days.[Ord. No. 19-198, 10-1-2019]
TRASH TRANSFER STATION — A facility at which municipal solid waste is
unloaded from small collection vehicles and loaded onto a larger means of
transport for hauling.[Ord. No. 18-013, 1-16-2018]
TREE — A woody plant that grows mostly upright as a single stem (rarely
multi-stem) that may eventually attain a height of fifteen (15) feet or more.
TREE BANK — An account set up within the City financial system that will
accept payments from tree replacement assessments imposed by the City
tree ordinance or other sources that may arise. The tree bank funds shall be
used to plant trees and maintain trees on public property within the City.
TRUCK STOP — A facility intended to provide services to the trucking
industry, including, but not limited to, the following activities: dispensing
fuel, repair shops, automated washes and restaurants, all as part of the
facility.[Ord. No. 18-283, 12-18-2018]
USE — The purpose for which land or premises or a building thereon is
designed, arranged or intended or for which it is occupied or maintained,
let or leased.
USE, PERMITTED — A use which is permitted in the zoning district in which
it is located.
UTILITY ROOM — A room or space, located other than in the basement,
specifically designed and constructed to house any home utilities, such as
major home appliances (furnace, water heater, pump).
VARIANCE — Relief from or variation of the provisions of these regulations,
other than use regulations, and as applied to a specific piece of property, as
distinct from rezoning, as further set out hereinafter in Sections 400.1060
et seq.
WAREHOUSE — A place for the storage of merchandise or commodities.
Section
400.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.050
100:774
WAREHOUSE, MINI — A building containing individual storage areas which
may be rented or leased for a period of time.
WARMING AND COOLING CENTER — A building or portion thereof which
is not designed for lodging and is operated for the purpose of sheltering
persons from the elements for brief periods (not to exceed twenty-four (24)
hours) during any twenty-four (24) hour period. A warming and cooling
center may provide shelter, meals and other incidental resources for not
less than three (3) persons at nominal or no cost and is operated during
periods of extreme cold or hot weather under staff supervision. The length
of time a person may be sheltered shall not exceed the duration of the
extreme cold or hot weather. For purposes of this definition, extreme cold
weather shall be defined as any given day with a forecast low temperature
below thirty-two degrees Fahrenheit (32°F) and extreme hot weather shall
be defined as any given day with a forecast high temperature above ninety
degrees Fahrenheit (90°F).
WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENTS — An establishment or place of business
primarily engaged in selling and/or distributing merchandise to retailers;
to industrial, commercial, institutional or professional business users, or to
other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise
to, such individuals or companies. This is not considered retail.[Ord. No.
18-283, 12-18-2018]
WINERY — A processing plant used for the commercial purpose of
processing grapes, other fruit products or vegetables to produce wine or
similar spirits. Processing includes wholesale sales, crushing, fermenting,
blending, aging, storage, bottling, administrative office functions for the
winery and warehousing. Retail sales, tasting and a restaurant may be
permitted as part of a winery function.[Ord. No. 18-283, 12-18-2018]
YARD — An open space on a lot, which space is unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this
Chapter.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying
between the front lot line and the nearest part of the building or use. See
Figure 6 following this Section.
YARD MEASUREMENT — In measuring a yard, the building line shall be
deemed to mean a line parallel to the lot line drawn through the point of a
building or the point of a group of buildings nearest to such lot line. This
measurement shall be taken at the right angles from the building line to the
nearest lot line.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying
between the rear lot line and the nearest part of the building or use. See
Figure 6 following this Section.
YARD, SIDE — A yard lying between a side lot line and the nearest part of
the building or use and the area remaining between the front and rear yard.
See Figure 6 following this Section.[Ord. No. 18-231, 10-16-2018]
Section
400.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.050
100:775
ZONING DISTRICT MAP — A map with all notations, dimensions,
references and symbols shown thereon depicting individually zoned
districts in accordance with Sections 400.060 through 400.090 of this
Chapter.
ZONING REGULATIONS — The whole body of regulations, texts, charts,
tables, diagrams, maps, notations, references and symbols contained herein
or to which reference is made.
Figure 1
Accessory Buildings
(Example only)
[R.O. 2009 156.005, Figure 1; CC 1981 § 30-5, Figure 6; Ord. No.
98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 18-231, 10-16-2018]
Section
400.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.050
100:776
Figure 2
Cellar and Basement
(Example only)
[R.O. 2009 156.005, Figures 1 and 2; CC 1981 § 30-5, Figures 1 and
2; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998]
When "B" is half or more than half of
"A," then "A" is a cellar.
When "B" is less than half of "A,"
then "A" is a basement.
Section
400.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.050
100:777
Figure 3
Floor Area Ratio
(Example only)
[R.O. 2009 156.005, Figures 2 and 3; CC 1981 § 30-5, Figures 1 and
2; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998]
3 store building
100% lot coverage
FAR = 3.0
6 store building
50% lot coverage
FAR = 3.0
12 store building
25% lot coverage
FAR = 3.0
Floor area ratio (FAR) is the total floor area in a structure, divided by the
total lot area on which the structure is located.
Section
400.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.050
100:778
Figure 4
Lot Types
(Example only)
[R.O. 2009 156.005, Figure 4; CC 1981 § 30-5, Figure 3; Ord. No.
98-209, 5-15-1998]
Section
400.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.050
100:779
Figure 5
Basement and Story
(Example only)
[R.O. 2009 156.005, Figures 1 and 2; CC 1981 § 30-5, Figures 1 and
2; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998]
1. If "A" is less than five (5) feet and "B" is used for storage, then "B" is
not counted as a story.
2. If "A" is more than five (5) feet or if "B" is used for purposes other than
storage, then "B" is counted as a story.
Section
400.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.050
100:780
Figure 6
Yards and Lines
(Example only)
[R.O. 2009 156.005, Figures 5 and 6; CC 1981 § 30-5, Figures 4 and
5; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 18-231, 10-16-2018]
Section
400.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.050
100:781
Figure 7
Block
(Example only)
[Ord. No. 18-231, 10-16-2018]
Section 400.060. Districts Established. [R.O. 2009 §156.006; CC
1981 §30-6; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 93-128, 6-8-1993;
Ord. No. 94-126, 6-8-1994; Ord. No. 96-24, 1-18-1996; Ord. No.
96-26, 1-18-1996; Ord. No. 96-41, 2-21-1996; Ord. No. 97-50,
1-31-1997; Ord. No. 97-348, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 98-209,
5-15-1998; Ord. No. 00-282, 10-25-2000; Ord. No. 04-176, 8-4-2004;
Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
A. In order to regulate and restrict the location and use of buildings and
land for residence, trade, industry and other purposes and to regulate
and restrict the location, height and size of buildings hereafter erected
or structurally altered, the size of yards and other open spaces and the
density of population, the following zoning districts are hereby
established:
1. "A" Agricultural District
2. "R-1C", "R-1D" and
"R-1E"
Single-Family Residential Districts
3. "R-2" Two-Family Residential District
4. "R-3A" Multiple-Family Residential District
5. "R-M" Manufactured/Modular Residential
District
6. "OI" Office Institutional District
7. "HCD" Historic Commercial District
8. "C-1" Neighborhood Business District
9. "C-2" General Business District
10. "C-3" Highway Business District
11. "I-1" Light Industrial District
12. "I-2" Heavy Industrial District
Section
400.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.060
100:782
Section 400.070. Reference To District Names. [R.O. 2009 §156.007;
CC 1981 §30-7; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 98-209,
5-15-1998; Ord. No. 04-176, 8-4-2004; Ord. No. 10-244 §1,
11-18-2010]
For the purpose of reference hereafter in this Chapter, unless specifically
provided to the contrary, the term "residential district" shall include the
"A", "R-1C", "R-1D", "R-1E", "R-2", "R-3A", "R-M", "CRD" and the strictly
residential portions of a "PD" or "PD-RF" districts. The term "business
district" shall include the "O-1", "HCD", "C-1", "C-2", "C-3", "CBD", "FHCD"
and the strictly commercial or mixed use portions of a "PD" or "PD-RF"
districts. The term "industrial district" shall include all the "I-1", "I-2" and
the strictly industrial portions of a "PD" or "PD-RF" districts.
Section 400.080. District Map — Adopted — Where Filed —
Amendments. [R.O. 2009 §156.008; CC 1981 §30-8; Ord. No. 77-31,
7-5-1977; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998]
13. "PD" Planned Development District
14. "PD-RF" Planned Development Riverfront District
15. "CBD" Central Business District
16. "CRD" Central Residential District
17. "FHCD" Frenchtown Historic Commercial District
18. "SD" Superimposed Districts:
Residential Permit Parking District "RPPD"
Wellhead Protection District "WHP"
South Main Preservation District "SMPD"
Extended Historic Preservation District
"EHP"
Historic Downtown District "HDD"
Frenchtown Preservation District "FPD"
Commons Preservation District "CPD"
Landmark Preservation District "LMPD"
A. Such land and the district classification thereof shall be as shown on the
map designated as the "Zoning District Map of St. Charles, Missouri".
This Zoning District Map and all notations, dimensions, references and
symbols shown thereon, pertaining to such districts, shall be as much a
part of this Chapter as if fully described herein and shall be filed as part
of this Chapter by the City Clerk. Such map shall be available for public
inspection in the office of the City Clerk. This map, together with
subsequent amendments, shall be conclusive as to the current zoning
status of land.
Section
400.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.080
100:783
Section 400.090. District Map — Boundary Interpretation. [R.O.
2009 §156.009; CC 1981 §30-9; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No.
98-209, 5-15-1998]
B. The original of each Zoning District Map shall be properly attested to
and filed along with the official signed and attested copy of this Chapter
in the office of the City Clerk. No amendment, new Zoning District Map,
new boundary, boundary changes or any entries are to be made or
become effective in the future until after the amendment, new Zoning
District Map, new boundary, boundary changes or entries have been
recorded, changed or entered on such original official Zoning District
Map adopted as a part of this Chapter.
A. A district name or letter-number combination shown on the Zoning
District Map(s) indicates that the regulations pertaining to the district
designated by that name or letter-number combination extend
throughout the whole area of the City, bounded by the district boundary
lines within which such name or letter-number combination is shown or
indicated, except as otherwise provided by this Section.
B. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various
districts as shown on the map accompanying and made a part of these
regulations, the following rules apply:
1. In cases where a boundary line is given a position within a street or
alley, right-of-way easement, navigable or non-navigable stream, it
shall be deemed to be in the center of the right-of-way of the street,
alley, right-of-way easement, canal or stream; and if the actual
location of such street, alley, easement or stream varies slightly
from the location as shown on the Zoning District Map, then the
actual location shall control.
2. In cases where a boundary line is shown as being located a specific
distance from a street line or other physical feature, this distance
shall control.
3. Where a district boundary line, as shown on the Zoning District
Map, approximately coincides with lot lines, municipal boundaries
or the City limit line, the lot lines, municipal boundaries or City
limit line shall be construed to be the district boundary line unless
otherwise indicated.
4. In cases where a district boundary line as shown on the Zoning
District Map does not coincide or approximately coincide with
street lines, alley lines or lot lines and no dimensions are shown,
the location of such district boundary line shall be determined by
the Department of Community Development, after review of
appropriate City Council records.
C. Whenever any street, alley, public way, railroad right-of-way, waterway
or other similar area is vacated by proper authority, the districts
Section
400.080
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.090
100:784
Section 400.100. Compliance With Provisions.377 [R.O. 2009
§156.010; CC 1981 §30-10; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No.
98-209, 5-15-1998]
No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure or part thereof
shall be erected, reconstructed, converted, enlarged, moved or structurally
altered unless in compliance with the regulations as set forth in this Chapter
and in compliance with the design standards of the zoning district in which
the structure is located.
Section 400.110. Location and Number of Buildings On A Lot. [R.O.
2009 §156.011; CC 1981 §30-11; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No.
98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 10-143 §1, 7-8-2010; Ord. No. 17-151
§ 1, 7-28-2017; Ord. No. 18-231, 10-16-2018]
Section 400.120. Encroachment of Required Yards and The Like —
Reduction or Consolidation of Lots. [R.O. 2009 §156.012; CC 1981
§30-12; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 96-200, 7-10-1996; Ord.
No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 01-156, 7-19-2001]
adjoining each side of such street, alley, public way, railroad rightof-
way or similar area shall be extended automatically to the center
of such vacation and all area included in the vacation shall then and
thenceforth be subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended
districts. In the event of a partial vacation, the adjoining district or
district nearest the portion vacated shall be extended automatically to
include all the vacated area.
A. Every building hereafter erected, reconstructed, converted, moved or
structurally altered shall be located on a lot as herein defined and in no
case shall there be more than one (1) principal building on one (1) lot.
B. There may be more than one (1) multi-family, hotel, motel or
institutional building located upon a lot or tract; provided that:
1. The required yards are maintained around the group of buildings;
2. Buildings that are parallel, or that are within forty-five degrees
(45°) of being parallel, shall be separated by a horizontal distance
that is at least equal to the height of the highest building;
3. Requirements for dwelling units per acre do not apply to
dormitories, fraternities, sororities and other similar living
quarters which are accessory to a permitted use and which have no
cooking facilities in individual rooms or apartments.
A. The minimum yards, height limits, parking spaces, landscaping and
open spaces, including dwelling units per acre required by this Chapter
for each building existing at the time of the passage of these regulations
377. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
Section
400.090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.120
100:785
Section 400.130. Uses Not Permitted By Provisions. [R.O. 2009
§156.013; CC 1981 §30-14; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No.
98-209, 5-15-1998]
For the purpose of this Chapter, permitted uses are listed for the various
districts. Unless the contrary is clear from the context of the lists or other
regulations of this Chapter, uses not specifically listed are prohibited.
or for any building hereafter erected, shall not be encroached upon or
considered as required yard or open space for any other building, nor
shall any lot area or lot dimensions be reduced below the requirements
of these regulations. Additionally, all required landscaping and
greenbelts must remain at or greater than the minimum specification
after final occupancy permits are issued.
B. Lot Consolidations. When the recorded owner of two (2) or more
contiguous lots desires to erect a building across common property
lines shared by the lots, the owner shall so indicate the proposed
consolidation in writing to the Director of Community Development. No
amended record plats are needed so long as the external boundary in
question is used as one (1) zoning lot. The Director of Community
Development shall indicate approval of the proposed consolidation in
writing. The proposed consolidation and the Director's approval thereof
shall remain part of the building permit record of the proposed
structure.
Section
400.120
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.130
100:786
Article II
District Regulations
Section
400.140
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.130
100:787

DIVISION 1
General District Regulations
Section 400.140. "A" Agricultural District.378 [R.O. 2009 §156.025;
CC 1981 §30-26; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 92-302,
12-16-1992; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 04-176, 8-4-2004;
Ord. No. 10-74 §1, 4-22-2010; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010; Ord.
No. 11-26 §2, 2-4-2011]
A. Purpose. The purpose of the "A" Agricultural District is to provide for
agricultural activities, to provide for spacious residential development
for those who choose this environment and to prevent untimely
scattering of more dense urban uses, which should be confined to areas
planned for efficient extension of public services.
B. Permitted Uses. A building or land in the "A" Agricultural District shall
be used only for the following purposes:
1. Agricultural activities on a farm of three (3) acres or more
including general farming, truck gardening, cultivation of field
crops, orchards, groves or nurseries for growing or propagation of
plants, turf, trees and shrubs, dairy farming, keeping or raising for
sale of large or small animals, reptiles, fish, birds or poultry and
including structures for storage and processing; provided, that
commercial slaughtering and processing of large animals such as
horses, cows, pigs, sheep or goats shall not be conducted on the
premises.
2. Educational facilities such as:
a. Public zoological gardens;
b. Public botanical gardens;
c. Bird sanctuaries; and
d. Arboretums.
3. Greenhouse, commercial.
4. Public and private parks and open spaces.
5. Reservoirs.
6. Single-family dwellings.
7. Wildlife reservations and other similar conservation projects.
8. Placement of a telecommunication antenna on an existing
telecommunication tower (co-location) where no expansion or
enlargement of the existing tower enclosure is required.
378. Cross Reference—As to animals and fowl, ch. 210.
Section
400.140
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.140
100:789
C. Permitted Accessory Uses. The following accessory uses are permitted
in the "A" district:
1. Buildings used as contractors' or construction operations during
development of the tract or subdivision on which they are located.
They shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the
project or the end of a two (2) year period, whichever is sooner.
2. Dwelling unit used for guests.
3. Fertilizer storage, for farm use only, in bags or bulk storage of
liquid or dry fertilizer in tanks or in a completely enclosed building,
but not manufacture, processing, retail or wholesale.
4. Garage, private.
5. Garden house, tool house, playhouse or greenhouse incidental to
residential use.
6. Grain storage, blending and packaging for farm use only, but not
milling.
7. Home occupations.
8. Marinas and boat docks.
9. Storage of a boat trailer, self-propelled camper, camp trailer or a
boat, but not in a front yard.
D. Conditional Uses.
1. The following uses may be permitted in the "A" district as
conditional uses if approved by the City Council following
recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission:
a. Airports and landing fields and accessory uses for general
aviation.
b. Archery range, provided, that such range is approved by the
Chief of Police.
c. Cemetery on a site of not less than twenty (20) acres.
d. Circus or carnival grounds, amusement park, zoo or midway,
permanent or temporary, for specified time period.
e. Day camps and campgrounds.
f. Day care facilities subject to the following as may be modified
through the conditional use process:
(1) Not more than ten (10) children not related to the operator
shall be kept. Up to three (3) additional children over the
age of two (2) may be kept for up to two (2) hours per day.
Up to three (3) additional school age children may be kept
Section
400.140
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.140
100:790
on unscheduled days of school closings; provided that at
no time shall more than thirteen (13) children not related
to the operator be kept.
(2) Such uses shall be permitted only if the rear yard in which
the home would operate meets the minimum requirements
of this Section and is enclosed with a suitable fence.
(3) Such uses are located in the dwelling used by the operator
as his/her private residence.
(4) The operator shall not employ more than one (1) full-time
(forty (40) hours per week) assistant who does not reside
on the premises or more than two (2) half-time (twenty
(20) hours per week) assistants who do not reside on the
premises.
(5) No advertising or identification sign shall be placed on the
premises.
(6) All City health and fire regulations are met.
(7) All applicable State regulations are met.
g. Dog kennels, commercial or non-commercial; provided any
commercial open pens, runs, cages or kennels shall be located
at least two hundred (200) feet from any side or rear lot lines.
h. Dwellings and mobile homes occupied by persons employed on
the premises or immediate members of the family or families
owning or operating a farm.
i. Educational institutions including museums, art galleries and
libraries.
j. Excavation or filling, borrow pits, extraction, processing and
removal of sand, gravel or stone and other major excavations
other than for construction of swimming pools and foundations
for buildings.
k. Exposition center or fairgrounds.
l. Golf courses, putting greens, driving ranges and similar
activities operated as a business including a building for a golf
shop, locker room and snack bar as an accessory use to a golf
course; provided no such building is located closer than one
hundred (100) feet from adjoining property lines.
m. Hospital or clinic for large or small animals; provided that all
buildings, structures, pens or open kennels shall be located at
least two hundred (200) feet from any lot lines.
n. Hospitals, congregate care facilities and group living
arrangements.
Section
400.140
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.140
100:791
o. Livestock auction market.
p. Racetrack, any type, subject to the following requirements for
protective screening: where a racetrack directly adjoins a
residential zoning district or a "PD" zoning district, a
landscaped greenbelt at least fifty (50) feet in width shall be
provided and maintained along the appropriate property line
by the owners and/or managers of the racetrack. The
undeveloped area shall be planted with trees or shrubs or shall
be maintained in a well kept lawn. The greenbelt shall not be
used for off-street parking facilities, for driveways or for open
storage. Along the inner side of the greenbelt, there shall be
provided a masonry wall at least six (6) feet in height above
grade to separate the greenbelt from the racetrack facilities.
q. Radio television transmission receiving station or tower;
subject to building codes and further regulations of Section
400.470.
r. Recreational uses or facilities, commercially operated or for a
private membership, such as game courts, swimming pools,
tennis clubs, fishing or boating lakes, camping areas, picnic
grounds, dude ranches or similar activities; and accessory
facilities including the sale of food, beverages, bait,
incidentals, supplies and equipment; provided that no such
use, structure or accessory use is located closer than fifty (50)
feet to any adjoining property lines.
s. Riding academies and commercial stables; provided that any
buildings for the keeping of animals shall be located at least
two hundred (200) feet from any side or rear lot lines and the
site size of the lot shall be no less than forty (40) acres.
t. Sports arenas or stadiums, commercial athletic fields or
baseball parks.
u. Temporary and conditional permits may be provided for a
period of two (2) years or less for the following uses:
(1) Asphalt batching plants or concrete batching plants.
(2) Non-accessory tents for special purposes.
(3) Outdoor displays for promotional activities.
v. Telecommunication towers, antennas attached to structures,
or placement of a telecommunication antenna on an existing
tower (co-location) where an expansion or enlargement of the
existing tower enclosure is required. Telecommunication
towers shall be located only on property that is a nonresidential
use.
Section
400.140
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.140
100:792
Section 400.150. "R-1C", "R-1D", "R-1E" Single-Family Residential
Districts. [R.O. 2009 §156.026; CC 1981 §30-27; Ord. No. 77-31,
7-5-1977; Ord. No. 83-2, 1-5-1983; Ord. No. 92-302, 12-16-1992;
Ord. No. 93-191, 9-8-1993; Ord. No. 94-95, 4-20-1994; Ord. No.
94-126, 6-8-1994; Ord. No. 95-11, 1-11-1995; Ord. No. 96-256,
9-19-1996; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 99-53, 2-4-1999;
Ord. No. 99-205, 6-3-1999; Ord. No. 99-344, 10-7-1999; Ord. No.
01-111, 6-8-2001; Ord. No. 04-176, 8-4-2004; Ord. No. 04-286,
12-29-2004; Ord. No. 06-163, 6-30-2006; Ord. No. 10-74 §1,
w. Warming and cooling centers when accessory to a church or
other place of worship. Occupancy limits for a warming and
cooling center shall be determined by the Building Code
Official and Fire Marshal.
2. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all new uses and to
existing uses where a substantial change or expansion to the
layout, operation or configuration is proposed.
E. Design Standards. (See also Sections 400.530 et seq. for additional
regulations.) In the "A" district, the design standards shall be as
follows:
1. Minimum lot area: 3 acres.
2. Minimum lot width at the building line: 150 feet.
3. Minimum street frontage: 25 feet.
4. Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
5. Maximum height of building: 2½ stories or 35 feet.
6. Minimum setback requirements measured from building line to
property line:
a. Front yard setback: 50 feet.
b. Side yard setback: 20 feet.
c. Rear yard setback: 50 feet.
7. Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be as contained
in Sections 400.660 et seq.
8. Minimum floor elevation. Floor elevations shall be at least one (1)
foot above the Corps of Engineers' 100-year flood elevation.
9. Protective screening. All exterior solid waste containers and
container racks or stands for any non-conforming use which is a
permitted or conditional use in any multi-family, commercial or
industrial district shall be screened from public view by an
enclosure which complies with the requirements contained in
Section 400.965(B)(4).
Section
400.140
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.150
100:793
4-22-2010; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010; Ord. No. 11-26 §3,
2-4-2011; Ord. No. 13-048 §1, 2-22-2013]
A. Purpose. The purpose of the "R-1C", "R-1D", "R-1E" Single-Family
Residential Districts is to provide for low density, single-family,
residential development on lots where water and sewer facilities
generally are provided, together with such churches, recreational
facilities and accessory uses as may be necessary or are normally
compatible with residential surroundings. In general, the districts are
located where urbanization and full utilities and public services exist or
are planned for the reasonably near future.
B. Permitted Uses. Buildings or land in the "R-1C", "R-1D", "R-1E" districts
shall be used only for the following uses:
1. Single-family dwellings, but not manufactured homes.
2. Group living arrangments.
3. Public parks and open spaces.
4. Public schools, government-owned buildings and places of worship.
5. Parking lots for governmental purposes.
6. Placement of a telecommunication antenna on an existing
telecommunication tower (co-location) where no expansion or
enlargement of the existing tower enclosure is required.
7. Short term rental property subject to the requirements of Section
400.525. [Ord. No. 19-198, 10-1-2019]
C. Permitted Accessory Uses. The following accessory uses are permitted
in the "R-1C", "R-1D", "R-1E" districts:
1. Buildings used as contractors' or construction operations during
development of the tract or subdivision on which they are located.
They shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the
project or at the end of a two (2) year period, whichever is sooner.
2. Garage.
3. Garden house, tool house, playhouse or greenhouse incidental to
residential use.
4. Home occupations.
5. Swimming pools and game courts, lighted or unlighted, for use by
occupants or their guests in accord with the conditions stated in
Sections 400.620 et seq.
D. Conditional Uses.
1. The following uses may be permitted in the "R-1C", "R-1D", "R-1E"
districts as conditional uses if approved by the City Council
Section
400.150
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.150
100:794
following recommendation by the Planning and Zoning
Commission:
a. Cemetery on a site of one (1) acre or more.
b. Adult day care facilities.
c. Day care facilities subject to the following as may be modified
through the conditional use process.
(1) Day care facilities located in an existing public or private
school and accommodating students of that school only are
not required to follow the procedures outlined in Section
400.1090.
(2) Not more than ten (10) children not related to the operator
shall be kept. Up to three (3) additional children over the
age of two (2) may be kept for up to two (2) hours per day.
Up to three (3) additional school age children may be kept
on unscheduled days of school closings; provided that at
no time shall more than thirteen (13) children not related
to the operator be kept.
(3) Such uses shall be permitted only if the rear yard in which
the home would operate meets the minimum requirements
of this Section and is enclosed with a suitable fence.
(4) Such uses are located in the dwelling used by the operator
as his/her private residence.
(5) The operator shall not employ more than one (1) full-time
(forty (40) hours per week) assistant who does not reside
on the premises or more than two (2) half-time (twenty
(20) hours per week) assistants who do not reside on the
premises.
(6) No advertising or identification sign shall be placed on the
premises.
(7) All City health and fire regulations are met.
(8) All applicable State regulations are met.
d. Educational facilities such as public zoological gardens and
public botanical gardens.
e. Farm, truck garden, orchard or nursery.
f. Golf courses, not lighted for night play, but including a building
for a golf shop, locker room and snack bar as an accessory use
to a golf course; provided no such building is located closer
than one hundred (100) feet to adjoining property lines; and
not including miniature golf courses, putting greens, driving
ranges and similar activities operated as a business.
Section
400.150
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.150
100:795
g. Private club associated with a subdivision development or
neighborhood clubs or neighborhood associations.
h. Amateur radio operator's equipment, as licensed by the FCC,
but not more than twenty (20) feet above the highest point of
the primary structure on the property.
i. Recreation facilities, such as fishing or boating lakes, boat
docks, picnic grounds, swimming or tennis clubs or similar
activities, and accessory facilities including sale of food,
beverages or bait.
j. Wildlife reservations and similar conservation projects.
k. Meeting facilities for fraternal, masonic and philanthropic
clubs and organizations.
l. Bed and breakfast.
m. Private dining service only within the Extended Historic
Preservation District.
n. Telecommunication towers, antennas attached to structures,
or placement of a telecommunication antenna on an existing
tower (co-location) where an expansion or enlargement of the
existing tower enclosure is required. Telecommunication
towers shall be located only on property that is a nonresidential
use.
o. Warming and cooling centers when accessory to a church or
other place of worship. Occupancy limits for a warming and
cooling center shall be determined by the Building Code
Official and Fire Marshal.
p. Guest Houses provided the property satisfies the requirements
provided in Section 400.421. [Ord. No. 15-295 §1,
12-15-2015; Ord. No. 17-261, 11-21-2017; Ord. No.
19-198, 10-1-2019]
q. Shipping container homes, provided: [Ord. No. 16-266 §2,
12-20-2016]
(1) The structure complies with all applicable provisions of the
International Building Code;
(2) The structure is completely enclosed with vinyl, wood,
cement board or brick siding; and
(3) The structure has a pitched roof constructed of wood or
metal.
Section
400.150
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.150
100:796
In approving the conditional use, the Planning and Zoning
Commission may recommend and the City Council may
impose additional conditions that are deemed necessary
to maintain the desired consistency of land uses, land use
intensities and land use impacts as related to the environs
of the subject property.
2. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all new uses and to
existing uses where a substantial change or expansion to the
layout, operation or configuration is proposed.
E. Design Standards. (See also Sections 400.530 et seq. for additional
regulations.) The following design standards are required in the "R-1C",
"R-1D", "R-1E" districts:
1. Minimum lot area:
a. "R-1C" district: 12,500 square feet.
b. "R-1D" district: 9,000 square feet.
c. "R-1E" district: 7,000 square feet.
2. Minimum lot width at the building line:
a. "R-1C" district: 100 feet.
b. "R-1D" district: 75 feet.
c. "R-1E" district: 60 feet.
d. 200 feet for a church.
3. Minimum street frontage shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
4. Minimum lot depth:
a. "R-1C" district: 125 feet.
b. "R-1D" district: 100 feet.
c. "R-1E" district: 100 feet.
5. Minimum setback requirements measured from the building line to
the property line:
a. Front yard setback:
(1) "R-1C" district: 30 feet.
(2) "R-1D", "R-1E" districts: 25 feet.
b. Side yard setback:
(1) "R-1C" district: 10 feet.
Section
400.150
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.150
100:797
Section 400.160. "R-2" Two-Family Residential District. [R.O. 2009
§156.027; CC 1981 §30-28; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No.
91-62, 3-25-1991; Ord. No. 92-302, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 94-95,
4-20-1994; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 99-53, 2-4-1999;
Ord. No. 99-205, 6-3-1999; Ord. No. 99-344, 10-7-1999; Ord. No.
01-111, 6-8-2001; Ord. No. 04-176, 8-4-2004; Ord. No. 10-244 §1,
11-18-2010]
(2) "R-1D" and "R-1E" districts: 7 feet.
c. Rear yard setback: 25 feet.
6. Maximum lot coverage. Not more than forty percent (40%) of the
lot area shall be covered by the principal building and accessory
structures.
7. Maximum height of building: 2½ stories or 35 feet
8. Minimum floor area in square feet: 1,000 square feet for a singlefamily
dwelling unit
9. Public utilities. Requirements are contained in Section 400.610.
10. Off-street parking and loading requirements.
a. Requirements for off-street parking and loading are contained
in Sections 400.660 et seq.
b. One (1) commercial vehicle licensed for not more than twelve
thousand (12,000) pounds gross vehicular weight and used by
the occupant of the dwelling may be parked on the premises.
c. Protective screening. All exterior solid waste containers and
container racks or stands for any non-conforming use, which is
a permitted or conditional use in any multi-family, commercial
or industrial district, shall be screened from public view by an
enclosure which complies with the requirements contained in
Section 400.965(B)(4).
A. Purpose. The purpose of the "R-2" Two-Family Residential District is to
provide for duplex development in areas appropriate for such uses,
particularly as a transitional area between single-family areas and
major roads or more intensive uses such as commercial, industrial or
multi-family developments. Population density and height of buildings
are intended to be generally compatible with any adjacent single-family
residential developments to be protected.
B. Permitted Uses. A building or land in the "R-2" district shall be used
only for the following purposes:
1. Any use permitted in the "R-1C", "R-1D" and "R-1E" Single-Family
Residential District.
Section
400.150
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.160
100:798
2. Two-family dwellings.
C. Permitted Accessory Uses. Any accessory use permitted in the "R-1C",
"R-1D" and "R-1E" Single-Family Residential District is a permitted
accessory use in the "R-2" district.
D. Conditional Uses.
1. The following uses may be permitted as conditional uses in the
"R-2" district if approved by the City Council following
recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission:
a. Any conditional use of the "R-1C", "R-1D" and "R-1E" Single-
Family Residential Districts.
b. Bed and breakfast establishments. For informational purposes
only, an applicant for a conditional use under this Subsection
shall forward a copy of the application to the City Council
member in whose ward the proposed use is located.
2. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all new uses and to
existing uses where a substantial change or expansion to the
layout, operation or configuration is proposed.
E. Design Standards. (See also Sections 400.530 et seq. for additional
regulations.) In the "R-2" district the design standards shall be:
1. Minimum lot area: 9,000 square feet.
2. Minimum lot width at the building line: 75 feet, minimum street
frontage shall be 25 feet.
3. Minimum lot depth: 120 feet.
4. Maximum height of building: 2½ stories or 35 feet.
5. Minimum setback requirements measured from building line to
property line:
a. Front yard setback: 25 feet.
b. Side yard setback: 7 feet.
c. Rear yard setback: 25 feet.
6. Maximum lot coverage. Not more than forty percent (40%) of the
lot area shall be covered by the principal building and accessory
structures.
7. Minimum floor area in square feet. No dwelling unit in a "R-2" zone
shall have a living area of less than seven hundred (700) square
feet.
8. Public utilities. Requirements are contained in Section 400.610.
Section
400.160
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.160
100:799
Section 400.170. "R-3A" Multiple-Family Residential District. [R.O.
2009 §156.028; CC 1981 §30-29; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No.
82-29, 4-21-1982; Ord. No. 90-188, 7-18-1990; Ord. No. 98-209,
5-15-1998; Ord. No. 99-53, 2-4-1999; Ord. No. 99-205, 6-3-1999;
Ord. No. 99-344, 10-7-1999; Ord. No. 04-176, 8-4-2004; Ord. No.
10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
9. Off-street parking and loading requirements.
a. Requirements are contained in Sections 400.660 et seq.
b. One (1) commercial vehicle licensed for not more than twelve
thousand (12,000) pounds gross vehicular weight and used by
the occupant of the dwelling may be parked on the premises.
10. Protective screening. All exterior solid waste containers and
container racks or stands for any non-conforming use which is a
permitted or conditional use in any multi-family, commercial or
industrial district, shall be screened from public view by an
enclosure which complies with the requirements contained in
Section 400.965(B)(4).
A. Purpose. The purpose of the "R-3A" Multiple-Family Residential District
is to provide for a variety of housing types and residential densities as
might be appropriate for row houses, garden apartments or town house
developments in areas appropriately located for such use, which areas
are well located with respect to major thoroughfares, shopping facilities
and centers of employment.
B. Permitted Uses. A building or land in the "R-3A" district shall be used
only for the following purposes:
1. Any use permitted in the "R-1C", "R-1D" and "R-1E" Single-Family
Residential District.
2. Any use permitted in the "R-2" Two-Family Residential District.
3. Apartment buildings, residential condominiums, town houses, row
houses and other types of multiple-family dwellings.
4. Senior Housing Facilities. [Ord. No. 15-069 §2, 4-21-2015]
C. Permitted Accessory Uses. The following accessory uses are permitted
in the "R-3A" district:
1. Any accessory use permitted in the "R-1C", "R-1D", "R-1E" and
"R-2" residential districts.
2. A laundry room for use of occupants of a multiple-family dwelling
development.
3. An office located in a main building for administration of a multiplefamily
development containing ten (10) or more dwelling units.
Section
400.160
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.170
100:800
4. Coin-operated vending machines for candy, tobacco, ice, soft drinks
and sundries located inside a building and for the use of occupants
of a multiple-family dwelling development.
5. Club and recreational facility for use of occupants of a multiplefamily
development.
D. Conditional Uses.
1. The following uses may be permitted in the "R-3A" district as
conditional uses if approved by the City Council following
recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission:
a. Conditional uses in any "R-1" or "R-2" zoning district.
b. Congregate Care Facilities.
c. Hospitals and orphanages, subject to the requirements of
Section 400.440.
d. Store for sale of food and sundries, not exceeding one
thousand (1,000) square feet of total floor area, inside a
multiple-family dwelling development and primarily for the
convenience of residents of a multiple-family development.
2. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all new uses and to
existing uses where a substantial change or expansion to the
layout, operation or configuration is proposed.
E. Design Standards. (See also Sections 400.530 et seq. for additional
regulations.) The following design standards are required in the "R-3A"
district:
1. Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
2. Minimum lot width:
a. Minimum width at the building line: 75 feet.
b. Minimum street frontage: 25 feet.
3. Minimum lot depth: 125 feet.
4. Maximum height of building: 3 stories or 45 feet.
5. Minimum setback requirements measured from building line to
property line:
a. Front yard setback: 25 feet.
b. Side yard setback: 7 feet.
c. Rear yard setback: 25 feet.
d. Minimum horizontal distance between buildings on the same
lot: 30 feet.
Section
400.170
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.170
100:801
Section 400.180. "R-M" Manufactured/Modular Residential
District.379 [R.O. 2009 §156.029; CC 1981 §30-31; Ord. No. 77-31,
7-5-1977; Ord. No. 92-302, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998;
Ord. No. 10-74 §1, 4-22-2010; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
6. Maximum lot coverage. Not more than forty percent (40%) of the
lot area shall be covered by the principal buildings and accessory
structures.
7. Residential density. The density shall not exceed eighteen (18.0)
dwelling units per acre (DU/A).
8. Protective screening. All exterior solid waste containers and
container racks or stands for a multiple-family dwelling shall be
screened from public view by an enclosure which complies with the
requirements contained in Section 400.965(B)(4).
9. Public utilities. Requirements are contained in Section 400.610.
10. Off-street parking and loading. Requirements are contained in
Sections 400.660 et seq.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the "R-M" Manufactured/Modular Residential
District is to provide for well designed mobile home parks in areas
where public utilities are available and to establish basic standards
which will determine the character of this land use and its effect on
surrounding properties.
B. Permitted Uses. A building or land in the "R-M" district shall be used
only for the following purposes:
1. Mobile home parks.
2. Public buildings, parks and open space.
3. Places of worship.
4. Public and private schools.
5. Placement of a telecommunication antenna on an existing
telecommunication tower (co-location) where no expansion or
enlargement of the existing tower enclosure is required.
6. Shipping container homes. [Ord. No. 16-266 §3, 12-20-2016]
C. Permitted Accessory Uses. The following accessory uses are permitted
in the "R-M" district:
1. For mobile home parks. Management headquarters, recreational
facilities, community building including toilets, showers, laundry
379. Cross References—As to penalty, §400.1890; as to mobile homes and mobile home parks,
ch. 415.
Section
400.170
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.180
100:802
facilities, vending machines and other uses and structures
customarily incidental to the operation of a mobile home park.
2. For individual mobile home lots.
a. Porches within side yard setback requirements.
b. Storage buildings in conformance with Section 400.530.
c. Home occupations.
D. Design Standards. (See also Sections 400.530 et seq. for additional
regulations.) The following design standards are required in the "R-M"
district:
1. Minimum lot area:
a. Mobile home park: 8 acres.
b. Individual lot: 5,000 square feet.
2. Minimum lot width at building line:
a. Mobile home park: 200 feet.
b. Individual lot: 45 feet.
3. Minimum street frontage: 25 feet.
4. Minimum lot depth:
a. Mobile home park: 200 feet.
b. Individual lot: 110 feet.
5. Minimum setback requirements measured from the mobile home to
the lot line:
a. Front yard setback:
(1) Public street or road: 30 feet.
(2) Interior access drive: 10 feet.
b. Side yard setback: 6 feet.
c. Rear yard setback: 25 feet.
d. No more than one (1) mobile home shall be located on any one
(1) lot.
6. Minimum distance between manufactured/ modular/mobile homes:
10 feet.
7. Maximum lot coverage. Each mobile home dwelling, including all
accessory buildings, garages and porches, shall cover no more than
fifty percent (50%) of each dwelling site or lot.
Section
400.180
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.180
100:803
8. Public utilities.
a. The mobile home park shall comply with all sanitary and other
requirements prescribed by law or regulation.
b. All utility lines shall be underground including electrical wiring
and telephone lines.
c. Each mobile home lot shall be provided with electrical outlets
installed in accordance with applicable codes and regulations.
d. Each mobile home lot shall be provided with individual water
and sewer connections to public water and sewer systems.
9. Mobile home park expansion. No existing mobile home park shall
be enlarged or extended:
a. When such park does not meet the applicable health or safety
requirements.
b. Where such park is in violation of regulations and standards
regarding sewage treatment or discharge, pollution or water
quality.
c. Unless such extension conforms to these regulations.
10. Protective screening. Mobile home parks shall be surrounded by a
landscaped or wooded strip of open space at least twenty-five (25)
feet wide along all exterior lot lines or street frontages. The rear
yard setback requirements may be used for partial fulfillment of the
protective screening requirements.
11. Open space. Open space accessible to all mobile home occupants
and suitable for use as a recreational land area shall be provided
within the mobile home park at a ratio of three hundred (300)
square feet per mobile home lot with a minimum of seven thousand
five hundred (7,500) square feet per mobile home park.
12. Off-street parking and loading.
a. A minimum of two (2) paved off-street parking spaces shall be
provided for each mobile home lot.
b. Additional requirements are contained in Sections 400.660 et
seq.
13. Mobile home park access and interior circulation.
a. Access to the mobile home park or subdivision shall be from a
collector or arterial street.
b. The number and location of access drives shall be controlled
for traffic safety and protection of surrounding properties.
Section
400.180
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.180
100:804
Section 400.190. "O-I" Office Institution District.380 [R.O. 2009
§156.030; CC 1981 §30-32; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No.
82-29, 4-21-1982; Ord. No. 85-46, 5-8-1985; Ord. No. 90-188,
7-18-1990; Ord. No. 96-327, 11-21-1996; Ord. No. 98-209,
5-15-1998; Ord. No. 00-78, 4-5-2000; Ord. No. 01-113, 6-8-2001;
Ord. No. 01-156, 7-19-2001; Ord. No. 04-176, 8-4-2004; Ord. No.
06-357, 12-20-2006; Ord. No. 09-227, 12-10-2009; Ord. No. 10-74
§1, 4-22-2010; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010; Ord. No. 11-26 §4,
2-4-2011; Ord. No. 11-41 §1, 3-16-2011; Ord. No. 11-106 §1,
6-9-2011; Ord. No. 12-165 §2, 9-28-2012; Ord. No. 12-231 §1,
12-6-2012]
c. No individual lot shall have direct access to a street outside the
boundaries of the park.
d. Interior access drives shall be properly lighted.
e. Interior access drives and through or collector streets shall be
in compliance with the standards of the subdivision
regulations. Installations to discourage speeding through the
park shall be approved by the Public Works Department.
14. Mobile home structures.
a. All mobile homes shall be securely tied down. Tie downs shall
meet the specifications and requirements of the City and the
State.
b. It shall be the responsibility of the mobile home park owner or
operator to insure that the tie down regulation is complied with
as provided for by the City or State Statutes.
c. Underskirting for all mobile homes shall be installed to
completely enclose all areas directly under the mobile home.
15. Protective screening of solid waste facilities. All exterior solid
waste containers and container racks or stands for any nonconforming
use which is a permitted or conditional use in any
multi-family, commercial or industrial district shall be screened
from public view by an enclosure which complies with the
requirements contained in Section 400.965(B)(4).
A. Purpose. The purpose of the "O-I" Office Institution District is to provide
for the development of certain low intensity business and professional
offices. The district will insure compatible uses of commercial and
adjacent residential districts by serving as a transitional area,
generating a light vehicular and pedestrian traffic flow.
B. Permitted Uses. All uses in the "O-I" district are restricted to lowintensity,
light traffic-generating businesses and offices and for the
380. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
Section
400.180
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.190
100:805
following purposes: [Ord. No. 15-069 § 3, 4-21-2015; Ord. No.
18-283, 12-18-2018]
1. Uses permitted in any "R-1" or "R-2" district except single-family or
two-family residences.
2. Banks and savings and loan associations without drive-up service.
3. Congregate care facilities.
4. Day care facilities or adult day care facilities.
5. Hospitals and orphanages, subject to the requirements of Section
400.440.
6. Institutions, art galleries and museums.
7. Institutions of higher education, including classroom buildings,
dormitories, gymnasiums and other uses incidental to the operation
of an institution of higher education.
8. Office.
9. Public parks and open spaces.
10. Senior housing facilities, provided that such facilities are offered on
the same lot as a congregate care facility as defined within this
Chapter.
C. Conditional Uses. [Ord. No. 18-283, 12-18-2018381]
1. The following uses may be permitted in the "O-I" district as
conditional uses if approved by the City Council following
recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission:
a. Boardinghouse.
b. Fraternity or sorority houses.
c. Guest house.
d. Halfway house subject to the following as may be modified
through the conditional use process:
(1) One (1) parking space for every four (4) residents,
including staff residents.
(2) No exterior evidence of such use and no sign advertising
the use.
(3) At the time of original approval, no facility shall be located
within five hundred (500) feet of another such facility,
group living arrangement, congregate care facility, day
381. Editor's Note: Section 2 of this ordinance repealed former Subsection (C), Accessory Uses,
and redesignated former Subsection (D) as Subsection (C).
Section
400.190
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.190
100:806
care home or facility, residential district or use, hotel or
motel, boardinghouse or guest house. The City Council
shall have the authority to waive this requirement if the
facilities are separated by a major thoroughfare, major
waterway or other comparable barrier.
(4) The applicant shall demonstrate that there is no negative
impact property within five hundred (500) feet of the
proposed facility.
(5) The original permit shall be limited to a one-year period,
but may be renewed thereafter for two-year periods by the
City Council. Renewals may be granted only after a public
hearing.
e. Halfway house for juvenile offenders subject to the following as
may be modified through the conditional use process:
(1) No exterior evidence of such use and no sign advertising
the use.
(2) At the time of original approval, no facility shall be located
within five hundred (500) feet of another such facility,
group living arrangement, congregate care facility, day
care home or facility, residential district or use, hotel or
motel, boardinghouse or guest house. The City Council
shall have the authority to waive this requirement if the
facilities are separated by a major thoroughfare, major
waterway or other comparable barrier.
(3) The applicant shall demonstrate that there is no negative
impact property within five hundred (500) feet of the
proposed facility.
(4) The original permit shall be limited to a one-year period,
but may be renewed thereafter for two-year periods by the
City Council. Renewals may be granted only after a public
hearing.
f. Telecommunication towers, antennas attached to structures,
or placement of a telecommunication antenna on an existing
tower (co-location) where an expansion or enlargement of the
existing tower enclosure is required.
g. Warming and cooling centers when accessory to a church or
other place of worship. Occupancy limits for a warming and
cooling center shall be determined by the Building Code
Official and Fire Marshal.
2. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all new uses and to
existing uses where a substantial change or expansion to the
layout, operation or configuration is proposed.
Section
400.190
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.190
100:807
D. (Reserved)
E. Design Standards. (See Sections 400.530 et seq. for additional
regulations.) The following design standards are required in the "O-I"
district:
1. Minimum lot area: 7,500 square feet.
2. Minimum lot width at the building line: 0.
3. Minimum lot depth: 0.
4. Maximum lot coverage: 40%.
5. Maximum height of building: 2½ stories or 35 feet.
Maximum height of building may be increased to ten (10) stories or
one hundred forty (140) feet on a campus of an institution of higher
learning by the provision of an additional five (5) feet of setback
from all exterior property lines for each additional story and upon
review and approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
"GPRS" bonus:
All tiers: 3 stories or 45 feet, except when adjoining a residential
zoning district.
6. Minimum setback requirements measured from building line to
property line:
a. Front yard setback: 25 feet.
"GPRS" bonus:
Tiers 1 and 2: 20 feet.
Tier 3: 15 feet.
b. Side yard setback: 0, except 15 feet when adjoining residential
zoning district.
c. Rear yard setback: 25 feet.
"GPRS" bonus:
Tiers 1 and 2: 20 feet.
Tier 3: 15 feet, except when adjoining a residential zoning
district.
7. Minimum floor area in square feet: None.
8. Public utilities. Requirements are contained in Section 400.610.
9. Off-street parking and loading:
Section
400.190
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.190
100:808
a. No parking shall be permitted in a required front yard.
b. Additional requirements are contained in Sections 400.660 et
seq.
10. Protective screening.
a. All exterior solid waste containers and container racks or
stands shall be screened from public view by an enclosure
which complies with the requirements of Section 400.965
(B)(4).
b. Where an "O-I" Zoning District adjoins a residential zoning
district or is located across a public street or alley from a
residential zoning district, a landscaped greenbelt at least
fifteen (15) feet in width shall be provided and maintained
along the appropriate property line by the users of the "O-I"
property. The open area shall be planted with trees and shrubs.
A minimum of one (1) tree shall be planted per thirty (30) lineal
feet or fraction thereof for any frontage along a residential
zoning district. Required trees shall be at least two and onehalf
(2½) inch caliper. Trees existing within any required
greenbelt at the time of installation and which are larger than
two and one-half (2½) inch caliper shall be preserved and will
count toward the minimum landscaping requirements. Newly
planted species shall be hardy for the specified area. All
landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition
and be neat and orderly in appearance. The fifteen (15) foot
greenbelt shall not be used for off-street parking facilities or
for loading spaces. Along the inner side (commercial side) of
the greenbelt, except when the greenbelt adjoins a public
street, there shall be provided either:
(1) A continuous visual screen with a minimum height of six
(6) feet, such screen consisting of a compact evergreen
hedge or foliage screening; or
(2) An ornamental masonry wall or wood fence at least six (6)
feet in height above grade, in which case one (1) shrub
shall be planted in the greenbelt per ten (10) lineal feet or
fraction thereof. Required shrubs shall be a minimum of
eighteen (18) inches in height at time of initial planting.
Shrubs may be clustered rather than evenly spaced.
c. Outdoor storage. All permitted and conditional uses shall be
conducted within a completely enclosed building with no open
storage.
11. Landscaping. The required front yard shall be planted with trees,
shrubs or well-kept lawn.
Section
400.190
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.200
100:809
Section 400.200. "HCD" Historic Commercial District. [R.O. 2009
§156.031; Ord. No. 96-40, 2-21-1996; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998;
Ord. No. 00-78, 4-5-2000; Ord. No. 01-156, 7-19-2001; Ord. No.
04-176, 8-4-2004; Ord. No. 10-74 §1, 4-22-2010; Ord. No. 10-244 §1,
11-18-2010; Ord. No. 12-84 §1, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 12-244 §1,
12-19-2012]
A. Purpose. The purpose of the "HCD" Historic Commercial District is to
provide for a low intensity restricted mixture of retail shopping,
personal service, residential and lodging uses on a comparatively small
scale and to preserve historic areas of Saint Charles for future
generations and for historic area residents while preserving the
integrity of historic areas. It seeks to encourage the growth of historic
and cultural activities and events, but discourages events or activities
that may misuse historic areas. It is intended to foster and complement
the community's tourist industry.
B. Permitted Uses. [Ord. No. 18-283, 12-18-2018]
1. Antique shops.
2. Art galleries and museums.
3. Banks, savings and loan associations, but not drive-in or outside
automatic teller machines.
4. Bed and breakfast establishments. [Ord. No. 19-191, 9-17-2019]
5. Dwellings, single-family and apartments with a maximum density of
eighteen (18) units per acre.
6. Libraries.
7. Microbrewery.
8. Office.
9. Placement of a telecommunication antenna on an existing
telecommunication tower (co-location) where no expansion or
enlargement of the existing tower enclosure is required.
10. Places of worship.
11. Public parks and open spaces.
12. Restaurants, but not drive-in.
13. Retail.
14. Service.
15. Short term rental property subject to the requirements of Section
400.525. [Ord. No. 19-198, 10-1-2019382]
Section
400.200
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.200
100:810
16. Studios for artists, photographers, teachers, sculptors, musicians
or graphic designers.
17. Winery.
C. Conditional Uses. [Ord. No. 18-283, 12-18-2018]
1. The following uses may be permitted in the "HCD" district as a
conditional use, if approved by the City Council following
recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission:
a. Auditorium or lecture hall, inside only.
b. Banquet centers and meetings facilities.
c. Guest house.
d. Multifamily dwellings with more than eighteen (18) units per
acre.
e. Parking lots and garages.
f. Small manufacturing establishments which produce the
following products principally by hand or hand tools:
(1) Hand tools;
(2) Horseshoes;
(3) Lead glass;
(4) Leather goods;
(5) Metal utensils;
(6) Rope;
(7) Tobacco or similar products;
(8) Wrought iron;
(9) Wooden staved barrels; and
(10) Any manufacturing establishment regulated by license.
g. Telecommunication towers, antennas attached to structures,
or placement of a telecommunication antenna on an existing
tower (co-location) where an expansion or enlargement of the
existing tower enclosure is required. Telecommunication
towers shall be located only on property that is a nonresidential
use.
382. Editor's Note: Subsections (B)(15 — 16), which immediately follow, were renumbered to
(B)(16 — 17), respectively.
Section
400.200
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.200
100:811
2. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all new uses and to
existing uses where a substantial change or expansion to the
layout, operation or configuration is proposed.
D. Design Standards. The following design standards are required in the
"HCD" District: [Ord. No. 17-151 § 2, 7-28-2017]
1. Minimum lot area: 7,500 square feet.
2. Minimum lot width at the building line: None.
3. Minimum lot depth: None.
4. Maximum height of building: 2½ stories or 35 feet.
5. Minimum setback requirements measured from the building line to
the property line:
a. Front yard setback: 10 feet.
b. Side yard setback: 10 feet only when abutting a residential
district.
c. Rear yard setback: 30 feet.
6. Maximum floor area: 5,000 square feet per establishment.
7. Public utilities. Requirements are contained in Section 400.610.
8. Off-street parking and loading.
a. For all existing buildings, the off-street parking and loading
requirements are waived for approved uses.
b. All new construction shall provide one-half (½) of the parking
and loading requirements contained in Sections 400.660 et
seq.
c. All new construction that exceeds the maximum height
requirements shall provide one hundred percent (100%) of the
parking and loading requirements contained in Sections
400.660 et. seq.
9. Metal clad buildings are prohibited.
10. Protective screening.
a. All exterior solid waste containers and container racks or
stands shall be screened from public view by an enclosure
which complies with the requirements of Section
400.965(B)(4).
b. Where an "HC" district directly adjoins a residential zoning
district or is located across a public street or alley from a
residential zoning district, a landscaped greenbelt at least
Section
400.200
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.200
100:812
Section 400.210. "C-1" Neighborhood Business District. [R.O. 2009
§156.032; CC 1981 §30-33; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No.
82-29, 4-21-1982; Ord. No. 90-188, 7-18-1990; Ord. No. 93-218,
9-22-1993; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 00-78, 4-5-2000;
Ord. No. 01-111, 6-8-2001; Ord. No. 01-156, 7-19-2001; Ord. No.
02-130, 5-28-2002; Ord. No. 04-176, 8-4-2004; Ord. No. 05-319,
12-22-2005; Ord. No. 09-227, 12-10-2009; Ord. No. 10-74 §1,
4-22-2010; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010; Ord. No. 11-106 §2,
6-9-2011]
fifteen (15) feet in width shall be provided and maintained
along the appropriate property line by the users of the "HC"
district property. The open area shall be planted with trees
and shrubs. A minimum of one (1) tree shall be planted per
thirty (30) lineal feet or fraction thereof for any frontage along
a residential zoning district. Required trees shall be at least
two and one-half (2½) inch caliper. Trees existing within any
required greenbelt at the timeof installation and which are
larger than two and one-half (2½) inch caliper shall be
preserved and will count toward the minimum landscaping
requirements. Newly planted species shall be hardy for the
specified area. All landscaping shall be maintained in healthy
growing condition and be neat and orderly in appearance.
The fifteen (15) foot greenbelt shall not be used for off-street
parking facilities or for loading space. Along the inner side
(the commercial property side) of the greenbelt, except when
the greenbelt adjoins a public street, there shall be provided
either:
(1) A continuous visual screen with a minimum height of six
(6) feet, such screen consisting of a compact evergreen
hedge or foliage screening; or
(2) An ornamental masonry wall or wood fence at least six (6)
feet in height above grade, in which case one (1) shrub
shall be planted in the greenbelt per ten (10) lineal feet or
fraction thereof. Required shrubs shall be a minimum of
eighteen (18) inches in height at time of initial planting.
Shrubs may be clustered rather than evenly spaced.
11. Accessory Buildings. [Ord. No. 17-151 § 2, 7-28-2017]
a. Residential uses within the district shall reference Section
400.530.
b. Non-Residential Uses shall comply with Design Standards of
this district.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the "C-1" Neighborhood Business District is to
provide primarily for a restricted mixture of retail shopping, personal
service, and residential uses, on a comparatively small scale, to be
Section
400.200
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.210
100:813
developed either as a unit or in individual parcels and to serve the
needs of a relatively small area, primarily nearby residential
neighborhoods.
B. Permitted Uses. A building or land in the "C-1" district shall be used
only for the following purposes: [Ord. No. 18-283, 12-18-2018]
1. Antique sales with no outside display or storage.
2. Auditoriums, but not drive-in theaters.
3. Banks and savings and loan associations.
4. Day care facilities.
5. One (1) dwelling unit may be permitted on the second floor or
above.
6. Institutions, art galleries and museums.
7. Libraries.
8. Office.
9. Places of worship.
10. Public parks and open spaces.
11. Recreational uses, indoor.
12. Restaurants, but not drive-in restaurants.
13. Retail.
14. Service.
15. Studios for artists, photographers, teachers, sculptors or
musicians.
16. Placement of a telecommunication antenna on an existing
telecommunication tower (co-location) where no expansion or
enlargement of the existing tower enclosure is required.
C. Conditional Uses. [Ord. No. 15-040 § 2, 2-17-2015; Ord. No. 17-072
§ 2, 4-18-2017; Ord. No. 18-258, 11-20-2018; Ord. No. 18-283,
12-18-2018]
1. The following uses may be permitted in the "C-1" district as a
conditional use if approved by the City Council following
recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission:
a. Any conditional use in the "O-I" Office Institution District
unless otherwise permitted by the "C-1" district.
b. Animal hospitals or clinics for small animals, dogs, cats, birds
and the like; provided that such hospital or clinic and any
Section
400.210
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.210
100:814
treatment rooms, cages, pens or kennels be maintained within
a completely enclosed, soundproof building and that such
hospital or clinic be operated in such a way as to produce no
objectionable noise or odors outside its walls.
c. Any of the uses listed as permitted, which are greater in height
than two and one-half (2 1/2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet and/
or greater than three thousand (3,000) square feet of
maximum floor area per establishment.
d. (Reserved)383
e. Community service establishment.
f. Dry cleaner and/or laundromat. No cleaning fluid considered
hazardous, in the judgment of the Fire Chief, shall be used.
g. In-vehicle sales or service.
(1) Conditional Use Regulations.
(a) Clearly marked pedestrian crosswalks shall be
provided for each walk-in customer access to the
facility adjacent to the drive-through lane(s).
(b) The drive-through facility shall be designed so as to
not impede or impair vehicular and pedestrian traffic
movement or exacerbate the potential for pedestrian/
vehicular conflicts.
(c) In no instance shall a drive-through facility be
permitted to operate which endangers the public
safety, even if such land use has been permitted under
the provisions of this Section.
(d) The setback of any overhead canopy or similar
structure shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet from all
street rights-of-way lines, a minimum of twenty (20)
feet from all residentially zoned property lines and
shall be a minimum of five (5) feet from all other
property lines. The total height of any overhead
canopy or similar structure shall not exceed twenty
(20) feet as measured to the highest part of the
structure. The setback requirements may be
recommended for modification by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and modified by the City Council
where it is found that due to pre-existing
circumstances the provision of said setback will cause
an undue burden on the ability to effectively use the
property.
383. Editor's Note: Former Subsection (C)(4), regarding bed and breakfast establishments, was
repealed 9-17-2019 by Ord. No. 19-191.
Section
400.210
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.210
100:815
(e) All vehicular areas of the facility shall provide a
surface paved with concrete or bituminous material
which is designed to meet the requirements of a
minimum four-ton axle load.
(f) The facility shall provide a minimum six-foot-high,
solid, earthtone-color, vinyl fence with a combination
of shrubs [eighteen (18) inches to twenty-four (24)
inches tall or three (3) feet to four (4) feet wide at the
time of planting], understory trees [six (6) feet to eight
(8) feet tall at the time of planting] and canopy trees
[two and one-half (2 1/2) inches to three (3) inches
caliper at the time of planting] as recommended by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the
City Council along all borders of the property directly
abutting a residentially zoned property. These
requirements may be recommended for modification
by the Planning and Zoning Commission and modified
by the City Council where it is found that due to preexisting
circumstances the provision of the setback
will cause an undue burden on the ability to effectively
use the property.
(g) Interior curbs shall be used to separate driving area
from exterior fixtures such as fuel pumps, vacuums,
menu boards, canopy supports and landscaped
islands. The curbs shall be a minimum of six (6) inches
high and be of a non-mountable design. No curb
protecting an exterior fixture shall be located closer
than twenty-five (25) feet to any property line. The
setback requirements may be recommended for
modification by the Planning and Zoning Commission
and modified by the City Council where it is found that
due to pre-existing circumstances the provision of the
setback will cause an undue burden on the ability to
effectively use the property.
(h) Outdoor storage uses (including the outdoor storage
of vehicles or vehicles for sale) shall be prohibited on
the same property.
(i) Automobile service stations must meet the
requirements contained in Section 400.410.
h. Nurseries for growing plants, trees, shrubs.
i. Parking lots/garages not accessory to a primary use.
j. Pet adoption centers with no more than one (1) open pen or run
at least three hundred (300) feet from a residential district.
The City Council shall impose any conditions it deems
appropriate for protection of adjoining properties from noise
Section
400.210
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.210
100:816
and odor which may include, but are not limited to, requiring
berms, walls, plantings.
k. Pet shops or dog beauty parlors; provided that any work rooms,
cages, pens or kennels be maintained within a completely
enclosed, soundproof building and that such shop or parlor be
operated in such a way as to produce no objectionable noises
or odors outside its walls.
l. Temporary enclosures.
m. Temporary shelters subject to the following standards as may
be modified through the conditional use process:
(1) An application for a conditional use permit for a temporary
shelter shall include information about the size and design
of the structure, population groups served, length of stay
permitted, maximum design capacity and support services
provided. These items shall be used to determine if the
facility is in conformance with the character of the
adjacent area.
(2) A temporary shelter shall not be located within one
thousand (1,000) feet of another temporary shelter.
(3) The minimum lot area for a temporary shelter shall be
seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. If a
proposed temporary shelter structure is larger than two
thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of gross floor
area, there shall be provided an additional one thousand
five hundred (1,500) square feet of lot area for each
additional five hundred (500) square feet of gross floor
area within the structure.
(4) The shelter shall submit a semi-annual report to the
Department of Community Development stating maximum
monthly occupancy level and support services provided by
the shelter.
n. Vacant lots at least one (1) acre in size may be utilized for
cultivation of field crops, orchards or groves or nurseries for
growing or propagation of plants, turf, trees and shrubs.
2. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all new uses and to
existing uses where a substantial change or expansion to the
layout, operation or configuration is proposed.
D. Design Standards. (See also Sections 400.530 et seq. for additional
regulations.) The following design standards are required in the "C-1"
district:
1. Minimum lot area: 7,500 square feet.
Section
400.210
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.210
100:817
2. Minimum lot width at the building line: None.
3. Minimum lot depth: None.
4. Maximum height of building: 2½ stories or 35 feet.
"GPRS" bonus:
All tiers: 3 stories or 45 feet, except when adjoining a residential
zoning district.
5. Minimum setback requirements measured from the building line to
the property line:
a. Front yard setback: 25 feet.
"GPRS" bonus:
Tiers 1 and 2: 20 feet.
Tier 3: 15 feet.
b. Side yard setback: None, except 15 feet when abutting a
residential district
c. Rear yard setback: 25 feet.
"GPRS" bonus:
All tiers: None, except 25 feet when abutting a residential
district.
6. Maximum floor area: 3,000 square feet per establishment.
"GPRS" bonus:
Tiers 1 and 2: 4,500 square feet.
Tier 3: 6,000 square feet.
7. Public utilities. Requirements are contained in Section 400.610.
8. Off-street parking and loading.
a. No parking shall be permitted in a required front yard.
b. Additional requirements for off-street parking and loading are
contained in Sections 400.660 et seq.
9. Protective screening.
a. All exterior solid waste containers and container racks or
stands shall be screened from public view by an enclosure
which complies with the requirements of Section 400.965
(B)(4).
Section
400.210
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.210
100:818
Section 400.220. "C-2" General Business District.384 [R.O. 2009
§156.033; CC 1981 §30-34; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No.
79-38, 5-2-1979; Ord. No. 79-85, 8-29-1979; Ord. No. 82-29,
4-21-1982; Ord. No. 89-36, 2-23-1989; Ord. No. 90-188, 7-18-1990;
Ord. No. 91-115, 6-4-1991; Ord. No. 94-230, 9-7-1994; Ord. No.
96-46, 2-21-1996; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 99-53,
2-4-1999; Ord. No. 99-205, 6-3-1999; Ord. No. 99-288, 8-17-1999;
Ord. No. 00-78, 4-5-2000; Ord. No. 01-71, 4-18-2001; Ord. No.
01-156, 7-19-2001; Ord. No. 02-130, 5-28-2002; Ord. No. 04-176,
8-4-2004; Ord. No. 05-65, 3-7-2005; Ord. No. 06-273, 9-27-2006;
Ord. No. 06-357, 12-20-2006; Ord. No. 08-123, 6-18-2008; Ord. No.
09-47, 3-20-2009; Ord. No. 09-227, 12-10-2009; Ord. No. 10-115 §1,
b. Where a "C-1" zoning district directly adjoins a residential
zoning district or is located across a public street or alley from
a residential zoning district, a landscaped greenbelt at least
fifteen (15) feet in width shall be provided and maintained
along the appropriate property line by the users of the "C-1"
property. The open area shall be planted with trees and shrubs.
A minimum of one (1) tree shall be planted per thirty (30) lineal
feet or fraction thereof for any frontage along a residential
zoning district. Required trees shall be at least two and onehalf
(2½) inch caliper. Trees existing within any required
greenbelt at the time of installation and which are larger than
two and one-half (2½) inch caliper shall be preserved and will
count toward the minimum landscaping requirements. Newly
planted species shall be hardy for the specified area. All
landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition
and be neat and orderly in appearance. The fifteen (15) foot
greenbelt shall not be used for off-street parking facilities or
for loading spaces. Along the inner side (the commercial
property side) of the greenbelt, except when the greenbelt
adjoins a public street, there shall be provided either:
(1) A continuous visual screen with a minimum height of six
(6) feet, such screen consisting of a compact evergreen
hedge or foliage screening; or
(2) An ornamental masonry wall or wood fence at least six (6)
feet in height above grade, in which case one (1) shrub
shall be planted in the greenbelt per ten (10) lineal feet or
fraction thereof. Required shrubs shall be a minimum of
eighteen (18) inches in height at time of initial planting.
Shrubs may be clustered rather than evenly spaced.
c. Outdoor storage. All permitted and conditional uses shall be
conducted within a completely enclosed building with no open
storage.
384. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
Section
400.210
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.220
100:819
6-9-2010; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010; Ord. No. 11-106 §3,
6-9-2011]
A. Purpose. The purpose of the "C-2" General Business District is to
provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
commercial and service activities generally serving a wide area and
located particularly along certain existing major thoroughfares where a
general mixture of commercial and service activity now exists, but
which uses are not characterized by warehousing, frequent heavy
trucking activity, open storage of material or the nuisance factors of
dust, odor and noise associated with manufacturing.
B. Permitted Uses. A building or land in a "C-2" district shall be used only
for the following purposes: [Ord. No. 18-283, 12-18-2018]
1. Any use permitted in the "O-I" Office Institution District or "C-1"
Neighborhood Business District.
2. Ambulance services, public or private.
3. Amusement places, including dance halls, subject to applicable City
regulations, arcades and similar activities.
4. Archery ranges, provided that such range is approved by the Chief
of Police.
5. Building contractor establishment; outside storage shall be
prohibited.
6. One (1) dwelling unit is permitted above the first floor.
7. Dry cleaning/laundromat.
8. Equipment rental and leasing services, including lawn mower, yard
and garden equipment, trailers (not mobile homes) and other such
items, provided storage is within a completely enclosed building
unless otherwise allowed through the conditional use process.
9. Exterminators; outside storage of chemicals shall be prohibited.
10. Hotels, motels or motor lodges, bed and breakfast establishments
and inns.
11. Motor vehicle service and repair. Wrecked, disabled or inoperable
motor vehicles shall not be stored anywhere on the property for
more than thirty (30) days. Examples of permitted uses are tire
repair and replacement, motor vehicle engine repair, muffler shops,
body shops and motor vehicle paint shops. [Ord. No. 18-284,
12-18-2018]
12. Plumbing, heating and air-conditioning shop, upholstering shop
(not involving furniture manufacture), appliance repairs and
general service and repair establishments similar in character to
Section
400.220
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.220
100:820
those listed in this item. No outside storage of material is
permitted.
13. Recreational uses, outdoor.
14. Schools for industrial training, trade or business.
C. Conditional Uses. [Ord. No. 14-113 § 1, 5-20-2014; Ord. No.
18-283, 12-18-2018]
1. The following uses may be permitted in the "C-2" district as
conditional uses if approved by the City Council following
recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission:
a. Any conditional use permitted in the "C-1" Neighborhood
Business District unless otherwise permitted by the "C-2"
district.
b. Indoor firearm ranges.
(1) Conditional Use Regulations.
(a) An indoor firearm range facility must be designed to
offer a completely controlled shooting environment
that includes impenetrable walls, floor and ceiling,
adequate ventilation and lighting systems and
acoustical treatment for sound attenuation suitable
for the range's approved use.
(b) Noise levels at the nearest residential property line to
an indoor firearm range shall not exceed thirty-five
(35) decibels.
(c) Noise levels at the nearest commercial property line
to an indoor firearm range shall not exceed forty-five
(45) decibels.
(d) An indoor firearm range shall not operate between the
hours of 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M.
(e) An indoor firearm range must be authorized in writing
by the Chief of Police and Building Code Official.
(f) The construction and operation of an indoor firearm
range must comply with all State and Federal
regulations.
c. Motor vehicle sales and rentals, new and used and temporary
motor vehicle storage.
(1) Conditional Use Regulations.
(a) The setback of any overhead canopy or similar
structure shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet from all
Section
400.220
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.220
100:821
street rights-of-way lines, a minimum of twenty (20)
feet from all residentially zoned property lines and
shall be a minimum of five (5) feet from all other
property lines. The total height of any overhead
canopy or similar structure shall not exceed twenty
(20) feet as measured to the highest part of the
structure. The setback requirements may be
recommended for modification by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and modified by the City Council
where it is found that due to pre-existing
circumstances the provision of said setback will cause
an undue burden on the ability to effectively use the
property.
(b) All vehicular areas of the facility shall provide a
surface paved with concrete or bituminous material
which is designed to meet the requirements of a
minimum four-ton axle load.
(c) The facility shall provide a minimum six-foot-high,
solid, earthtone-color, vinyl fence with a combination
of shrubs [eighteen (18) inches to twenty-four (24)
inches tall or three (3) feet to four (4) feet wide at the
time of planting], understory trees [six (6) feet to eight
(8) feet tall at the time of planting] and canopy trees
[two and one-half (2 1/2) inches to three (3) inches
caliper at the time of planting] as recommended by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the
City Council along all borders of the property directly
abutting a residentially zoned property. These
requirements may be recommended for modification
by the Planning and Zoning Commission and modified
by the City Council where it is found that due to preexisting
circumstances the provision of the setback
will cause an undue burden on the ability to effectively
use the property.
d. Secondhand sales.385
e. Taverns, bars, cocktail lounges, microbreweries.
(1) Conditional Use Regulations. Due to the potential negative
secondary effects of the location and operations of
establishments that predominantly sell intoxicating
beverages, the City Council may place additional
regulations on a tavern, bar, cocktail lounge or
microbrewery to reduce or eliminate these effects.
385. Editor's Note: Former Subsection (C)(1)(d), regarding motor vehicle service and repair,
was repealed 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-284 § 1. This ordinance also provided for the
redesignation of former Subsection (C)(1)(e) through (h) as Subsection (C)(1)(d) through
(g), respectively.
Section
400.220
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.220
100:822
f. Taxicab stations and stands.
g. Taxidermy.
2. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all new uses and to
existing uses where a substantial change or expansion to the
layout, operation or configuration is proposed.
D. Design Standards. (See also Sections 400.530 et seq. for additional
regulations.) The following design standards are required in the "C-2"
district:
1. Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
2. Minimum lot width at the building line: None.
3. Minimum lot depth: None.
4. Maximum height of building: 3 stories or 45 feet.
"GPRS" bonus:
All tiers: 4 stories or 60 feet, except when adjoining a residential
zoning district
5. Minimum setbacks measured from building line to property line:
a. Front yard setback: 25 feet.
"GPRS" bonus:
Tiers 1 and 2: 20 feet.
Tier 3: 15 feet.
b. Side yard setback: None, except 20 feet when abutting a
residential district.
"GPRS" bonus:
All tiers: None, except 20 feet when abutting a residential
district.
c. Rear yard setback: None, except twenty (20) feet when
abutting a residential district.
"GPRS" bonus:
All tiers: None, except twenty (20) feet when abutting a
residential district.
6. Maximum floor area in square feet: None.
7. Public utilities. Requirements are contained in Section 400.610.
8. Off-street parking and loading.
Section
400.220
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.220
100:823
a. No parking shall be permitted in a required front yard.
b. Additional requirements are contained in Sections 400.660 et
seq.
9. Protective screening.
a. All exterior solid waste containers and container racks or
stands shall be screened from public view by an enclosure
which complies with the requirements of Section 400.965
(B)(4).
b. Where a "C-2" zoning district directly adjoins a residential
zoning district or is located across a public street or alley from
a residential zoning district, a landscaped greenbelt at least
twenty (20) feet in width shall be provided and maintained
along the appropriate property line by the users of the "C-2"
property. The open area shall be planted with trees and shrubs.
A minimum of one (1) tree shall be planted per thirty (30) lineal
feet or fraction thereof for any frontage along a residential
zoning district. Required trees shall be at least two and onehalf
(2½) inch caliper. Trees existing within any required
greenbelt at the time of installation and which are larger than
two and one-half (2½) inch caliper shall be preserved and will
count toward the minimum landscaping requirements. Newly
planted species shall be hardy for the specified area. All
landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition
and be neat and orderly in appearance. The twenty (20) foot
greenbelt shall not be used for off-street parking facilities or
for loading spaces. Along the inner side (the commercial
property side) of the greenbelt, except when the greenbelt
adjoins a public street, there shall be provided either:
(1) A continuous visual screen with a minimum height of six
(6) feet, such screen consisting of a compact evergreen
hedge or foliage screening; or
(2) An ornamental masonry wall or wood fence at least six (6)
feet in height above grade, in which case one (1) shrub
shall be planted in the greenbelt per ten (10) lineal feet or
fraction thereof. Required shrubs shall be a minimum of
eighteen (18) inches in height at time of initial planting.
Shrubs may be clustered rather than evenly spaced.
c. Outdoor storage. All permitted and conditional uses shall be
conducted within a completely enclosed building with no open
storage, unless screened from the street, adjacent properties
or any residential district by fences or walls as approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
Section
400.220
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.230
100:824
Section 400.230. "C-3" Highway Business District.386 [R.O. 2009
§156.034; CC 1981 §30-35; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No.
82-29, 4-20-1982; Ord. No. 88-252, 12-22-1988; Ord. No. 90-188,
7-18-1990; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 99-288, 8-17-1999;
Ord. No. 00-78, 4-5-2000; Ord. No. 01-71, 4-18-2001; Ord. No.
01-156, 7-19-2001; Ord. No. 02-130, 5-28-2002; Ord. No. 03-64,
3-28-2003; Ord. No. 04-176, 8-4-2004; Ord. No. 08-123, 6-18-2008;
Ord. No. 09-227, 12-10-2009; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010; Ord.
No. 11-106 §4, 6-9-2011; Ord. No. 18-283, 12-18-2018; Ord. No.
19-118, 5-21-2019]
A. Purpose. The "C-3" Highway Business District is intended to be one
which permits all types of commercial activity: retailing, wholesaling,
warehousing, provision of personal and business services and
entertainment.
B. Permitted Uses. A building or land in the "C-3" district shall be used
only for the following purposes:
1. Any use permitted in the "C-2" General Business District.
2. Animal hospital or kennel with any open pens at least two hundred
(200) feet from a residential district.
3. Painting shops and bottling works.
4. Lumber and building materials stores, but not a lumberyard.
5. Medical marijuana facility.
6. Mini-warehouses including living quarters or dwellings for resident
watchmen and caretakers employed on the premises.
7. Mortuary and monument sales establishments with or without
outdoor storage or display.
8. Nurseries for growing plants, trees, shrubs.
9. Printing, publishing and engraving establishments.
10. Wholesale establishment, truck terminal or warehouse not in
excess of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet of floor area.
11. Radio and television stations and studios or recording studios,
subject to the provisions of Section 400.470.
12. Retail establishments with eight thousand (8,000) square feet or
less with either secondhand, used or consignment inventory. Retail
establishments greater than eight thousand (8,000) square feet,
provided twenty-five percent (25%) or less of inventory is
secondhand, used or consignment goods.
386. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
Section
400.230
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.230
100:825
C. Conditional Uses.
1. The following uses may be permitted in the "C-3" District as a
conditional use if approved by the City Council following
recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission:
a. Any conditional use permitted in the "C-2" District unless
permitted by the "C-3" District.
b. Fertilizer storage in bags or bulk storage of liquid or dry
fertilizer in tanks or in a completely enclosed building
associated with a retail business, but not manufacturing or
processing.
c. Material storage yards, in connection with a permitted use,
where storage is incidental to the approved occupancy of the
building, provided all products and materials used or stored
are enclosed by a masonry wall, sight-proof fence or hedge not
less than six (6) feet in height. Storage of motor vehicles and
trucks used in connection with the permitted trade or business
is permitted within the walls or screen, but not including
storage of heavy equipment, such as road-building or
excavating equipment.
d. Sale or storage of stone products, sand and gravel, but not
crushing or grinding.
e. Welding or soldering shops.
f. Agricultural or farm implements for sale, storage or repair.
g. Boat and boat trailer, repair, sales and storage.
h. Mobile home sales, display and storage or sales, display and
storage of travel trailers and campers, provided that all units
shall be in usable condition, none shall be placed in a required
front yard, the minimum parcel area shall be one-half (1/2)
acre, the storage area shall be separated from the display
areas by a continuous visual screen with a minimum height of
eight (8) feet, such screen consisting of a compact evergreen
hedge or foliage screening or louvered fence or masonry wall.
i. Truck stop.
j. Bus terminal.
k. More than one (1) dwelling unit above the ground floor up to a
maximum of eighteen (18) units per acre.
2. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all new uses and to
existing uses where a substantial change or expansion to the
layout, operation or configuration is proposed.
Section
400.230
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.230
100:826
D. Design Standards. (See also Section 400.530 et seq. for additional
regulations.) The following design standards are required in the "C-3"
District:
1. Minimum lot area: ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
2. Minimum lot width at the building line: None.
3. Minimum lot depth: None.
4. Maximum height of building: three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet.
"GPRS" bonus:
All tiers: four (4) stories or sixty (60) feet, except when adjoining a
residential zoning district.
5. Minimum setback requirements measured from building line to
property line:
a. Front yard setback: twenty-five (25) feet.
"GPRS" bonus:
Tiers 1 and 2: twenty (20) feet.
Tier 3: fifteen (15) feet.
b. Side yard setback: None, except twenty-five (25) feet when
abutting a residential district.
"GPRS" bonus:
All tiers: None, except twenty-five (25) feet when abutting a
residential district.
c. Rear yard setback: None, except twenty-five (25) feet when
abutting a residential district.
"GPRS" bonus:
All tiers: None, except twenty-five (25) feet when abutting a
residential district.
6. Maximum floor area in square feet: None.
7. Public Utilities. Requirements are contained in Section 400.610.
8. Off-Street Parking And Loading.
a. No parking shall be permitted in a required front yard.
b. Additional requirements for off-street parking and loading are
contained in Section 400.660 et seq.
9. Protective Screening.
Section
400.230
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.230
100:827
Section 400.240. "I-1" Light Industrial District.387 [R.O. 2009
§156.035; CC 1981 §30-37; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No.
77-56, 10-26-1977; Ord. No. 82-29, 4-21-1982; Ord. No. 90-163,
6-21-1990; Ord. No. 90-188, 7-18-1990; Ord. No. 91-26, 2-7-1991;
a. All exterior solid waste containers and container racks or
stands shall be screened from public view by an enclosure
which complies with the requirements of Section 400.965
(B)(4).
b. Where a "C-3" zoning district directly adjoins a residential
zoning district or is located across a public street or alley from
a residential zoning district, a landscaped greenbelt at least
twenty-five (25) feet in width shall be provided and maintained
along the appropriate property line by the users of the "C-3"
property. The open area shall be planted with trees and shrubs.
A minimum of one (1) tree shall be planted per thirty (30) lineal
feet or fraction thereof for any frontage along a residential
zoning district.
Required trees shall be at least two and one-half (2 1/2) inch
caliper. Trees existing within any required greenbelt at the
time of installation and which are larger than two and one-half
(2 1/2) inch caliper shall be preserved and will count toward
the minimum landscaping requirements. Newly planted
species shall be hardy for the specified area. All landscaping
shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition and be
neat and orderly in appearance. The twenty-five-foot
greenbelt shall not be used for off-street parking facilities
or for loading spaces. Along the inner side (the commercial
property side) of the greenbelt, except when the greenbelt
adjoins a public street, there shall be provided either:
(1) A continuous visual screen with a minimum height of six
(6) feet, such screen consisting of a compact evergreen
hedge or foliage screening; or
(2) An ornamental masonry wall or wood fence at least six (6)
feet in height above grade, in which case one (1) shrub
shall be planted in the greenbelt per ten (10) lineal feet or
fraction thereof. Required shrubs shall be a minimum of
eighteen (18) inches in height at time of initial planting.
Shrubs may be clustered rather than evenly spaced.
c. Outdoor Storage. All permitted and conditional uses shall be
conducted within a completely enclosed building with no open
storage, unless screened from the street, adjacent properties
or any residential district by fences or walls as approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
387. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
Section
400.230
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.240
100:828
Ord. No. 93-26, 2-26-1993; Ord. No. 93-129, 6-9-1993; Ord. No.
95-280, 10-18-1995; Ord. No. 96-256, 9-19-1996; Ord. No. 98-209,
5-15-1998; Ord. No. 00-78, 4-5-2000; Ord. No. 01-156, 7-19-2001;
Ord. No. 02-130, 5-28-2002; Ord. No. 04-176, 8-4-2004; Ord. No.
04-216, 9-10-2004; Ord. No. 09-227, 12-10-2009; Ord. No. 10-244
§1, 11-18-2010; Ord. No. 11-106 §5, 6-9-2011; Ord. No. 12-245 §1,
12-19-2012]
A. Purpose. The purpose of the "I-1" Light Industrial District is to provide
sufficient space in appropriate locations for certain types of business
and manufacturing, relatively free from offense, on modern landscaped
buildings sites, and to make available more attractive locations for
these businesses and industries. In order to preserve the land for
industry and to avoid future conflicts between industry and residence,
future residential uses are restricted.
B. Permitted Uses. A building or land in the "I-1" district shall be used only
for the following purposes: [Ord. No. 16-266 § 4, 12-20-2016; Ord.
No. 18-283, 12-18-2018]
1. Any use permitted in the "C-1", "C-2" and "C-3" districts, except
dwellings other than permitted below.
2. Aluminum extrusion, rolling, fabrication and forming.
3. Crematoria (cremation facilities), subject to meeting all
requirements of State licensing regulations regarding cremation
facilities and regarding clean air requirements.
4. Dwellings for resident watchmen and caretakers employed on the
premises.
5. Establishments for the rent, sale and repair of heavy machinery.
6. Food lockers, freezers, cold storage facilities.
7. Laboratories, research, experimental or testing, but not testing
combustion engines or explosives.
8. Light manufacturing uses similar to those listed below, which do
not create any more danger to health and safety in surrounding
areas and which do not create any more offensive noise, vibration,
dust, smoke, lint, odor, heat or glare than that which is generally
associated with light industries of the types specifically permitted
below:
a. Beverage blending or bottling, bakery products, candy
manufacture, dairy products and ice cream, fruit and vegetable
processing and canning, but not distilling of beverages or
slaughtering of poultry or animals, or processing or bulk
storage of grain or feeds for animals or poultry.
Section
400.240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.240
100:829
b. Compounding of cosmetics, toiletries, drugs and
pharmaceutical products.
c. Manufacture or assembly of medical and dental equipment,
drafting, optical and musical instruments, watches, clocks,
toys, games and electrical or electronic apparatus.
d. Manufacture or assembly of boats, bolts, nuts, screws, rivets,
ornamental iron products, firearms, electrical appliances,
tools, dies, machinery and hardware products, sheet metal
products and vitreous enameled metal products.
e. Manufacture of rugs, mattresses, pillows, quilts, millinery,
hosiery, clothing and fabrics, printing and finishing of textiles
and fibers into fabric goods.
f. Manufacture of boxes, furniture, cabinets, baskets and other
wood products of similar nature.
9. Outside storage of goods used in or produced by permitted
commercial and industrial uses or related activities, subject to
industrial performance standards.
10. Radio or television station with receiving-transmission tower.
11. Railroad spur tracks.
12. Recycle operation for paper, glass, oil, metal, but not salvage.
13. Shipping container structures subject to site plan approval by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
14. Welding or soldering shops.
15. Wholesale merchandising or storage warehouses.
C. Conditional Uses. [Ord. No. 15-038 § 1, 2-17-2015; Ord. No.
18-283, 12-18-2018]
1. The following uses may be permitted in the "I-1" district as
conditional uses if approved by the City Council following
recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission:
a. Any conditional use listed in the "C-3" district unless permitted
by the "I-1" district.
b. Fertilizer storage in bags or bulk storage of liquid or dry
fertilizer in tanks or in a completely enclosed building, but not
manufacturing or processing.
c. Recreational facilities primarily for employees in the district.
d. Recreational vehicle campgrounds.
e. Temporary shelters.
Section
400.240
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.240
100:830
f. The preparation of general purpose industrial commercial and
household cleaning products and related chemicals (blending
only).
g. Towing companies and impound lots.
2. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all new uses and to
existing uses where a substantial change or expansion to the
layout, operation or configuration is proposed.
D. Design Standards. (See also Sections 400.530 et seq. for additional
regulations.) The following design standards are required in the "I-1"
district:
1. Minimum lot area: 1 acre.
2. Minimum lot width at the building line: 150 feet.
3. Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
4. Maximum height of building: 3 stories or 45 feet.
"GPRS" bonus:
All tiers: 4 stories or 60 feet, except when adjoining a residential
district.
5. Minimum setbacks measured from building line to property line:
[Ord. No. 18-258, 11-20-2018]
a. No part of any building, accessory structure or sign shall be
located closer than one hundred (100) feet to any residential
district boundary.
"GPRS" bonus:
All tiers: No part of any building, accessory structure or signs
shall be located closer than 75 feet to any residential district
boundary.
b. The front yard setback is thirty-five (35) feet, except fifty (50)
feet across street from residential district.
"GPRS" bonus:
Tiers 1 and 2: 30 feet.
Tier 3: 25 feet, except 50 feet across street from residential
district.
c. The side yard setback is zero (0) feet, except fifty (50) feet
adjoining residential district.
"GPRS" bonus:
Section
400.240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.240
100:831
All tiers: zero (0) feet, except 50 feet when abutting a
residential district. [Ord. No. 18-258, 11-20-2018]
d. The rear yard setback is zero (0) feet, except fifty (50) feet
adjoining residential district. [Ord. No. 18-258, 11-20-2018]
"GPRS" bonus:
All tiers: zero (0) feet, except 50 feet when abutting a
residential district. [Ord. No. 18-258, 11-20-2018]
6. Maximum lot coverage: None.
7. Maximum floor area in square feet: None.
8. Public utilities. Requirements are contained in Section 400.610.
9. Off-street parking and loading.
a. No parking shall be permitted in a required front yard.
b. (Reserved)388
c. Adequate parking and loading space shall be provided off the
street for all employees and traffic to the building, if necessary
in excess of the minimum requirements of Sections 400.660 et
seq.
10. Protective screening.
a. All exterior solid waste containers and container racks or
stands shall be screened from public view by an enclosure
which complies with the requirements of Section
400.965(B)(4).
b. Where an "I-1" zoning district directly adjoins a residential
zoning district or is located across a public street or alley from
a residential zoning district, a landscaped greenbelt at least
fifty (50) feet in width shall be provided and maintained along
the appropriate property line by the users of the "I-1" property.
The open area shall be planted with trees and shrubs. A
minimum of one (1) tree shall be planted per thirty (30) lineal
feet or fraction thereof for any frontage along a residential
zoning district. Required trees shall be at least two and onehalf
(2½) inch caliper. Trees existing within any required
greenbelt at the time of installation and which are larger than
two and one-half (2½) inch caliper shall be preserved and will
count toward the minimum landscaping requirements. Newly
planted species shall be hardy for the specified area. All
landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition
and be neat and orderly in appearance. The fifty (50) foot
388. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection (D)(9)(b), regarding loading operations to be conducted
at the side or rear of buildings, etc., was repealed 7-28-2017 by § 1 of Ord. No. 17-152.
Section
400.240
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.240
100:832
greenbelt shall not be used for off-street parking facilities
or for loading spaces. Along the inner side (the industrial
property side) of the greenbelt, except when the greenbelt
adjoins a public street, there shall be provided either:
(1) A continuous visual screen with a minimum height of six
(6) feet, such screen consisting of a compact evergreen
hedge of foliage screening; or
(2) An ornamental masonry wall or wood fence at least six (6)
feet in height above grade, in which case one (1) shrub
shall be planted in the greenbelt per ten (10) lineal feet or
fraction thereof. Required shrubs shall be a minimum of
eighteen (18) inches in height at time of initial planting.
Shrubs may be clustered rather than evenly spaced.
11. Landscaping. The required front, side and rear yards shall be
planted with trees and shrubs.
E. Industrial Performance Standards.
1. Compliance with standards. Any use or proposed use shall be
operated so as to comply with the provisions of this Chapter. If it is
deemed necessary by the Building Commissioner in order to
determine compliance with these standards by any proposed or
expansion of industry, the Commissioner may require any person,
firm or corporation to retain an expert consultant or consultants to
study and report as to compliance or non-compliance with these
performance standards and to advise how a proposed use or
proposed expansion of a use can be brought into compliance with
these performance standards. Such consultants shall be fully
qualified to give the required information and shall be persons or
firms mutually agreeable to the Building Commissioner and to the
persons or firms of the use in question. In the event of inability to
select a mutual consultant, the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall select the consultant. The cost of the consultant's services
shall be borne by the owner, firm or corporation requesting such
use. No use lawfully established before October 25, 1977, shall be
hereafter altered or modified so as to conflict with or further
conflict with these performance standards.
2. Outdoor storage. All permitted and conditional uses shall be
conducted within a completely enclosed building with no open
storage of raw, in process, or finished material, and supplies or
waste material, or finished or semi-finished products manufactured
on the premises, unless screened from the street, or any residential
or business district by fences or walls in accordance with these
district regulations.
3. Noise. At no point on the boundary of a residential or business
district shall the sound intensity level of any individual operation or
plant (other than the operation of motor vehicles or other
Section
400.240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.240
100:833
transportation facilities) exceed the decibel levels in the designated
octave bands shown in the following table:
Maximum Permitted Sound Levels (decibels)
Octave Band
Frequency (cycles
per second)
Along Residential
District
Boundaries
Along Business
District Boundaries
0 to 75 67 75
75 to 150 65 70
150 to 300 59 63
300 to 600 52 57
600 to 1,200 46 52
1,200 to 2,400 40 45
2,400 to 4,800 34 40
Above 4,800 32 38
Note: Measurement is to be made at the boundary of the nearest
residential or business area or at any other point along the
boundary where the level is higher.
Sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and
associated octave band filter manufactured according to standards
prescribed by the American Standards Association. Measurements
shall be made using the flat network of the sound level meter.
Impulsive type noises shall be subject to the performance
standards hereinafter prescribed, provided that such noises are
capable of being accurately measured with such equipment.
Noises capable of being so measured, for the purpose of this
Chapter, shall be those noises which cause rapid fluctuations of
the needle of the sound level meter with a variation of no more
than plus or minus two (±2) decibels. Noises incapable of being so
measured, such as those of an irregular and intermittent nature,
should be controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent
uses.
4. Smoke and particulate matter. The emission of smoke, dusts or any
gaseous or particulate matter by any building in an amount
sufficient to create a general nuisance to adjoining properties shall
be prohibited. Total emission of smoke, dusts and any gaseous or
particulate matter shall be limited to the following:
a. Ringelmann requirements. All smoke and the emission of all
other particulate matter in quantities sufficient to produce an
opacity at any point greater than Ringelmann 3 shall be
prohibited. The only exception shall be a plume consisting
entirely of condensed steam. A Ringelmann 1 unit is defined as
twenty percent (20%) density for one (1) minute. No more than
fifteen (15) units of Ringelmann smoke shall be permitted per
Section
400.240
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.240
100:834
hour and no smoke more intense than Ringelmann 2, except
that during one (1) hour of a twenty-four (24) hour day, thirty
(30) units of smoke may be emitted, but with no smoke more
intense than Ringelmann 3 as shown on the Ringelmann Chart.
b. The emission, from all sources within any lot area, of
particulate matter containing more than ten percent (10%) by
weight, of particles having a particulate diameter larger than
forty-four (44) microns, shall be prohibited.
c. Dust and other types of air pollution, borne by the wind from
such sources as storage areas, yards, roads and the like within
lot boundaries, shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate
landscaping, paving, oiling, fencing or acceptable means.
Emission of particulate matter from such sources in excess of
the weight limitation herein specified shall be prohibited.
5. Odors. No odor shall be emitted by any use permitted in this
district in such quantities as to be readily detectable by an average
observer at any point on the boundary line of the premises or
beyond.
6. Noxious gases. Processes and operations of permitted uses capable
of dispersing gases or toxic particulates into the atmosphere must
be hooded or otherwise suitably enclosed. The emission of such
toxic gases or particulate matter shall be from a stack.
7. Glare and heat. Operation producing intense light and heat shall be
performed within an enclosed building and not be visible beyond
any lot line bounding the property whereon the use is conducted.
8. Vibration. Any operation or activity which shall cause at any time
and at any point beyond the boundaries of the lot, earth-borne
vibrations, other than background vibrations produced by some
source not under control of this Chapter, such as the operations of
motor vehicles or other transportation facilities, in excess of the
limits set forth in Column I of the table below shall be prohibited. In
addition, any operation or activity which shall cause at any time
and at any point in a residence district earth-borne vibrations in
excess of the limits set forth in Column II of the table below shall be
prohibited. Vibration shall be expressed as displacement in inches
and shall be measured with a three (3) component measuring
system approved by the Building Commissioner.
Frequency (cycles per
second)
I
Displacement
(inches)
II
Displacement
(inches)
0 to 10 .0008 .0004
10 to 20 .0005 .0002
Section
400.240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.240
100:835
Section 400.250. "I-2" Heavy Industrial District.389 [R.O. 2009
§156.036; CC 1981 §30-38; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No.
82-29, 4-21-1982; Ord. No. 90-163, 6-21-1990; Ord. No. 90-188,
7-18-1990; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 00-78, 4-5-2000;
Ord. No. 01-156, 7-19-2001; Ord. No. 04-176, 8-4-2004; Ord. No.
09-227, 12-10-2009; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010; Ord. No.
11-106 §6, 6-9-2011; Ord. No. 13-116 §2, 6-20-2013]
Frequency (cycles per
second)
I
Displacement
(inches)
II
Displacement
(inches)
20 to 30 .0002 .0001
30 to 40 .0002 .0001
40 to over .0001 .0001
Note: Impact vibrations which are discrete pulses that do not
exceed one hundred (100) impulses per minute shall be permitted
twice the displacements shown above in Columns I and II.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the "I-2" Heavy Industrial District is to provide
for a wide variety of manufacturing, fabricating, processing, wholesale
distributing and warehousing uses appropriately located for access by
major thoroughfares or railroads, to restrict or prohibit those industries
which have characteristics likely to produce serious adverse effects
within or beyond the limits of the district. Certain potentially hazardous
industries are permitted only after public hearings and review to assure
protection of the public interest and surrounding property and persons.
Commercial uses and open storage of materials are permitted, but new
residential development is excluded.
B. Permitted Uses. A building or land in the "I-2" district shall be used only
for the following purposes. Where any doubt exists as to the nature of a
proposed use, product or process, the proposal shall be considered as a
potentially hazardous use and referred to the Board of Adjustment for
decision after a public hearing. [Ord. No. 18-283, 12-18-2018]
1. Any permitted use in the "I-1" Light Industrial District.
2. Blacksmith shops.
3. Cleaning and dyeing of garments, hats, carpets and rugs.
4. Coal and wood yards, coke storage and sales.
5. Exterminating establishment.
389. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
Section
400.240
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.250
100:836
6. Fertilizer storage in bags or bulk storage of liquid or dry fertilizer
in tanks or in a completely enclosed building, but not manufacture
or processing.
7. Flour, grain and feed storage, blending and packaging, but not
milling.
8. Manufacture or assembly of the following products:
a. Abrasive wheels or stones, abrasive paper, cloth and related
products.
b. Agricultural or farm implements.
c. Aircraft and aircraft parts.
d. Foundry products.
e. Excelsior, wood fiber.
f. Ice manufacture.
g. Insecticides, fungicides, disinfectants and related industrial
and household chemical elements (blending only).
h. Leather goods, not including tanning operations.
i. Monuments and architectural stone.
j. Pottery and figurines or similar ceramic products and kilns
fired by electricity or gas only.
k. Pulp goods, pressed or molded, including paper mache
products, paper products, but not manufacture of paper.
l. Rubber products and rubber and synthetic fabrics, excluding
all rubber and synthetic processing.
m. Structural iron and steel fabrication.
n. Wall board and plaster, building insulation and composition
flooring.
o. Wire rope and cable.
p. Wood chip and fiberboard.
9. Indoor and outdoor storage and sales of building materials
(cement, lime in bags or containers, sand, gravel, stone, lumber,
structural or reinforcing steel, pipe and the like), but not
manufacture or steel fabricating or junk storage.
10. Laundries, linen service.
11. Plating, electrolytic process.
Section
400.250
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.250
100:837
12. Poultry packing, and slaughtering (wholesale).
13. Railroad switching yard, primarily for railroad service in the
district, team tracks and spur tracks.
14. Sawmill, including cooperage stock mill, stationery.
15. Soap products, but not soap manufacture.
16. Stone products, sand and gravel, but not crushing or grinding.
C. Conditional Uses. The following uses or the manufacture,
compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of products not
specifically listed above or below, but which may have accompanying
hazards such as fire, explosion, noise, vibration, dust or the emission of
smoke, odor, toxic gases or other pollutants, may be located in the "I-2"
Heavy Industrial District, if not in conflict with any State or County law
or ordinance, only after the location and nature of such use shall have
been approved by the City Council following recommendation by the
Planning and Zoning Commission after public hearing as provided in
Section 400.980 et seq. The Commission and Council shall review the
plans and statements and shall not permit such buildings, structures or
uses until there has been shown that the public health, safety, morals
and general welfare will be properly protected and that necessary
safeguards will be provided for the protection of streams or other water
areas or surrounding property and persons. The Commission and
Council, in reviewing the plans and statements, shall consult with other
agencies created for the promotion of public health and safety and shall
pay particular attention to protection of the City and its neighbors from
the harmful effects of air or water pollution of any type. [Ord. No.
18-283, 12-18-2018]
1. Any conditional use permitted in the "I-1" zoning district.
2. Airports, landing strips and heliports.
3. Ammunition and explosives storage.
4. Asphalt or asphalt products or central asphalt mixing or batching.
5. Concrete products or central mixing and proportioning plant and
cement manufacture.
6. Distillery (alcoholic), breweries and makers of alcoholic spirits
(non-industrial).
7. Docks, wharves and piers, except for pleasure craft, marine
warehouses or storage area, freight storage shed, freight handling
equipment.
8. Dredging base, marine construction yard, marine salvage base, but
not junk unrelated to marine salvage.
Section
400.250
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.250
100:838
9. Engine testing (internal combustion engines), but not jet engines or
rockets.
10. Flour, feed and grain milling.
11. Galvanizing or plating (hot dip).
12. Hides and raw fur, curing, tanning, dressing, dyeing and storage.
13. Incinerators.
14. Junkyards, subject to Section 400.450.
15. Leather tanning and curing.
16. Manufacture of the following products:
a. Acetylene generation and storage.
b. Adhesives, glue or sizing.
c. Alcohol, industrial.
d. Asbestos products.
e. Candles, including wax or tallow manufacture.
f. Film, photographic.
g. Glass and glass products.
h. Insecticides, fungicides, disinfectants or related industrial or
household chemical products.
i. Linoleum and other hard-surface floor coverings, except wood.
j. Match manufacture.
k. Oils, shortening and fats (edible) manufacture and storage.
l. Paint, oil, shellac, turpentine or varnish.
m. Starch manufacture.
17. Materials recovery facility.
18. Meat or fish products, including slaughtering of animals or poultry
or preparation of fish for packing.
19. Petroleum storage.
20. Plastic material and synthetic resins, processing only.
21. Railroad yards.
22. Stockyard.
23. Wood preserving treatment facility.
Section
400.250
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.250
100:839
24. Quarry with rock crushing operation.
25. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all new uses and to
existing uses where a substantial change or expansion to the
layout, operation or configuration is proposed.
D. (Reserved)
E. Design Standards. (See also Sections 400.530 et seq. for additional
regulations.) The following design standards are required in the "I-2"
district:
1. Minimum lot area: 1 acre.
2. Minimum lot width at the building line: 150 feet.
3. Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
4. Maximum height of building: 3 stories or 45 feet.
"GPRS" bonus:
All tiers: 4 stories or 60 feet, except when adjoining a residential
zoning district.
5. Minimum setback requirements measured from building line to
property line:
a. No part of any building, accessory structure or sign shall be
located closer than one hundred (100) feet to any residential
district boundary.
b. The front yard setback is thirty-five (35) feet, except fifty (50)
feet across street from residential district.
"GPRS" bonus:
Tiers 1 and 2: 30 feet.
Tier 3: 25 feet, except 50 feet across street from residential
district.
c. The side yard setback is zero (0) feet, except ten (10) feet
adjoining any commercial zoning district and fifty (50) feet
adjoining any residential district. [Ord. No. 18-258,
11-20-2018]
"GPRS" bonus:
All tiers: 0 feet, except 10 feet adjoining any commercial
zoning district and 50 feet adjoining any residential district.
[Ord. No. 18-258, 11-20-2018]
d. The rear yard setback is zero (0) feet, except thirty (30) feet
adjoining any commercial zoning district and fifty (50) feet
Section
400.250
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.250
100:840
adjoining any residential district. [Ord. No. 18-258,
11-20-2018]
"GPRS" bonus:
All tiers: 0 feet, except 25 feet adjoining any commercial
zoning district and 50 feet adjoining any residential district.
[Ord. No. 18-258, 11-20-2018]
6. Maximum lot coverage: None.
7. Floor area in square feet: No requirement.
8. Public utilities. Requirements are contained in Section 400.610.
9. Off-street parking and loading.
a. No parking shall be permitted in required front yard.
b. Additional off-street parking and loading requirements are
contained in Sections 400.660 et seq.
10. Protective screening.
a. All exterior solid waste containers and container racks or
stands shall be screened from public view by an enclosure
which complies with the requirements of Section 400.965
(B)(4).
b. Where an "I-2" zoning district directly adjoins a residential
zoning district or is located across a public street or alley from
a residential zoning district, a landscaped greenbelt at least
fifty (50) feet in width shall be provided and maintained along
the appropriate property line by the users of the "I-2" property.
The open area shall be planted with trees and shrubs. A
minimum of one (1) tree shall be planted per thirty (30) lineal
feet or fraction thereof for any frontage along a residential
zoning district. Required trees shall be at least two and onehalf
(2½) inch caliper. Trees existing within any required
greenbelt at the time of installation and which are larger than
two and one-half (2½) inch caliper shall be preserved and will
count toward the minimum landscaping requirements. Newly
planted species shall be hardy for the specified area. All
landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition
and be neat and orderly in appearance. The fifty (50) foot
greenbelt shall not be used for off-street parking facilities or
for loading spaces. Along the inner side (the industrial
property side) of the greenbelt, except when the greenbelt
adjoins a public street, there shall be provided either:
(1) A continuous visual screen with a minimum height of six
(6) feet, such screen consisting of a compact evergreen
hedge or foliage screening; or
Section
400.250
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.250
100:841
Section 400.270. "CBD" Central Business District. [R.O. 2009
§156.038; CC 1981 §30-30(b); Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No.
98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 00-78, 4-5-2000; Ord. No. 01-156,
7-19-2001; Ord. No. 04-176, 8-4-2004; Ord. No. 06-320, 11-29-2006;
Ord. No. 09-64, 4-17-2009; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
(2) An ornamental masonry wall or wood fence at least six (6)
feet in height above grade, in which case one (1) shrub
shall be planted in the greenbelt per ten (10) lineal feet or
fraction thereof. Required shrubs shall be a minimum of
eighteen (18) inches in height at time of initial planting.
Shrubs may be clustered rather than evenly placed.
11. Landscaping. The required front yard shall be planted with trees or
shrubs.
F. Industrial Performance Standards. The same requirements as in
Section 400.240(E).
A. Purpose. The purpose of the "CBD" Central Business District is to
provide opportunity for a broad spectrum of uses designed to
encourage development of the downtown area as a commercial and
office center with appropriate loosening of normal restrictions. The
regulations of the Central Business District are intended to allow
greater design flexibility than is permitted by the other district
regulations for tracts of land in the Central Business District, where the
planned development of such tract would better utilize the character of
the site and enhance the appearance and economic vitality of the
downtown area.
B. Permitted Uses. A building or land in the Central Business District shall
be used only for the following purposes:
1. Any permitted use in the "C-1" or "C-2" zoning districts;
2. Two (2) dwelling units located above the first (1st) floor; or
3. Single-family dwellings, except that in the Historic Downtown
District a single-family dwelling shall not be located on the first
(1st) floor of a building.
C. Conditional Uses. The following uses may be permitted as conditional
uses if approved by the City Council following recommendation by the
Planning and Zoning Commission:
1. Any conditional use in the "C-1" or "C-2" zoning districts, except
vehicle sales and firearm ranges are prohibited; and
2. Apartment buildings, residential condominiums, town houses, row
houses and other types of multiple-family dwellings, except that in
the Historic Downtown District these residential uses shall be
permitted only above the first (1st) floor. The density of multi-family
Section
400.250
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.270
100:842
dwellings shall not exceed twenty-four (24) dwelling units per acre
(DU/A). The following are permitted accessory uses for
developments of multiple-family dwellings: [Ord. No. 15-185 §1,
8-18-2015]
a. A laundry room for use by occupants;
b. Club and recreational facilities for use by occupants;
c. Coin-operated vending machines for candy, tobacco, ice, soft
drinks and sundries located inside a building for use by
occupants; and
d. An office located in a main building for administration of a
development consisting of ten (10) or more dwelling units.
D. Design Standards.
1. Minimum lot area: None.
2. Minimum lot width: None.
3. Minimum lot depth: None.
4. Minimum setback requirements measured from the building line to
the property line:
a. Front yard: None, except 15 feet when across a street from a
residential zoning district.
b. Side yard: None, except 15 feet when adjoining a residential
zoning district.
c. Rear yard: None, except 15 feet when adjoining a residential
zoning district.
5. Minimum floor area in square feet: None.
E. Maximum Height. Maximum height of buildings shall be three (3)
stories or forty-five (45) feet. However, the height limitations may be
varied upon review by the Planning and Zoning Commission and
approval by the City Council.
F. Maximum Lot Coverage. Eighty percent (80%) of the gross lot area.
G. Protective Screening.
1. All exterior solid waste containers and container racks or stands
shall be screened from public view by an enclosure which complies
with the requirements of Section 400.965(B)(4).
2. Where a "CBD" zoning district directly adjoins a residential zoning
district or is located across a public street or alley from a
residential zoning district, a landscaped greenbelt at least fifteen
(15) feet in width shall be provided and maintained along the
Section
400.270
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.270
100:843
Section 400.280. "CRD" Central Residential District. [R.O. 2009
§156.039; CC 1981 §30-39(c); Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No.
98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 99-53, 2-4-1999; Ord. No. 99-205,
6-3-1999; Ord. No. 01-111, 6-8-2001; Ord. No. 02-229, 9-20-2002;
Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
appropriate property line by the users of the "CBD" property. The
open area shall be planted with trees and shrubs. A minimum of
one (1) tree shall be planted per thirty (30) lineal feet or fraction
thereof for any frontage along a residential zoning district.
Required trees shall be at least two and one-half (2½) inch caliper.
Trees existing within any required greenbelt at the time of
installation and which are larger than two and one-half (2½) inch
caliper shall be preserved and will count toward the minimum
landscaping requirements. Newly planted species shall be hardy
for the specified area. All landscaping shall be maintained in a
healthy growing condition and be neat and orderly in appearance.
The fifteen (15) foot greenbelt shall not be used for off-street
parking facilities or for loading spaces. Along the inner side (the
commercial property side) of the greenbelt, except when the
greenbelt adjoins a public street, there shall be provided either:
a. A continuous visual screen with a minimum height of six (6)
feet, such screen consisting of a compact evergreen hedge or
foliage screening; or
b. An ornamental masonry wall or wood fence at least six (6) feet
in height above grade, in which case one (1) shrub shall be
planted in the greenbelt per ten (10) lineal feet or fraction
thereof. Required shrubs shall be a minimum of eighteen (18)
inches in height at time of initial planting. Shrubs may be
clustered rather than evenly spaced.
H. Off-Street Parking And Loading. The following off-street parking and
loading regulations shall apply to the "CBD":
1. For all existing buildings, the off-street parking and loading
requirements are waived for approved uses.
2. All new construction shall provide one-half (½) of the parking and
loading requirements contained in Sections 400.660 et seq.
3. All new construction that exceeds the maximum height
requirements shall provide one hundred percent (100%) of the
parking and loading requirements contained in Sections 400.660 et
seq.
I. Additional Requirements. Additional requirements are contained in
Sections 400.350 et seq.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the "CRD" Central Residential District is to
provide opportunity for residential uses in close proximity to the
Section
400.270
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.280
100:844
Central Business District. The regulations of Central Residential
District are intended to allow greater flexibility in design and uses than
would normally be permitted by other residential districts. The primary
objective of the district is to preserve the appearance and economic
vitality of the entire area while at the same time maintaining the initial
character of the original residential uses of the area.
B. Permitted Uses.
1. "CRD-I". A building or land shall be used only for the following
purposes. Any use, accessory use or conditional use permitted in
the "R1-C", "R1-D" or "R1-E" zoning districts.
2. "CRD-II". A building or land shall be used only for the following
purposes. Any use, accessory use or conditional use permitted in
the "R-1C", "R-1D", "R-1E" or "R-2" zoning districts.
C. Design Standards.
1. Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet.
2. Minimum floor area: 850 square feet per principal building.
3. Minimum lot width: None.
4. Minimum lot depth: None.
5. Minimum front yard: 20 feet.
Front yard area, except for driveway access, shall be used for lawn
and landscaping only.
6. Minimum side yard: 5 feet.
7. Minimum rear yard: 10 feet.
8. Maximum height:
a. "CRD-I": 3 stories or 45 feet.
b. "CRD-II": 2½ stories or 35 feet.
9. Minimum floor area per dwelling unit in the "CRD-II": 700 square
feet.
D. Maximum Building Coverage.
1. "CRD-I". The maximum building coverage of the principal buildings
shall be not more than seventy percent (70%) of the gross lot area.
Usable yard area shall be not less than five percent (5%) of the net
lot area.
2. "CRD-II". There shall be only one (1) principal building per lot
within the "CRD" II District. The maximum building coverage of the
principal building shall be not more than seventy percent (70%) of
Section
400.280
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.280
100:845
Section 400.290. "FHCD" Frenchtown Historic Commercial District.
[R.O. 2009 §156.040; Ord. No. 05-21, 1-14-2005; Ord. No. 08-217,
10-13-2008; Ord. No. 09-189, 10-29-2009; Ord. No. 10-25 §1,
2-19-2010; Ord. No. 10-74 §1, 4-22-2010; Ord. No. 10-99 §1,
5-20-2010; Ord. No. 11-26 §5, 2-4-2011; Ord. No. 12-165 §3,
9-28-2012]
the gross lot area. Usable lot area shall be not less than five percent
(5%) of the net lot area.
E. Off-Street Parking. The off-street parking spaces shall be provided for
as outlined in Sections 400.660 et seq.
F. Protective Screening. Except for lots with one (1) single-family or one
(1) two-family dwelling, all exterior solid waste containers and
container racks or stands shall be screened from public view by an
enclosure which complies with the requirements of Section
400.965(B)(4).
A. Purpose. The purpose of the "FHCD" Frenchtown Historic Commercial
District is to provide for a low intensity restricted mixture of retail
shopping, personal service, residential and lodging uses on a
comparatively small scale; and to preserve historic areas of St. Charles,
for future generations and for historic area residents, while preserving
the integrity of historic and cultural activities and events; but
discourages events or activities that may misuse historic areas. It is
intended to foster and complement the nearby residential
neighborhoods.
B. Permitted Uses. A building or land in the "FHCD" shall be used only for
the following purposes: [Ord. No. 13-231, 11-19-2013; Ord. No.
19-133, 6-11-2019]
1. Accounting and auditing agencies.
2. Antique shops.
3. Art galleries and museums.
4. Bakeries or bake shops.
5. Banks, savings and loan associations, but not drive-in or drive-thru
facilities except as otherwise provided.
6. Barbershops and beauty parlors.
7. Bed and breakfast establishments. [Ord. No. 19-191, 9-17-2019]
8. Bicycle sales, rental and repair shops.
9. Business, professional and technical schools and universities.
10. Business, professional or medical offices.
Section
400.280
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.290
100:846
11. Custom dressmaking or tailoring shops.
12. Day spas and massage establishments employing licensed massage
technicians in the practice of massage as that term is defined in
Section 660.010. All persons practicing massage shall be licensed
pursuant to Chapter 660.
13. Delicatessen businesses.
14. Enclosed recreational uses including tennis, handball or
paddleball, swimming, skating, gymnasium or health club, bowling
and similar recreational uses.
15. Hobby shops or craft shops.
16. Insurance agencies and services.
17. Investment agencies and services.
18. Microbreweries. A business that brews beer and sells the brewed
beer on the premises with an annual minimum capacity of one
hundred (100) barrels of beer brewed and an annual maximum
capacity of ten thousand (10,000) barrels of beer brewed and has a
federally approved brewer's notice.
19. Patio and garden shops, retail greenhouses.
20. Pet shops and pet grooming shops, provided that any work rooms,
cages, pens or kennels be maintained within a completely enclosed
soundproof building and that such shop or parlor be operated in
such a way as to produce no objectionable noises or odors outside
its walls.
21. Printing, publishing and engraving.
22. Public and private libraries.
23. Public or government offices.
24. Public parks and open space.
25. Real estate agencies and services.
26. Restaurants, but not drive-through or drive-in except as otherwise
provided.
27. Shops for the sale, service or repair of home appliances, shoes,
jewelry, stereos, televisions and radios.
28. Single-family dwellings, but residential uses shall be prohibited on
the first floor of an existing commercial structure.
29. Specialty shops, boutiques, coffee shops and tea rooms.
Section
400.290
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.290
100:847
30. Stores or shops for the conduct of retail business including the sale
of books, cards, carpets, clothing, drugs, fabrics, flowers, food,
furniture, garden supplies, gifts, groceries, hardware, home
appliances, jewelry, musical instruments and records, office
supplies and merchandise, optics, paint, shoes, sporting goods,
stationery, stereos, televisions and radio, tobacco and similar stores
and shops.
31. Studios for artists, photographers, teachers, sculptors, musicians
or graphic designers.
32. Temples and meeting facilities for fraternal, religious, Masonic and
philanthropic clubs and organizations.
33. Title companies.
34. Travel bureaus and ticket offices.
35. Veterinary office, clinic and/or hospital.
36. Wineries.
37. All other types of indoor retail sales uses not listed may otherwise
be permitted through a conditional use.
38. Placement of a telecommunication antenna on an existing
telecommunication tower (co-location) where no expansion or
enlargement of the existing tower enclosure is required.
C. Conditional Uses. The purpose of the conditional use process is to allow
the establishment of those uses which have some special impact or
uniqueness such that their effect on the surrounding environment
cannot be determined in advance of the use being proposed for a
particular location. The conditional use process provides the City with
the means to review the location, design, configuration of uses and
potential impacts and compatibility with the surrounding area. In
approving the conditional use, the Planning and Zoning Commission
may recommend and the City Council may impose conditions or
safeguards as are deemed necessary to protect the surrounding
properties and public generally. The following uses may be permitted in
the "FHCD" as a conditional use, if approved by the City Council
following recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission:
[Ord. No. 13-231, 11-19-2013; Ord. No. 19-133, 6-11-2019]
1. Auditorium, lecture hall, meeting facility or conference center.
2. Direct mail advertising service business.
3. Guest house.
4. Hotels, motels and inns.
5. In-vehicle sales or service.
Section
400.290
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.290
100:848
Description: In-vehicle sales and service land uses include all land
uses which perform sales or services to persons in vehicles or to
vehicles which may be occupied at the time of such activity. Such
land uses often have traffic volumes which exhibit their highest
levels concurrent with peak traffic flows on adjacent streets.
Examples of such land uses include drive-in, drive-up and drivethrough
facilities, vehicular fuel stations and all forms of car
washes.
a. Regulations for in-vehicle sales or service.
(1) Clearly marked pedestrian crosswalks shall be provided
for each walk-in customer access to the facility adjacent to
the drive-through lane(s).
(2) The drive-through facility shall be designed so as not to
impede or impair vehicular and pedestrian traffic
movement or exacerbate the potential for pedestrian/
vehicular conflicts.
(3) In no instance shall a drive-though facility be permitted to
operate which endangers the public safety, even if such
land use has been permitted under the provisions of this
Section.
(4) The setback of any overhead canopy or similar structure
shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet from all street rightsof-
way lines, a minimum of twenty (20) feet from all
residentially zoned property lines and shall be a minimum
of five (5) feet away from all other property lines. The total
height of any overhead canopy or similar structure shall
not exceed twenty (20) feet as measured to the highest
part of the structure. The setback requirements may be
recommended for modifications by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and modified by the City Council
where it is found that due to pre-existing circumstances
the provision of the setback will cause an undue burden on
the ability to effectively use the property.
(5) All vehicular areas of the facility shall provide a surface
paved with concrete or bituminous material which is
designed to meet the requirements of a minimum four (4)
ton axle load.
(6) Facility shall provide a minimum six (6) foot high solid,
maintenance-free fence with a combination of shrubs
(eighteen (18) inches to twenty-four (24) inches tall or
three (3) feet to four (4) feet wide at the time of planting),
understory trees (six (6) feet to eight (8) feet tall at the
time of planting) and canopy trees (two and one-half (2½)
inches to three (3) inches caliper at the time of planting) as
recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission
Section
400.290
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.290
100:849
and approved by the City Council along all borders of the
property directly abutting a residentially zoned property.
These requirements may be recommended for
modification by the Planning and Zoning Commission and
modified by the City Council where it is found that due
to pre-existing circumstances the provision of the setback
will cause an undue burden on the ability to effectively use
the property.
(7) Interior curbs shall be used to separate driving area from
exterior fixtures such as fuel pumps, vacuums, menu
boards, canopy supports and landscaped islands. The
curbs shall be a minimum of six (6) inches high and be of a
non-mountable design. No curb protecting an exterior
fixture shall be located closer than twenty-five (25) feet to
any property line. The setback requirements may be
recommended for modification by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and modified by the City Council where it is
found that due to pre-existing circumstances the provision
of the setback will cause an undue burden on the ability to
effectively use the property.
(8) Outdoor storage uses (including the outdoor storage of
vehicles or vehicles for sale) shall be prohibited on the
same property.
6. Laundromats or self-service dry cleaning establishments, laundries
and dry cleaning or pressing pickup stations. No cleaning fluid
considered hazardous, in the judgment of the Fire Chief, shall be
used.
7. Live performance or motion picture theater.
8. Parking lots or garages not accessory to a principal structure and
approved through a site plan or parking lots or garages for public
use for compensation.
9. Plumbing, heating and air-conditioning shop, upholstering shop
(not involving furniture manufacture), appliance repairs and
general service and repair establishments, similar in character to
those listed in this item. No outside storage of material is
permitted.
10. Research laboratories and facilities.
11. Secondhand sales establishments.
12. Short-term rental of motorized vehicles that do not require State
registration of a State driver's license to operate. Examples of such
vehicles are golf carts, scooters and ATVs. For purposes of this
conditional use, "short-term rental" shall be defined as seven (7)
days or less.
Section
400.290
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.290
100:850
13. Small manufacturing establishments which occupy no more than
ten thousand (10,000) square feet of building space. No outdoor
storage shall be permitted and no offensive noise, vibration, smoke,
dust, odors, heat or glare shall be produced.
14. Street Performers. This conditional use shall be defined as persons
who entertain or perform outdoors on public or private property,
usually though not necessarily for donations. Examples of this use
are face painters, caricature artists, musicians, magicians and
haunted house tours. Performances may not interfere with
vehicular traffic or with pedestrian traffic on public sidewalks.
Street performers may not use any type of electronic equipment
such as microphones, amplifiers or recorded music. Street
performers may be further limited by conditions attached to the
conditional use permit.
15. Telecommunication towers, antennas attached to structures, or
placement of a telecommunication antenna on an existing tower
(co-location) where an expansion or enlargement of the existing
tower enclosure is required.
16. Two-family and multi-family residential.
17. Warming and cooling centers when accessory to a church or other
place of worship. Occupancy limits for a warming and cooling
center shall be determined by the Building Code Official and Fire
Marshal.
D. Design Standards.
1. Minimum lot area: Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square
feet.
2. Minimum lot width at the building line: None.
3. Minimum lot depth: None.
4. Maximum height of building: Three (3) stories or forty-five (45)
feet.
5. Minimum setback requirements measured from the building line to
the property line:
a. Front yard setback:
(1) Minimum: Zero (0) feet.
(2) Maximum: Ten (10) feet.
b. Side yard setback: None, except ten (10) feet when abutting a
residential district.
c. Rear yard setback: None, except twenty (20) feet when
abutting a residential district.
Section
400.290
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.290
100:851
6. Maximum floor area: None.
7. Public utilities. Requirements are contained in Section 400.610.
8. Off-street parking and loading.
a. Buildings existing before May 20, 2010 situated on lots less
than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area, the off-street
parking and loading requirements are waived for approved
uses.
b. For all new construction after May 20, 2010 on lots less than
ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area shall provide onehalf
(½) of the parking and loading requirements contained in
Sections 400.660 et seq.
c. Buildings existing before May 20, 2010 and new construction
on lots larger than ten thousand (10,000) square feet shall
provide parking and loading in accordance with the
requirements contained in Sections 400.660 et seq.
9. Metal clad buildings are prohibited.
10. Protective screening.
a. All refuse and waste removal storage areas shall be screened
with a minimum six (6) foot high solid screen walls of masonry
construction to complement the primary structure as approved
by the Historic Landmarks Preservation and Architectural
Review Board. Gates shall be composed of metal or solid vinyl
in a complementary color to the masonry as approved by the
HLPARB and in no case shall slatted, chain-link fencing be
used. Any other materials shall be approved by the Historic
Landmarks Preservation and Architectural Review Board.
Solid waste container enclosures shall have a concrete floor.
b. Where a "FHCD" directly adjoins a residential zoning district
or is located across a public street or alley from a residential
zoning district, a landscaped greenbelt at least fifteen (15) feet
in width shall be provided and maintained along the
appropriate property line by the users of the "FHCD" property.
The open area shall be planted with trees and shrubs. A
minimum of one (1) tree shall be planted per lineal foot or
fraction thereof for any frontage along a residential zoning
district. Required trees shall be at least two and one-half (2½)
inch caliper. Trees existing within any required greenbelt at
the time of installation and which are larger than two and onehalf
(2½) inch caliper shall be preserved and will count toward
the minimum landscaping requirements. Newly planted
species shall be hardy for the specified area. All landscaping
shall be maintained in healthy growing condition and be neat
and orderly in appearance. The fifteen (15) foot greenbelt shall
Section
400.290
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.290
100:852
not be used for off-street parking facilities or for loading space.
Along the inner side (the commercial property side) of the
greenbelt, except when the greenbelt adjoins a public street,
there shall be provided either:
(1) A continuous visual screen with a minimum height of six
(6) feet, such screen consisting of a compact evergreen
hedge or foliage screening; or
(2) An ornamental masonry wall or solid maintenance-free
fence at least six (6) feet in height above grade, in which
case one (1) shrub shall be planted in the greenbelt per ten
(10) lineal feet or fraction thereof. Required shrubs shall
be a minimum of eighteen (18) inches in height at time of
initial planting. Shrubs may be clustered rather than
evenly spaced.
11. Any of the above design standards may be modified through
approval of a conditional use.
12. Accessory Buildings. [Ord. No. 17-151 § 3, 7-28-2017]
a. Residential uses within the district shall reference Section
400.530.
b. Non-Residential Uses shall comply with Design Standards of
this district.
Section
400.290
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.290
100:853

DIVISION 2
"SD" Superimposed District Regulations
Section 400.300. "SD" Superimposed Districts—Application. [R.O.
2009 §156.063; CC 1981 §30-39(a); Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord.
No. 98-209, 5-15-1998]
To enable the "superimposed district" to operate in harmony with the plan
for land use and population density embodied in this Chapter, the "HP"
Historic Preservation District, the "RPPD" Residential Parking Permit
District and the "EHP" Extended Historic Preservation District, are created
as special districts to be superimposed on the other districts contained in
this Chapter or amendments hereto and are to be so designated by the City
Council and depicted by a special symbol for their boundaries on the Zoning
District Map. If there is a conflict between regulations of an underlying
district and a superimposed district, the regulations of the superimposed
district shall prevail.
Section 400.310. "RPPD" Residential Permit Parking District.390
[R.O. 2009 §156.064; CC 1981 §30-30(f); Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977;
Ord. No. 80-47, 4-9-1980; Ord. No. 97-311, 9-18-1997; Ord. No.
98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 05-114, 4-26-2005; Ord. No. 06-329,
12-14-2006; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007; Ord. No. 10-244 §1,
11-18-2010; Ord. No. 12-125 §1, 7-25-2012; Ord. No. 16-161 §1,
8-16-2016]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this district is to reduce the hazardous traffic
conditions resulting from the use of streets within residentially zoned
districts for parking of vehicles by persons using adjoining multifamily
or non-residentially zoned districts. The regulations of the "RPPD"
Superimposed District are intended to protect these districts from
polluted air, excessive noise, trash and refuse caused by the entry of
such vehicles; to protect the residents of these districts from
unreasonable burden in gaining access to their residences; to preserve
the residential character; to promote efficiency of access in the
answering of emergency calls by the Fire and Police Departments; to
promote efficiency in the maintenance of these streets in a clean and
safe condition; to preserve the value of the residential property; to
preserve the safety of children and other pedestrians and traffic safety;
and to maintain the peace, good order, comfort, convenience and
welfare of the residents.
B. Initiation Of A Request For "RPPD" Designation.
1. Any member of the City Council or the Mayor may initiate a request
through the Mayor for "RPPD" designation for an area of the City. A
"RPPD" area must contain a minimum of five (5) adjacent
properties or have a lineal distance of three hundred (300) feet to
be eligible.
390. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
Section
400.300
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.310
100:855
2. Each street or street segment which is proposed for residential
permit parking will be evaluated using the following methodology:
a. Seven (7) days prior to the evaluation, all residents within the
area to be evaluated will be notified by the Department of
Community Development that the City is going to conduct an
on-street parking evaluation. Area residents will be asked to
place a card, provided by the City, in the rear window of any
vehicle they intend to park on the street in the area in question
to evaluate the impact of non-resident on-street parking in the
area.
b. The evaluation will include a determination of the number of
on-street spaces occupied during at least two (2) days when
the greatest number of parked vehicles is anticipated. The
effects of turnover in vehicles parked on the street will also be
analyzed.
c. The number of on-street spaces are calculated at the rate of
twenty-two (22) feet of lineal curb length with any fractional
number rounded to the lowest number.
C. Design Criteria. To be eligible for the "RPPD" overlay, the study area
must find at least fifty percent (50%) of the parking spaces must not
turn over within a two-hour period and at least fifty percent (50%) of
the parking spaces must be filled and at least fifty percent (50%) of the
spaces must be occupied by non-resident vehicles. A proposed district
with boundaries within one thousand (1,000) feet of a property line of a
learning institution where any portion of the student population is of
driving age shall not be subject to the design criteria.
D. Overlay Designation. Upon completion of the analysis and a finding that
a "RPPD" meets the design criteria, staff shall notice and advertise for
rezoning the area in question using the procedures outlined in Section
400.990, except as set forth in Subsection (D)(1) below:
1. Completion of analysis and a finding of meeting design criteria
shall not be required for a proposed district with boundaries within
one thousand (1,000) feet of a property line of a learning institution
where any portion of the student population is of driving age, a
proposed district designed to reduce criminal activity or to reduce
congestion from street or utility construction. These proposed
districts shall only be subject to a public hearing before the City
Council prior to the passage of an ordinance to create the district.
A district created to reduce criminal activity or to reduce
congestion from street or utility construction shall terminate within
one (1) year of its establishment or completion of construction, as
the case may be, but may be extended by the City Council if the
conditions prompting the designation have not been resolved or the
construction is not completed.
Section
400.310
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.310
100:856
E. Parking Permits Notification. Upon passage of an ordinance by City
Council designating an area as a "RPPD," notification will be sent to
every address within the eligible area informing them that they are in a
permit parking area and must obtain a parking permit sticker from the
Department of Community Development. Residents must furnish proof
in the form of vehicle registration for each vehicle for which they want a
sticker. This notification will also include information concerning the
availability of temporary visitor, guest and business parking permits.
F. Signage. Upon passage of the ordinance, the Department of Public
Works will post signs on the affected streets with "Residential Permit
Parking Only" and the days and hours permits are in effect or required.
G. Eligibility For Permits.
1. To residents of the affected areas, one (1) permit for each vehicle
registered to that address.
2. For visitors of any residents in the affected area, residents may
obtain visitor passes to issue to their visitors.
3. One-day permits for other uses consistent with the residential
character of the district may be obtained by residents.
4. In applying for a "RPPD" permit, the applicant must apply to the
Department of Community Development who will verify that the
address is within the "RPPD" overlay. Upon verification by the
Department of Community Development, the applicant will then be
able to purchase the permit from the City Collector.
H. Proof Of Eligibility.
1. Each resident is entitled to one (1) permit per vehicle.
2. Residents must present to the City Collector proof of ownership
and paid personal property tax receipt with his/her address for
each vehicle for which a permit is desired.
3. If a resident has recently moved into an affected district, they must
show proof of residence and vehicle ownership. A permit shall not
be issued to a new resident until the original resident has
surrendered his/her permit.
4. Residents must obtain parking permits for all visitors.
I. Expiration. Residential and visitor parking permits shall be valid for one
(1) year expiring December 31.
J. Sticker Display. All stickers will be displayed in the lower driver's side
of the rear window, except where the lower driver's side of the rear
window is tinted or obstructed, then the sticker may be affixed to the
non-reflective side of the rear view mirror.
Section
400.310
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.310
100:857
Section 400.320. "WHP" Wellhead Protection District. [R.O. 2009
§156.065; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 04-176, 8-4-2004;
Ord. No. 10-26 §1, 2-19-2010; Ord. No. 13-116 §3, 6-20-2013]
K. Non-Residence. Whenever a person holding a permit no longer meets
the conditions of residency in a permit parking district, he/she shall
surrender the permit(s) issued to him/her to the Department of
Community Development.
L. Enforcement.
1. Enforcement of the residential parking permit district shall be
under the direction of the Chief of Police.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to represent that he/she is
entitled to a permit when he/she is not so entitled; to fail to
surrender a permit to which he/she is not so entitled; to obtain,
give, rent or sell a permit to a person to whom it is not entitled; to
park a vehicle displaying a permit when the holder of the permit is
not so entitled.
M. Violation. Violation of this Section shall be punishable by a minimum
fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
A. Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to safeguard the public health,
safety and general welfare through the protection of ground water used
as a public water supply.
B. Permitted Uses. Any use permitted by right in an underlying zoning
district shall also be permitted by right in an overlying Wellhead
Protection District, the boundaries of which are illustrated on the map
attached to Ordinance 10-26 and on file in the City offices.
C. Conditional Uses.
1. The following uses may be permitted in the "WHP" Wellhead
Protection District as a conditional use if approved by the City
Council following recommendation by the Planning and Zoning
Commission:
a. The production, use, handling or storage of any hazardous
substance or liquid petroleum product.
b. Fleet maintenance repair and service facilities including, but
not limited to, mechanic services, transmission repair services
and oil changing services in conjunction with and
supplementary to a permitted business operation.
c. Construction of new underground storage tanks and
associated pipes in compliance with applicable local, State and
Federal laws and in conjunction with and supplementary to a
permitted business operation.
Section
400.310
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.320
100:858
d. Dry cleaning business.
e. Furniture stripping.
f. Wastewater pretreatment facilities or other impoundments of
waste material.
g. Vehicle service stations and convenience stores which sell
motor fuel.
h. Electrical power generator and substations.
i. Closed-loop heat pump well systems, provided the entire
length of the pipe system is sealed with a thermal grout.
j. Materials recovery facilities for properties located within the
"I-2" Heavy Industrial District only, provided the operations are
conducted within enclosed buildings, do not involve outdoor
processing, and the only material accepted is non-hazardous
construction and demolition waste. Such waste is limited to
wood, drywall, masonry, concrete, metal, plastic, cardboard,
paper, roofing, and asphalt products.
2. In order to receive approval from the City Council, each facility
which handles or uses regulated substances must fulfill the
following requirements:
a. Provide for the installation and maintenance of devices for
secondary containment in case of inadvertent discharge from
primary containers. Ensure the proper storage of regulated
substances to insure the integrity and proper functionality of
impervious floor surface.
b. Submission of an emergency contingency plan for each facility
to respond to unauthorized discharges.
c. Posting of a bond or carrying of insurance which would pay for
the cost of cleanup incurred as the result of inadvertent
discharge.
d. The three (3) previous requirements must be approved in
writing by both the Fire Chief and the Community
Development Director or their designees.
D. Prohibited Uses. The following uses are prohibited in the "WHP"
Wellhead Protection District:
1. The production, use, handling, or storage of any extremely
hazardous substance, greater than the exempted quantity, as
defined in Section 400.050.
2. Landfills, including, but not limited to, industrial and municipal
landfills; open dumps; or any other waste disposal facility.
Section
400.320
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.320
100:859
3. Waste transfer stations and incinerators, except for materials
recovery facilities as defined in Section 400.050 and described in
Subsection (C).
4. Waste disposal wells and underground injection of liquid wastes.
5. Sewage lagoons.
6. Wastewater treatment plants.
7. Cemeteries and graveyards for humans or domesticated animals.
8. Scrap and junkyards.
9. Uncovered salt storage.
10. Private potable water wells into known and potential sources of
contamination, including, but not limited to, those identified on
Exhibit A as filed in the City Clerk's office.
11. Ponds/lakes constructed deeper than fifteen (15) feet, in order to
prohibit excavation below the upper cohesive solids into the
underlying sand and gravel aquifer except at properties where site
specific drilling data indicates deeper excavation, will not contact
the sand and gravel aquifer to a maximum allowable excavation
depth of five (5) feet above the base of the upper cohesive soils.
12. Open-loop heat pump well systems which utilize ground water as
the heat source and sink.
13. Any use not described in Subsections (B) or (C).
E. Exemptions. The following substances are not subject to the provisions
of this Chapter, as long as they are used, handled or stored in a manner
that does not result in contamination of the ground water:
1. Use of any regulated substance in an amount less than the
exempted quantity for that substance.
2. Any substance to the extent it is used for personal, family or
household purposes or is present in the same form and
concentration as a product packaged for distribution and use by the
general public. However, regulated substances used in the
operation of a home business shall not be exempt from the
provisions of these requirements.
3. Any substance to the extent it is used in routine agricultural
operations or is a fertilizer held for sale by a retailer to the user.
4. Any substance to the extent it is used in a research laboratory,
hospital or other medical facility and is under the direct supervision
of a technically qualified individual.
Section
400.320
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.320
100:860
Section 400.330. "SMPD" South Main Preservation District.391 [R.O.
2009 §156.066; CC 1981 §30-39(e); Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord.
No. 94-84, 4-13-1994; Ord. No. 96-45, 2-21-1996; Ord. No. 98-209,
5-15-1998; Ord. No. 02-54, 3-6-2002; Ord. No. 10-244 §1,
11-18-2010; Ord. No. 12-85 §1, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 12-195 §1,
10-18-2012]
5. Regulated substances contained in properly operating sealed units
(transformers, refrigeration units, etc.) which are not operated as
part of routine use and which are in operable condition.
6. Motor fuels, lubricants and coolants which are in use within
operable internal combustion engines and attached fuel tanks.
7. Radioactive materials regulated by the United States Nuclear
Regulatory Commission.
8. Regulated substances in continuous transit through a "WHP"
District.
F. Design Standards. Within the "WHP" District, the design standards of
the district upon which the "WHP" District is superimposed shall apply.
In addition, the following design standards shall be required in a "WHP"
zoning district:
1. Operation of existing underground storage tanks is permitted, as
long as doing so is within compliance with applicable State and
Federal laws.
2. Other design measures as required to receive a conditional use
permit from the City Council.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the South Main Preservation District is to
preserve historic areas, buildings, monuments or other historic features
which contribute or will contribute to the heritage of the City or the
State. The district also provides for the protection of historic areas,
buildings, monuments or features, and their surroundings within a
reasonable distance, from obviously incongruous development or uses
of land. Banquet centers and meeting facilities as a primary use shall
not be permitted in the South Main Preservation District as a permitted
or a conditional use.
B. Permitted Uses. A building or land shall be used only for the following
purposes:
1. Any use or accessory use permitted in the zoning district in which
the premises are situated and upon which the South Main
Preservation District is superimposed, including single-family
dwellings, except as provided in Section 400.330(B)(2). Banquet
centers and meeting facilities as a primary use shall not be
391. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
Section
400.320
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.330
100:861
permitted in the South Main Preservation District as a permitted
use. [Ord. No. 18-285, 12-18-2018]
2. Restaurants, cafes or cafeterias, including restaurants, cafes or
cafeterias where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed
incidental to the sale of food, provided that no alcoholic beverages
may be sold to patrons standing or sitting at a bar, whether or not
such sale is incidental to the sale of food, and the only exception to
this latter proviso is that alcoholic beverages may be sold to
patrons standing or sitting at an exposed bar in a restaurant
microbrewery. Live music is prohibited at these uses unless
approved as a conditional use as set forth in this Section. For
purposes of this Section, the performance of live music shall be
limited to the playing of musical instruments or vocals, both of
which shall not be amplified by any means, electronic or otherwise.
Sunday through Thursday the performance of live music shall stop
at or before 8:00 P.M. when performed on the exterior of the
premises, and shall stop at or before 9:00 P.M. when performed
inside a restaurant, cafe or cafeteria. Friday and Saturday the
performance of live music shall stop at or before 10:00 P.M.,
whether performed on the exterior of the premises or inside a
restaurant, cafe or cafeteria. The times of performance of live
music may be further limited as a condition to a conditional use
permit, if said permit is approved. [Ord. No. 13-231 §1,
11-19-2013; Ord. No. 15-108 §1, 5-19-2015]
a. As used in this Section, the term "restaurant microbrewery"
shall mean a restaurant which meets the following
qualifications:
(1) Brews beer on the premises, and sells the brewed beer on
the premises, with an annual minimum capacity of one
hundred (100) barrels of beer brewed, and an annual
maximum of ten thousand (10,000) barrels of beer brewed.
(2) Has a federally approved "brewer's notice".
(3) Has either fifty-one percent (51%) gross income from nonalcohol
food sales or a minimum of two hundred thousand
dollars ($200,000.00) of gross income per year in nonalcohol
food sales.
(4) Is licensed for Sunday liquor sales.
C. Conditional Uses. The purpose of the conditional use process is to allow
the establishment of a use which has some special impact or uniqueness
such that its effect on the surrounding environment cannot be
determined in advance of the use being proposed for a particular
location. The conditional use process provides the City with the means
to review the location, design, configuration of uses and potential
impacts and compatibility with the surrounding area. In approving the
Section
400.330
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.330
100:862
conditional use, the Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend
and the City Council may impose conditions or safeguards as are
deemed necessary to protect the surrounding properties and public
generally. The following uses may be permitted in the "SMPD" as
a conditional use, if approved by the City Council following
recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission: [Ord. No.
18-285, 12-18-2018]
1. Any conditional use in the zoning district in which the premises are
situated and upon which the South Main Preservation District is
superimposed, except as provided in Section 400.220(B)(2).
Banquet centers and meeting facilities shall only be permitted as a
conditional use secondary to the principal/primary use.
2. The performance of live music in restaurants, cafes or cafeterias.
D. Special Building And Occupancy Permit.
1. No person shall be permitted to build, erect, construct, alter,
destroy or remove buildings or structures, or in any way change the
outward appearance of any building or structure in the South Main
Preservation District without having obtained a certificate of
appropriateness from the Historic Landmarks Preservation and
Architectural Review Board.
2. Evidence of such required approval shall be a certificate of
appropriateness issued by the Historic Landmarks Preservation
and Architectural Review Board. Such certificate shall be a
statement signed by the Chairperson of the Board, stating that the
exterior architectural features of the proposed construction,
reconstruction, alteration, removal or restoration for which
application for approval by the Board has been made as approved
by the Board.
3. No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for
any building or structure within the South Main Preservation
District, unless such applicant shall furnish with his application for
such permit a copy of certificate of appropriateness.
E. Signs. Signs and billboards shall be permitted as required in Section
400.1830. All signs shall be reviewed and approved by the Historic
Landmarks Preservation and Architectural Review Board in accordance
with the standards and purposes of the South Main Preservation
District.
F. Lighting. All outdoor, temporary, decorative lighting must obtain a
certificate of appropriateness from the Historic Landmarks
Preservation and Architectural Review Board prior to installation,
except from November fifteenth (15th) through January fifteenth
(15th), at which time only white non-twinkling, non-chasing miniature
lights will be allowed.
Section
400.330
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.340
100:863
Section 400.340. "EHP" Extended Historic Preservation District.392
[R.O. 2009 §156.067; CC 1981 §30-39(g); Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977;
Ord. No. 93-291, 12-22-1993; Ord. No. 96-4, 1-16-1996; Ord. No.
97-52, 1-31-1997; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 01-176,
8-3-2001; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
Section 400.350. "HDD" Historic Downtown District.393 [R.O. 2009
§156.068; CC 1981 §30-39(h); Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No.
80-47, 4-9-1980; Ord. No. 82-29, 4-21-1982; Ord. No. 83-2,
1-5-1983; Ord. No. 83-17, 3-2-1983; Ord. No. 87-35, 2-13-1987; Ord.
No. 91-3, 1-16-1991; Ord. No. 92-321, 12-23-1992; Ord. No. 93-291,
A. Purposes. The purposes of the "EHP" Extended Historic Preservation
District are to preserve historic buildings which contribute or will
contribute to the heritage of the City or the State and to preserve
existing neighborhood architecture by protecting the buildings and
their surroundings from obviously incongruous development or uses of
land.
B. Certificate Of Demolition Or Removal. No person shall be permitted to
remove or demolish any building in the Extended Historic Preservation
District without the issuance of a certificate of demolition or removal by
the Historic Landmarks Preservation and Architectural Review Board
(HLPARB). The HLPARB shall base its decision upon the review criteria
set forth in Section 400.1280; further, the HLPARB shall process all
requests for certificates of demolition and removal in accordance with
the procedures set forth in the aforesaid Sections of the Code. This
provision shall not apply to accessory buildings which have less than
five hundred (500) square feet nor to properties less than fifty (50)
years old, unless the Director of Community Development determines
that the building may have historical significance and refers the
question to the HLPARB.
C. Architectural Review For Properties Constructed During Or Prior To
1945. No person shall alter the exterior appearance of any building
without first obtaining a Certificate of Appropriateness from the
Historic Landmarks Preservation and Architectural Review Board
(HLPARB). In reviewing applications for a Certificate of
Appropriateness, guidelines established in Section 400.1270 shall be
used.
D. Architectural Review For Properties Constructed After 1945. Every
application for a building permit for construction of, additions to, and
exterior alterations of, any building in the district shall be submitted to
the HLPARB for review and approval. In reviewing applications for a
Certificate of Appropriateness, guidelines established in Section
400.1270 shall be used.
392. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
393. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
Section
400.340
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.350
100:864
12-22-1993; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 02-54, 3-6-2002;
Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
Section 400.360. "FPD" Frenchtown Preservation District. [R.O.
2009 §156.069; Ord. No. 97-50, 1-31-1997; Ord. No. 98-209,
5-15-1998; Ord. No. 01-262, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 03-216, 9-3-2003;
Ord. No. 03-279, 10-23-2003; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
A. Purpose. The purpose of the "HDD" Historic Downtown District is to
protect the district from alterations, additions or demolitions which
would be detrimental to property values and its character as a
pedestrian-oriented, historic commercial area.
B. Permitted Uses. Any use or accessory use permitted in the zoning
district in which the premises are situated and upon which the Historic
Downtown District is superimposed, including single-family dwellings.
[Ord. No. 18-285, 12-18-2018]
C. Conditional Uses. Any conditional use in the zoning district in which the
premises are situated and upon which the Historic Downtown District is
superimposed, including single-family dwellings. [Ord. No. 18-285,
12-18-2018394]
D. Building, Sign And Occupancy Permits.
1. No person shall be permitted to build, erect, construct, alter,
destroy or remove buildings or structures, including signs, or in
any way change the outward appearance of any building or
structure in the Historic Downtown District overlay without having
obtained a certificate of appropriateness from the Historic
Landmarks Preservation and Architectural Review Board
(HLPARB). The painting of buildings does not require a Certificate
of Appropriateness when colors listed on the approved color chart
are utilized.
2. No building permit, sign permit or certificate of occupancy shall be
issued for any building or structure within the Historic Downtown
District unless the applicant shall furnish with an application for
such permit a copy of any necessary certificate of appropriateness.
E. Lighting. All outdoor, temporary, decorative lighting must obtain a
certificate of appropriateness from the Historic Landmarks
Preservation and Architectural Review Board prior to installation,
except from November fifteenth (15th) through January fifteenth
(15th), at which time only white non-twinkling, non-chasing miniature
lights will be allowed.
A. Purpose. The purposes of the "FPD" Frenchtown Preservation District
are to preserve buildings, structures and sites valued for cultural and
394. Editor's Note: Section 2 of this ordinance redesignated former Subsections (C) and (D) as
Subsections (D) and (E), respectively.
Section
400.350
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.360
100:865
historic reasons; preserve properties which provide a strong sense
of place and community; maintain an aesthetically pleasing area by
limiting incongruous alterations; and retain unique community assets
for economic expansion.
B. Determination Of Historically Contributing Properties. Using the
following criteria, the Department of Community Development staff
shall determine which properties within the "FPD" are either
contributing or non-contributing. The Department of Community
Development shall maintain a map for public review which clearly
indicates which properties are contributing and non-contributing.
1. Contributing properties. A building, structure or permanently fixed
object which meets either of the following criteria:
a. Is eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic
Places, either individually or as part of a collection; or
b. Was present during the period of significance (1830—1940),
relates to the documented significance of the district and
either possesses historic integrity or is capable of yielding
important information about the period.
2. Non-contributing properties. Properties other than contributing
properties and vacant land.
3. Vacant land. For purposes of new construction, vacant land shall be
subject to the architectural review process of contributing
properties.
C. Architectural Review For Contributing Properties.
1. No person shall alter the exterior appearance of any building
without first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness from the
Historic Landmarks Preservation and Architectural Review Board
(HLPARB). In reviewing applications for a certificate of
appropriateness, design guidelines adopted for the district by City
Council shall be used.
2. Every application for a building permit for construction of,
additions to and exterior alterations of any contributing building or
structure and for every new structure shall be submitted to the
HLPARB for issuance of a certificate of appropriateness. The
painting of buildings does not require a Certificate of
Appropriateness when colors listed on the approved color chart are
utilized.
D. Architectural Review For Non-Contributing Properties. For noncontributing
properties as provided by Section 400.340(C),
Construction Permits within the Extended Historic Preservation
District, every application for a building permit for construction of,
Section
400.360
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.360
100:866
additions to and exterior alterations of any building in the district shall
be submitted to the HLPARB for review and approval.
E. Outdoor Display Of Merchandise. Merchandise may be displayed
outside an allowed, licensed business within a commercial zoning
district provided the following conditions are met:
1. There shall be a continuous, unobstructed four (4) foot wide path
from the back of the curb or street if no curb exists; and
2. The display of merchandise shall not extend beyond the width of
the storefront; and
3. Any business that is located on a corner, merchandise may only be
displayed in the area along the main entrance; and
4. The following items shall be prohibited from outdoor display:
a. Household appliances including, but not limited to, items such
as:
(1) Refrigerators,
(2) Washing machines,
(3) Dryers,
(4) Stoves, etc.
b. Household fixtures including, but not limited to, items such as:
(1) Sinks,
(2) Commodes, etc.
c. Automotive parts.
d. Lawn equipment including, but not limited to, items such as:
(1) Lawn mowers,
(2) Trimmers,
(3) Tractors,
(4) Chain saws, etc.
e. Pre-packaged items including, but not limited to, items such
as:
(1) Food,
(2) Paper goods, etc.
f. Construction equipment including, but not limited to, items
such as:
Section
400.360
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.360
100:867
Section 400.370. "CPD" Commons Preservation District. [R.O. 2009
§156.070; Ord. No. 97-348, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998;
Ord. No. 98-449, 10-22-1998; Ord. No. 01-175, 8-3-2001; Ord. No.
10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
(1) Power or powered tools,
(2) Hauling trailers,
(3) Earth-moving equipment, etc.
5. Merchandise for sale shall not be attached to or hanging from the
structure; and
6. Merchandise may only be displayed during the business hours of
operation.
F. A certificate of appropriateness is required for any paint color change
on any building or sign that fronts on Second Street within the
Frenchtown Preservation District. The HLPARB will consider the
selection of colors and how color is applied in color schemes. In
general, the HLPARB seeks the use of colors that replicate those used
historically. Colors shall be equivalent to or like the colors from one (1)
of the following:
1. Sherwin Williams Arts and Crafts;
2. Sherwin Williams Victorian;
3. Benjamin Moore Historical Color Collection; and
4. Benjamin Moore Exterior Palettes.
For this purpose, the HLPARB maintains a chart of approved
colors.
A. Purpose. The purposes of the "CPD" Commons Preservation District are
to preserve buildings, structures and sites valued for cultural and
historic reasons; preserve properties which provide a strong sense of
place and community; maintain an aesthetically pleasing area by
limiting incongruous alterations; and retain unique community assets
for economic expansion.
B. Determination Of Historically Contributing Properties. Using the
following criteria, the Department of Community Development staff
shall determine which properties within the "FPD" are either
contributing or non-contributing. The Department of Community
Development shall maintain a map for public review which clearly
indicates which properties are contributing and non-contributing.
1. Contributing properties. A building, structure or permanently fixed
object which meets either of the following criteria:
Section
400.360
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.370
100:868
Section 400.380. "LMPD" Landmark Preservation District. [R.O.
2009 §156.071; Ord. No. 99-261, 7-23-1999; Ord. No. 10-244 §1,
11-18-2010]
a. Is eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic
Places, either individually or as part of a collection, or
b. Was present during the period of significance (1860—1920),
relates to the documented significance of the district and
either possesses historic integrity or is capable of yielding
important information about the period.
2. Non-contributing properties. Properties other than contributing
properties and vacant land.
3. Vacant land. For purposes of new construction, vacant land shall be
subject to the architectural review process for contributing
properties.
C. Architectural Review For Contributing Properties.
1. No person shall alter the exterior appearance of any building
without first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness from the
Historic Landmarks Preservation and Architectural Review Board
(HLPARB). The painting of buildings does not require a Certificate
of Appropriateness when colors listed on the approved color chart
are utilized. In reviewing applications for a certificate of
appropriateness, design guidelines adopted for the district by the
HLPARB and City Council shall be used.
2. Every application for a building permit for construction of,
additions to and exterior alterations of any contributing building or
structure and for every new structure shall be submitted to the
HLPARB for issuance of a certificate of appropriateness.
D. Architectural Review For Non-Contributing Properties. For noncontributing
properties as provided by Section 400.340(C),
Construction Permits within the "EHP" Extended Historic Preservation
District, every application for a building permit for construction of,
additions to and exterior alterations of any building in the district shall
be submitted to the Historic Landmarks Preservation and Architectural
Review Board (HLPARB) for review and approval.
E. Design Guidelines. "Design Guidelines for the St. Charles Commons
Neighborhood" prepared by the St. Charles Commons Neighborhood
Association and dated October 30, 1996, hereby adopted by reference
and incorporated as if fully set out herein, are adopted as the design
guidelines for the Commons Preservation ("CP") District.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the "LMPD" Landmark Preservation District is
to promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of
the community by:
Section
400.370
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.380
100:869
Section 400.390. "FSC/HD" Fifth Street Corridor/Hospital District.
[Ord. No. 12-86 §1, 5-24-2012]
1. Preserving the distinctive historic, archaeological and architectural
characteristics of St. Charles which represent elements of the
City's cultural, social, economic, political and architectural history;
2. Fostering civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past
as represented in St. Charles landmarks;
3. Conserving and improving the value of property designated as
landmarks; and
4. Protecting and enhancing the attractiveness of the City to home
buyers, tourists, visitors and shoppers and thereby supporting and
promoting business and providing economic benefit to the City.
B. Permitted Uses. Any use or accessory use permitted in the zoning
district in which the premises are situated and upon which the
Landmark Preservation District is superimposed. [Ord. No. 18-285,
12-18-2018]
C. Conditional Uses. Any conditional use in the zoning district in which the
premises are situated and upon which the Landmark Preservation
District is superimposed. [Ord. No. 18-285, 12-18-2018395]
D. Building, Sign And Occupancy Permits.
1. No person shall build, erect, construct or alter buildings or
structures on the designated property, other than routine
maintenance or repairs, without first having obtained a certificate
of appropriateness from the Historic Landmarks Preservation and
Architectural Review Board. In reviewing applications for
certificates of appropriateness, design guidelines approved by the
City Council for the property shall be used. Furthermore, no person
shall demolish or remove structures, in whole or in part, without
first having obtained a certificate of demolition or removal from the
Historic Landmarks Preservation and Architectural Review Board.
In reviewing applications for a certificate of demolition or removal,
criteria provided in Section 400.1280 shall be used. The painting of
buildings does not require a Certificate of Appropriateness when
colors listed on the approved color chart are utilized.
2. No building permit, sign permit, certificate of occupancy or
demolition permit shall be issued for any building or structure
within a Landmark Preservation District unless the applicant shall
furnish with an application for such permit a copy of any necessary
certificate of appropriateness or certificate of demolition or
removal.
395. Editor's Note: Section 3 of this ordinance redesignated former Subsection (C) as
Subsection (D).
Section
400.380
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.390
100:870
A. Purpose. The purpose of the "FSC/HD" Fifth Street Corridor/Hospital
District is to promote and facilitate redevelopment, reinvestment and
rejuvenation in the Fifth Street Corridor and in the neighborhood
surrounding the SSM St. Joseph Medical Center and to achieve the
goals and objectives of the master plan for these areas, Sustainable
Gateways to the Heart of St. Charles.
B. District Boundary. The boundary of the "FSC/HD" Fifth Street Corridor/
Hospital District shall be defined as follows:
Beginning at the centerline of Boone's Lick Road and the extension of
the Eastern property line of the parcel currently known as 1050 S Fifth
Street; thence Northwesterly along the Eastern property line of parcel
currently known as 1050 S Fifth Street to the Eastern property line
of parcel currently known as 1020 S Fifth Street; thence meandering
Easterly and Northerly along the Eastern property line of 1020 S Fifth
Street to the Eastern property line of parcel currently known as 1016
S Fifth Street; thence Northeasterly along the Eastern property line of
parcel currently known as 1016 S Fifth Street to the extension of the
centerline of the alleyway between S Fifth Street and S Fourth Street;
thence Northeasterly along the centerline of the alleyway between
S Fifth Street and S Fourth Street and its extension to centerline
of McDonough Street; thence Northeasterly from the centerline of
McDonough Street and the extension of the Eastern property line of
418 McDonough Street to the South Eastern property corner of 418
McDonough Street; thence continuing from the property corner and
along the property line of parcel currently known as 418 McDonough
Street to the Northern property line of 418 McDonough Street; thence
Northwesterly along the Northern property line of parcel currently
known as 418 McDonough Street to the extension of the Western
boundary of the alleyway between South Fifth Street and South Fourth
Street; thence Northwesterly along the alleyway and its extension
between South Fifth Street and South Fourth Street to the Southern
property line of the parcel currently known as 500 South Fifth Street;
thence Easterly along the Southern, Eastern and Northern property
line of 500 South Fifth Street to the extension of the Eastern property
line of the parcel currently known as 424 Tompkins; thence Northerly
and Westerly along the Eastern and Northern property line of the
property currently known as 424 Tompkins to the extension of the
Eastern property line of the parcel currently known as 423 Jackson
Street; thence Northerly along the Eastern boundary line and its
extensions to the Southern property line of parcel currently known
as 423 First Capitol Drive; thence Easterly and Northerly along the
Southern and Eastern property line of parcel currently known as 423
First Capitol Drive to the Southwestern property corner of parcel
known as 405 First Capitol Drive; thence Easterly and Northerly along
the Southern and Eastern property line of the parcel known as 423
First Capitol Drive to the extension of the Southern property line of
the parcel currently known as 6-009D-B087-00-7; thence easterly along
the extension and the Southern property line to the Southern parcel
Section
400.390
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.390
100:871
line of property currently known as 315 First Capitol Drive; thence
Easterly along the property line of parcel currently known as 315 First
Capitol Drive to its intersection of the Western property line of the
parcel currently known as 301 First Capitol Drive; thence Southerly
and Easterly along the Western and Southern parcel line and its
extension to the Western boundary line of parcel currently known as
324 S Third Street; thence Southerly, Easterly and Northerly along
the Western, Southern and Eastern property lines of parcel currently
known as 324 S Third Street to the extension of the southern parcel
line of property currently known as 300 South Second Street; thence
Easterly along the Southern property line of parcel currently known
as 300 S Second Street to the Western boundary line of the alleyway
between South Second Street and South Main Street; thence Northerly
along the Western boundary line of the alleyway between South Second
Street and South Main Street to the Northeastern property corner of
parcel currently known as 128 South Second Street; thence Westerly
to the Eastern property line of parcel currently known as 131 Jefferson
Street; thence Northerly along the Eastern property line of parcel
currently known as 131 Jefferson Street to the Southern right-of-way
line of Jefferson Street; thence Westerly along the Southern right-ofway
line of Jefferson Street to the extension of the Eastern property
line of 302 Jefferson Street; thence Northeasterly along the Eastern
extension and the Eastern property line of the parcel currently known
as 302 Jefferson Street to the Southern alleyway line between Jefferson
Street and Washington Street; thence Northwesterly along the
Southern alleyway line between Jefferson Street and Washington Street
and extending to the Eastern property line of 404 Jefferson Street;
thence Northeasterly along the Eastern property line of 404 Jefferson
Street to the Southern alleyway boundary line between Jefferson Street
and Washington Street; thence Westerly along the Southern alleyway
boundary line between Jefferson Street and Washington Street to the
Northwestern corner of the parcel currently known as 424 Jefferson
Street; thence Southerly along the Western property line of parcel
currently known as 424 Jefferson Street and its extension to the
Northwestern property corner of the parcel currently known as 112
South Fifth Street; thence from the Northwestern property corner
of parcel currently know as 112 South Fifth Street extending across
South Fifth Street to the Northern property line of the parcel currently
known as 505 Jefferson Street; thence Westerly along the Northern
property line of 505 Jefferson Street to the Eastern property corner
of parcel currently known as 515 Jefferson Street; thence Westerly
and Southerly along the Northern and Western property line of parcel
currently known as 515 Jefferson Street and extending across the
alley between Jefferson Street and Madison Street to the Northern
property line of parcel currently known as 512 Madison Street; thence
Westerly along to the Northern property line of parcel currently known
as 512 Madison Street to the Northeastern property corner of parcel
currently known as 520 Madison Street; thence Westerly and Southerly
along the Northern and Eastern property lines of 520 Madison Street
Section
400.390
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.390
100:872
and its extension to the Northern property line of parcel currently
known as 524 First Capitol Drive; thence Westerly along the Northern
property line of 524 First Capitol Drive to the Northeastern property
corner of parcel currently known as 546 First Capitol Drive; thence
meandering Westerly and Southerly along the Northern and Western
property line of parcel currently known as 546 First Capitol Drive to the
Northeastern property corner of parcel currently known as 566 First
Capitol Drive; thence Westerly and Southerly along the Northern and
Western property line of parcel currently known as 566 First Capitol
Drive and its extension across First Capitol Drive to the Northwestern
property corner of parcel currently known as 571 First Capitol Drive;
thence Southerly along the Western property line of parcel currently
known as 571 First Capitol Drive to the Northwestern property corner
of parcel currently known as 6-009D-B188-00-4; thence Southerly and
Easterly along the Western and Southern property line of parcel
currently known as 6-009D-B 188-00-4 to the Western property line of
parcel currently known as 559 First Capitol Drive; thence Southerly
and Easterly along the Western and Southern property line of parcel
currently known as 559 First Capitol Drive to the Southwestern corner
of property currently known as 555 First Capitol Drive; thence Easterly
along the Southern property line of parcels currently known as 555,
547, and 545 First Capitol Drive and extending across South Benton
Avenue to the Southern property line of parcel currently known as 529
First Capitol Drive; thence Easterly along the Southern property line
of parcels currently know as 529, 527 and 519 First Capitol Drive to
the Northeastern property corner of 519 First Capitol Drive; thence
extending across alleyway between First Capitol Drive and Jackson
Street to the Northern property line of parcel currently known as 531
Jackson Street; thence meandering Westerly, Southerly and Easterly
along the Northern, Southern and Eastern property lines of parcel
currently known as 531 Jackson Street and extending across Tompkins
Street to the Eastern alleyway right-of-way line of alley between South
Fifth Street and South Benton Avenue; thence Southerly along the
Eastern alleyway right-of-way line between South Fifth Street and
South Benton Avenue and extending across McDonough Street to the
Northeastern property line of the parcel currently known as 922 South
Benton Avenue; thence Southerly along the Eastern property line of
parcel currently known as 922 South Benton Avenue to the
Northeastern property corner of parcel currently known as 924 South
Benton Avenue; thence Southerly and Westerly along the Eastern and
Southern property line of parcel currently known as 924 South Benton
Avenue to its Southwestern property corner also known as the Eastern
right-of-way line of South Benton Avenue; thence Southerly along the
Eastern right-of-way line of South Benton Avenue to the Northwestern
property corner of parcel currently known as 1100 South Benton
Avenue; thence Easterly and Southerly along the Northern and Eastern
property line of parcel currently known as 1100 South Benton Avenue
to the Southeastern property corner of 1100 South Benton Avenue;
thence in a Southerly direction along the Eastern property lines of
Section
400.390
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.390
100:873
properties currently known as 1104, 1108, 1112, 1120, 1144, 1148
South Benton Avenue to the Northeastern property corner of the parcel
currently known as 6-014A-4309-00-25; thence meandering Westerly
and Southerly along the Eastern and Southern property lines of parcel
currently known as 6-014A-4309-00-25 to the Eastern right-of-way line
of South Benton Street; thence Southerly along the Eastern right-ofway
line of South Benton Street and its extension to the centerline of
Boone's Lick Road; thence Easterly along the centerline of Boone's Lick
Road and back to the point of beginning.
C. District Regulations. The regulations governing development and land
use within the "FSC/HD" Fifth Street Corridor/Hospital District shall be
the St. Charles Gateways Smartcode dated April 9, 2012 which is on file
in the City offices as Exhibit A and is incorporated herein by reference.
D. Amendments. As the governing code for the "FSC/HD" Fifth Street
Corridor/Hospital District, the St. Charles Gateways Smartcode shall be
subject to the amendment and modification procedures defined in
Article XII: Amendments and Modifications, Sections 400.1010 through
400.1050 inclusive.
Section
400.390
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.390
100:874
Article III
Other Use Regulations And Design Standards
Section
400.400
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.390
100:875

DIVISION 1
Use Regulations
Section 400.400. Animals.396 [R.O. 2009 §156.085; CC 1981 §30-52;
Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 97-356, 10-22-1997; Ord. No.
98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
A. In all residential zoning districts, as well as all dwellings located in any
other zoning district, dogs, rabbits, cats, horses or ponies may be kept
as domestic pets by the occupant of a dwelling unit. These animals may
not be used or kept for commercial or resale purposes or so as to cause
a public nuisance. The stable, shed or other place of shelter for a horse
or pony shall not be located closer than fifty (50) feet to any property
line. No horse or pony may be kept on a lot which measures less than
two and one-half (2½) acres in area.
B. In all residential zoning districts, as well as all dwellings located in any
other zoning district, the occupant of a dwelling unit may keep for
personal use geese, ducks, turkeys, other species of fowl except for
chickens as set forth in Subsection (C) below and rabbits only under the
following conditions: [Ord. No. 15-234 §1, 10-20-2015]
1. Permanent shelters, pens or cages shall be located at least fifty (50)
feet from any property line.
2. The shelter, pen or cage shall have a concrete floor and be
maintained in a sanitary condition.
3. Fowl shall not be kept for commercial or resale purposes or so as to
cause a public nuisance.
C. In all residential zoning districts and dwellings located in any other
zoning district, the occupant of a dwelling unit may keep for personal
use chickens only under the following conditions: [Ord. No. 15-234 §1,
10-20-2015397]
1. Only hens may be kept on residential property. Roosters are
prohibited. In residential lots of seven thousand (7,000) square feet
or less, the maximum number of hens that may be kept is eight (8).
One (1) additional hen is permitted for each two thousand (2,000)
square feet of lot area greater than seven thousand (7,000) square
feet to a maximum of twelve (12) hens.
2. Hens shall not be kept for commercial or resale purposes. Hens and
eggs may not be sold nor may they be advertised for sale.
3. Hens shall be confined in a run (enclosure) by a fence meeting the
following specifications:
396. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
397. Editor's Note: Subsection 1 of Ord. No. 15-234 also redesignated former Subsection (C),
which immediately followed, as Subsection (D).
Section
400.400
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.400
100:877
a. Constructed of wire mesh, wire grid or chicken wire;
b. Six (6) feet or less in height;
c. The area enclosed by the fence shall contain a minimum of ten
(10) square feet per hen; and
d. Located entirely in the rear yard as defined in Section 400.050.
4. A chicken coop shall be located within or adjacent to the fenced
confinement area described in Section 400.400(C)(3). No more
than one (1) chicken coop may be located on a lot. The chicken coop
shall be structurally sound and meet the following specifications:
a. A roof constructed of standard building material but not a
tarpaulin;
b. Walls constructed of wood or metal which are six (6) feet or
less in height;
c. A non-porous floor of vinyl, plastic or concrete, covered with
straw or wood shavings;
d. Contain a minimum of four (4) square feet per animal kept;
e. A coop shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in area,
and shall be located in the rear yard as defined in Section
400.050.
5. The run (enclosure) and chicken coop may be located within a rear
yard setback for the residence provided the following setbacks are
maintained:
a. Minimum of ten (10) feet from any property line; and
b. Minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any residence other
than the owner's residence.
6. Both the fenced confinement area and the coop shall be maintained
as to not pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare or to
cause a public nuisance. No material from the confinement area or
coop shall run off onto adjoining property. Any manure or waste
shall be collected and properly removed from the premises or tilled
into the soil on the premises promptly and regularly to prevent
offensive smells or conditions conducive to diseases.
7. Food for hens shall be stored in a sanitary, leak-proof container that
cannot be contaminated by rodents or insects.
8. Chickens shall not be slaughtered at any location on the property
where the slaughtering may be observed from another property or
a street or alley.
Section
400.400
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.400
100:878
Section 400.410. Automobile Service Stations and Convenience
Stores With Fuel.398 [R.O. 2009 §156.086; CC 1981 §30-70; Ord. No.
77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 90-68, 3-21-1990; Ord. No. 98-209,
5-15-1998; Ord. No. 06-106, 4-26-2006; Ord. No. 10-244 §1,
11-18-2010]
9. All waste resulting from the slaughtering of chickens must be
disposed of so as not to create a threat to public health and safety,
and not produce obnoxious or foul odors or create a public
nuisance.
D. In all residential zoning districts and any single-family and two-family
dwellings located in the "C-1" zoning district, cattle, swine, sheep and
goats shall not be kept under any circumstances.
A. Purpose. In order to regulate and control the problems of noise, odor,
fumes, dust, danger of fire and explosion and traffic congestion, which
result from the unrestricted and unregulated operation of service
stations, and to regulate and control the adverse effects which service
stations may impose upon surrounding areas, the following regulations
and requirements shall apply to all service stations located in any
zoning district.
B. Reserved.
C. Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet or two thousand (2,000) square feet for each pump
station, whichever is greater.
D. Minimum Lot Width. 150 feet at the building line.
E. Minimum Lot Depth. 100 feet.
F. Maximum Height Of Building. 2½ stories or 35 feet.
G. Minimum Setbacks. The minimum setback requirements, measured
from the building line to the property line, are:
1. Front yard setback: 50 feet.
2. Side yard setback: 10 feet, except 20 feet where adjoining a
residential zoning district.
3. Rear yard setback: 10 feet, except 20 feet where adjoining a
residential zoning district.
4. Pump islands:
a. Twenty (20) feet, except as required in items (b) and (c) below.
b. Twenty-five (25) feet from any street right-of-way line parallel
to a pump island.
398. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
Section
400.400
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.410
100:879
c. Fifty (50) feet from any street right-of-way line perpendicular
to a pump island.
5. Pump island canopies:
a. Fifteen (15) feet from any street right-of-way and ten (10) feet
from any other lot line.
b. Canopy support posts shall be located no closer than twenty
(20) feet to a street right-of-way.
H. Protective Screening.
1. All discarded tires, parts, trash and similar objects shall be stored
within a masonry enclosure, a minimum of six (6) feet in height, in
the rear half or, in the case of corner sites, the rear quarter of the
site.
2. When abutting any residential district, automobile service station
sites shall be fenced with a decorative brick, stone masonry or
wood wall or fence a minimum of six (6) feet in height.
I. Public Utilities. All automobile service stations shall be connected to
public water and sanitary sewers.
J. Off-Street Parking And Loading. Requirements contained in Section
400.670.
K. Grease And Wash Racks.
1. All grease racks shall be contained within the building.
2. Entry to grease racks shall be on the side, away from any public
street.
L. Tanker Delivery. No delivery tanker shall be allowed to park on a public
right-of-way during gasoline delivery, nor shall any hose be permitted
on a public right-of-way.
M. Gasoline Storage. The total gasoline storage capacity of each service
station shall not exceed twenty thousand (20,000) gallons, unless
permission is granted in writing from the Fire Chief.
N. Hours Of Operation. If the automobile service station is within one
hundred (100) feet of any residential zoning district, then the service
station shall not operate between the hours of 12:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M.
This Subsection (N) shall not apply to any place of business which is
engaged in the retail servicing of motor vehicles with fuels and oil and
which does not provide repairs. This Subsection (N) shall apply to all
service stations existing on the effective date of this Subsection (N) and
to those erected after the effective date of this Subsection (i.e., July 5,
1977).
Section
400.410
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.410
100:880
Section 400.420. Bed and Breakfast Establishments.399 [R.O. 2009
§156.087; CC 1981 §30-71; Ord. No. 88-79, 5-19-1988; Ord. No.
91-251, 12-18-1991; Ord. No. 96-44, 2-21-1996; Ord. No. 98-209,
5-15-1998; Ord. No. 99-344, 10-7-1999; Ord. No. 00-78, 4-5-2000;
Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010; Ord. No. 19-191, 9-17-2019]
O. Removal Of Closed Or Inactive Automobile Service Stations. Any
automobile service station that is closed to the public and has a
dormant, inactive or non-operable status for a period of at least six (6)
consecutive months shall be removed from the property upon which it is
located. The words "removed from the property", as used herein, shall
mean the following: removal of all fuel pumps and associated pipes
whether located above or below ground from the premises; removal of
any canopies covering fuel pumps; and excavation and removal of all
underground storage tanks. Removal of the automobile service station
shall be completed within sixty (60) days after the end of the six (6)
month period of closure, dormancy, inactivity or non-operation. Any
person who violates any of the provisions of this Subsection shall be
subject to the penalty set forth in Section 100.150.
A. Bed and breakfast establishments are a conditional use in all residential
zoning districts and permitted in agricultural zoning districts subject to
the home occupation provisions of this Section as well as Section
400.430. Bed and breakfast establishments are permitted by right
within the "HCD" Historic Commercial District and "FHCD"
Frenchtown Historic Commercial District. A bed and breakfast
establishment shall be carried on entirely within the dwelling unit by a
member of the family residing in the dwelling unit, shall clearly be
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential
purposes and shall conform to the following standards and provisions:
1. Any necessary business license shall be obtained pursuant to the
requirements of the City of St. Charles Finance Department.
2. Other types of occupation or professions may be permitted within
the building where the bed and breakfast establishment is located,
subject to the City's home occupation regulations.
3. Maximum floor area allowed.
a. Buildings of less than two thousand five hundred (2,500)
square feet of interior living space shall be allowed to use no
more than three (3) bedrooms, nor more than fifty percent
(50%) of the livable floor area of the building for the bed and
breakfast establishment.
b. Buildings of greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500)
square feet of interior living space may be allowed up to six (6)
399. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
Section
400.410
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.420
100:881
Section 400.421. Guest Houses. [Ord. No. 17-261, 11-21-2017]
bedrooms but no more than fifty percent (50%) of the livable
floor area for use of the bed and breakfast establishment.
c. The applicant shall provide a floor plan showing the specific
location of the areas to be used for the bed and breakfast
establishment.
4. No non-family person shall be employed.
5. No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare
shall be produced.
6. There shall be no exterior display, no exterior sign, except as
permitted herein, no exterior storage of materials and no other
exterior indication of the bed and breakfast establishment or
variation from the residential character of the building.
7. One (1) sign shall be permitted which shall be unanimated, nonilluminated,
flat or window sign having an area of not more than
one hundred forty-four (144) square inches. The sign shall be
attached flat to the building.
8. No machinery or equipment shall be installed which interferes with
radio or television reception and which is not customarily
incidental to the bed and breakfast establishment.
9. One (1) unobstructed off-street parking space shall be provided for
each available bedroom in the bed and breakfast establishment.
The Director of Community Development may grant a variance if it
can be shown that adequate parking already exists.
10. No additions shall be added to the residence to establish this use.
11. No lodger shall be rented a room for longer than seven (7)
consecutive days.
12. No meals may be served, except for breakfast and/or brunch.
13. Meals may be served only to overnight guests.
14. The owner/occupant is required to maintain a guest register which
shall be available for inspection by the City.
A. Where Guest Houses are a conditional use within a residential zoning
district the use shall conform to the following standards and provisions:
1. The dwelling unit shall not be occupied as a primary residence; and
2. The structure shall be a single-family or two-family dwelling; and
3. Shall conform to one (1) of the following:
Section
400.420
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.421
100:882
Section 400.430. Home Occupations.400 [R.O. 2009 §156.089; CC
1981 §30-58; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 86-106, 5-15-1986;
Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 01-250, 10-24-2001; Ord. No.
07-162, 6-11-2007; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010; Ord. No. 11-232
§1, 11-16-2011]
a. The property is located within one thousand three hundred
twenty (1,320) feet (one-fourth (1/4) mile) of Interstate seventy
(70) right-of-way, or
b. The property is located within the SMPD South Main
Preservation District, HDD Historic Downtown District, FPD
Frenchtown Preservation District, CPD Commons Preservation
District, the LMPD Landmarks Preservation District, or the
Midtown Neighborhood as shown on the attached Exhibit A,
held on file in the City offices. [Ord. No. 18-023, 2-20-2018]
c. The property is zoned CRD-II Central Residential District.
[Ord. No. 18-259, 11-20-2018]
4. Parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 400.670;
however, modifications to this standard may be approved by the
City Council during the conditional use permit review process.
[Ord. No. 18-115, 5-15-2018]
A. A home occupation is an occupation or profession which is customarily
carried on entirely within the dwelling unit by a member of the family
residing in the dwelling unit, which is clearly incidental and secondary
to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes and which
conforms to the standards and provisions provided herein. Home
occupations may be for profit or not-for-profit.
1. Standards. Home occupations shall conform to the following
standards:
a. Up to four (4) types of occupation or profession shall be
permitted within the occupied building.
b. The total area utilized by home occupations may not exceed
twenty-five percent (25%) of the total floor area and in no event
more than five hundred (500) square feet of floor area of the
occupied building.
c. All employees and business partners must reside in the
dwelling unit or be related to the applicant by blood, marriage,
or adoption.
d. No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare
shall be produced.
400. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890
Section
400.421
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.430
100:883
e. There shall be no exterior display, no exterior sign, except as
permitted herein, no exterior storage of materials, no direct
access from outside the principal building to the home
occupation except that which serves the residential portion,
and no other exterior indication of the home occupation or
variation from the residential character of the principal
building.
f. One (1) sign shall be permitted which shall be an unanimated,
non-illuminated, flat or window sign having an area of not more
than one hundred forty-four (144) square inches attached flat
to the building.
g. No business hours shall be permitted after 8:00 P.M.
h. No machinery or equipment shall be installed which interferes
with radio or television reception and which is not customarily
incidental to the practice of such occupation or profession.
i. No machinery or equipment shall be permitted which is not
customarily found within or incidental to residential use of
property. [Ord. No. 18-047, 2-20-2018]
2. Specific examples permitted. Permitted home occupations include,
but are not limited to, the following list of occupations:
a. A profession such as an engineer, architect, doctor, dentist,
consultant or lawyer.
b. Dressmakers, seamstresses or tailors.
c. Music, dancing and other teachers or tutors; provided the
instruction is limited to one (1) pupil at a time, except for
occasional groups.
d. Beauty and barber services having not more than one (1)
operator.
e. Real estate or insurance services.
f. Photography studio primarily devoted to photography of
individuals or small groups.
g. Minor repair service.
h. Artists, artisans, and crafts people, with items produced on
premises.
i. Nursery schools, kindergartens, and child-sitting services
having no more than four (4) children at any one time, not
including members of the immediate family of the operator.
j. Internet-based businesses without on-site warehousing or
stock-in-trade.
Section
400.430
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.430
100:884
3. Specific examples prohibited. The following uses are specifically
prohibited as home occupations:
a. Vehicular repair, detailing or sales.
b. Rental business.
c. Stables or kennels.
d. Eating or drinking places.
e. Nursery schools and kindergartens and child-sitting services
having more than four (4) children at any one time, not
including members of the immediate family of the operator.
f. Retail or wholesale sales with stock-in-trade and customers
coming to the home, including, but not limited to, dealers in
groceries, appliances, automobiles, computers, and
pharmaceuticals.
g. Veterinarian services or animal hospitals.
h. Mortuaries and embalming establishments.
i. Private clubs, including fraternity and sorority houses.
j. Sales, distribution or auction services relating to firearms or
alcohol.
4. Permit, application and issuance.
a. Every person engaged in a home occupation shall obtain a
home occupation permit from the Department of Community
Development, and shall obtain a business license if one is
required for that occupation.
b. When an application for a home occupation permit is filed, the
Department of Community Development shall schedule a
permit application conference, and shall send a notice of the
conference to the applicant, to the residence on the adjacent
properties on all four (4) sides, and to the Councilmember of
that ward. The purpose of the conference is the discussion of
the requirements of the City ordinances and the proposed
home occupation. The applicant, the persons from the adjacent
residences, and the Councilmember may attend and
participate in the conference. Notification of the decision to
issue the permit or to deny it shall be mailed to the applicant,
to the adjacent residences, and to the Council- member.
5. Permit revocation. Whenever the Director of Community
Development determines that a permit holder has violated any of
the standards contained within this Section, the Director may
initiate the following revocation proceedings.
Section
400.430
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.430
100:885
Section 400.440. Hospitals and Orphanages. [R.O. 2009 §156.090;
CC 1981 §30-59; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 98-209,
5-15-1998]
Section 400.450. Junk, Used Auto Parts and Salvage Yards.401 [R.O.
2009 §156.091; CC 1981 §30-60; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No.
98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
a. The Director shall notify the permit holder of the intent to
revoke the permit, and state that the revocation will become
effective ten (10) days after the date the notice is mailed by
registered or certified mail or is delivered to the permit holder
at the home where the home occupation is located.
b. The permit holder may appeal the decision to revoke within the
ten (10) day period by delivering a written appeal to the
Department of Community Development.
c. If the permit holder appeals the Director's revocation decision,
the Mayor shall set a date for a hearing, giving at least ten (10)
days' written notice of the hearing to the permit holder, the
adjacent residence, and the Councilmember. The Mayor shall
hear and determine the case, and shall cause a record of the
case to be kept, and copies shall be made available to any
interested person upon the payment of a reasonable fee.
A. Public and private hospitals and orphanages shall meet the following
minimum standards:
1. Minimum lot size: 2 acres.
2. Minimum setback requirements measured from building line to
property line: 50 feet.
3. Maximum building height:
a. Three (3) stories or 45 feet.
b. May be increased to a maximum of five (5) stories or sixty-five
(65) feet by the provision of an additional five (5) feet of
setback from all exterior property lines for each additional
story.
4. Sites shall front upon a collector or arterial street.
A. Sight-proof fences or walls shall be required around the entire area of
junk yards and/or used auto parts yards or salvage yards.
1. Fences shall not be less than six (6) feet nor greater than ten (10)
feet in height.
401. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
Section
400.430
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.450
100:886
Section 400.460. Manufactured (Mobile) Homes As Temporary Non-
Residential Uses. [R.O. 2009 §156.092; CC 1981 §30-62; Ord. No.
77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 10-244 §1,
11-18-2010]
Section 400.470. Telecommunications Towers. [R.O. 2009 §156.093;
Ord. No. 96-256, 9-19-1996; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No.
00-78, 4-5-2000; Ord. No. 04-176, 8-4-2004; Ord. No. 04-216,
9-10-2004; Ord. No. 10-74 §1, 4-22-2010]
2. Fences shall be designed and constructed in compliance with
existing building codes.
3. Fences and/or greenbelts shall be used to shield contents of such
businesses from view of public streets or residences.
4. Fences shall be properly maintained at all times.
5. In no instance shall slatted chain-link fencing be installed.
B. Stacking in a junk yard shall be limited to the height of the fence. There
must be enough space provided so that if any material falls or is blown
over, it will fall on the property.
C. No items for sale shall be stored or displayed on the fence or outside of
the fenced area.
D. Any business moving to a new location shall be in full compliance with
the regulations of this Section.
A. A manufactured (mobile home), modular, prefabricated, sectional
home, unit or units may be used as a construction office during the
construction, provided any building permit shall not exceed a period of
two (2) years or project completion, whichever happens first.
B. A permit from the Department of Community Development shall be
obtained for all manufactured (mobile) homes used as a non-residential
use.
A. Intent And Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to regulate the
placement, construction and modification of telecommunications
towers, support structures and antennas in order to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the public, while at the same time not
unreasonably interfering with the development of the competitive
wireless telecommunications marketplace in the City. This Section is
intended to:
1. Provide for the appropriate location and development of
telecommunications facilities and systems to serve the citizens and
businesses of the City;
Section
400.450
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.470
100:887
2. Minimize adverse visual impacts of communications antennas and
support structures through the careful design, siding, landscape
screening and innovative camouflaging techniques;
3. Maximize the use of existing and new support structures so as to
minimize the need to construct new or additional facilities;
4. Maximize the co-location of facilities on any new support
structures;
5. Ensure that any new telecommunications tower or structure is
located in an area compatible with the neighborhood or
surrounding community to the extent possible;
6. Ensure that regulation of telecommunications towers and
structures does not have the effect of prohibiting the provision of
personal wireless services and does not unreasonably discriminate
among functionally equivalent providers of such service.
B. Legislative Findings.
1. On February 8, 1996, Congress enacted the Federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996 P.L. No. 104-104. The purpose of
the Act included deregulation of the telecommunications industry
and providing a more competitive environment for wired and
wireless telecommunication services in the United States.
2. The Telecommunications Act of 1996 preserves the authority of the
City to regulate the placement, construction and modification of
towers and antenna support structures and to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the public.
3. The City has been granted the authority to enact legislation to
regulate the construction, placement and operation of
telecommunications towers and antennas pursuant to its zoning
powers established in Chapter 89, RSMo., as amended, State
Statute and additionally pursuant to its general and specific police
powers established by Statute authorizing the regulations herein to
protect the public health, safety and welfare.
4. The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) has exclusive
jurisdiction over:
a. The regulation of the environmental effects of radio frequency
emissions from telecommunication facilities, and
b. The regulation of radio signal interference among users of the
radio frequency spectrum.
5. Consistent with the Telecommunications Act of 1996, the
regulations of this Section will not have the effect of prohibiting the
provision of personal wireless services and do not unreasonably
discriminate among functionally equivalent providers of such
Section
400.470
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.470
100:888
service. The regulations also impose reasonable restrictions to
protect the public safety and welfare and ensure opportunities
for placement of antennas with prompt approval by the City. The
Section does not attempt to regulate in areas within the exclusive
jurisdiction of the FCC.
6. The uncontrolled proliferation of towers in the City is threatened
without adoption of new regulations and would diminish property
values, the aesthetic quality of the City and would otherwise
threaten the health, safety and welfare of the public.
C. General Requirements.
1. The requirements set forth in this Section shall be applicable to all
telecommunications towers, antennas and other support structures
installed, built or modified after the effective date of this Section to
the full extent permitted by law.
2. Building codes, safety standards and zoning compliance. The
design for a telecommunications tower shall bear the seal of a
structural engineer licensed and in good standing with the State of
Missouri. The structural engineer shall certify that the tower has
been designed such that in the event of structural failure, it shall
only fall on the property upon which it has been erected and shall
not fall on any neighboring property. To ensure the structural
integrity of antenna support structures, the owner shall see that it
is constructed and maintained in compliance with all standards
contained in applicable State and local building codes and the
applicable standards published by the Electronics Industries
Association, as amended from time to time. In addition to any other
approvals required by this Section, no antenna, tower or support
structure shall be erected without verification of zoning compliance
and issuance of a building permit.
3. Regulatory compliance. All antennas and support structures shall
meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, FCC
and any other State or Federal agency with the authority to
regulate communications antennas and support structures. Should
such standards or regulations be amended, then the owner shall
bring such devices and structure into compliance with the revised
standards or regulations within the time period mandated by the
controlling agency. No approval for any placement, construction or
modification of any antenna or structure permitted by this Section
shall be granted for any applicant having an uncured violation of
this Section or any other governmental regulatory requirement
related to such antenna or structures within the City.
4. Security. All antennas and support structures shall be protected
from unauthorized access by appropriate security measures. A
description of proposed security measures shall be provided as part
of any application to install, build or modify antennas or support
Section
400.470
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.470
100:889
structures. Additional measures may be required as a condition
of the issuance of a building permit or conditional use permit as
deemed necessary by the Commission or by the City Council.
5. Lighting. Antennas and support structures shall not be lighted
unless required by the FAA or other State or Federal agency with
authority to regulate, in which case a description of the required
lighting scheme will be made a part of the application to install,
build or modify the antennas or support structure. Equipment
cabinets and shelters may have lighting only as approved by the
Commission or by the City Council as part of the conditional use
permit approval.
6. Advertising. Except for a disguised antenna support structure in
the form of attachment to an existing and otherwise lawfully
permitted pylon sign, the placement of advertising on structures
regulated by this Section is prohibited.
7. Design.
a. Telecommunication towers, except towers owned or operated
by the City of St. Charles, shall not exceed one hundred (100)
feet unless approved by a conditional use permit.
b. No two (2) towers, except towers owned or operated by a
government entity, shall be located within a one thousand
(1,000) foot radius. The distance shall be calculated from the
center of the base of the tower.
c. The design of the tower, compound and building mounted
antennas shall maximize use of building materials, colors,
textures, screening and landscaping that effectively blend the
telecommunication facilities within the surrounding natural
setting and built environment.
d. Landscaping or sight proof fencing shall be required around
the base of the telecommunication tower and around ancillary
structures as indicated on a sketch plan. Landscaping shall be
required to effectively screen ancillary structures from
adjacent development and roadways. Landscaping shall
include evergreen trees a minimum of six (6) feet in height.
The evergreen trees shall be planted ten (10) foot on center.
e. Telecommunication towers, excluding stealth towers, shall be
set back from any public right-of-way a minimum of fifty (50)
feet. Stealth towers shall be set back from a public right-of-way
the minimum setback required by the zoning district in which
the tower is located.
f. All towers, disguised support structures, and related
structures, fences and walls shall be separated from the
Section
400.470
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.470
100:890
Section 400.480. Temporary Retail Sales and Outdoor Display of
Merchandise. [R.O. 2009 §156.094; Ord. No. 03-265, 10-23-2003;
property line of any adjacent property at least a distance equal
to one-half (½) of the height of the tower or structure.
g. Antennas on structures, including signage, shall be painted or
treated to match the structure to which they are attached.
Antennas shall not exceed five (5) feet above the structure
unless additional height is authorized in the conditional use
permit approving the antenna.
h. Towers shall not exceed the height limitation of any airport
overlay zone as may be adopted by the City.
i. On-site parking for periodic maintenance and service shall be
provided at all antenna or tower locations consistent with the
underlying zoning district.
D. Shared Use. All new telecommunication towers shall be constructed to
accommodate at least one (1) additional user. Co-location on towers
shall be encouraged; the applicant for a permit for a telecommunication
tower shall submit a report to show that no viable co-location site exists
to meet the applicant's coverage requirement. The report shall address
all the existing towers within one (1) mile of the proposed tower
location and shall indicate the reasons the existing tower(s) cannot
include the proposed tower/antenna for co-location. The report shall
include RF frequency coverage map(s) for the proposed tower and the
existing towers within the one (1) mile radius. The report shall be
signed and certified by an electrical frequency engineer.
E. Obsolete Non-Complying Tower Structures. Any upper portion of a
tower which is not occupied by active antennas for a period of twelve
(12) months, and any entire tower which is not so occupied for a period
of six (6) months, shall be removed at the owner's expense. Failure to
comply with this provision shall constitute a nuisance that may be
remedied by the City at the tower or property owner's expense.
F. Commercial Operation Of Unlawful Tower Or Antennas.
Notwithstanding any right that may exist for a governmental entity to
operate or construct a tower or structure, it shall be unlawful for any
person to erect or operate for any private commercial purpose of any
antenna, tower or disguised support structure in violation of any
provision of this Section, regardless of whether such antenna or
structure is located on land owned by a governmental entity.
G. Penalty. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to a fine of
not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or ninety (90) days in jail,
or both. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
Section
400.470
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.480
100:891
Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007; Ord. No. 14-058 §1, 3-18-2014; Ord. No.
15-073 §1, 4-21-2015; Ord. No. 16-131 §3, 6-21-2016]
A. Intent And Purpose. It is the intent and purpose of this Section to
permit defined temporary retail sales uses, outdoor display of
merchandise and special events within the City on a controlled, timelimited
basis while controlling any adverse impacts on the City's
permanent uses. This Section is not intended to be a way to circumvent
the strict application of the use districts. Therefore, time limits are to
be strictly enforced. This Section does not apply to garage sales, vehicle
sales, garden centers accessory to retail establishments, farm produce
stands, fireworks stands licensed under Section 215.1100 et seq., nonprofit
organization fund-raising events or to authorized vendors
permitted under the auspices of City-recognized civic events.
B. Definitions. For the purposes of this Section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
OUTDOOR DISPLAY OF MERCHANDISE — The outdoor displaying of
goods or products normally offered for sale inside a business on the
subject property. Such display may include items offered only on a
seasonal basis such as salt or mulch in bags.
SPECIAL EVENT — A temporary use of land for the temporary
gathering of people for a limited duration of time held outside and
conducted on non-residentially zoned private property which is open
to the general public. The use may or may not involve retail sales as
an accessory component of the special event. A special event does not
include City-sponsored events and festivals which may involve the use
of private property but are primarily conducted on public property.
TEMPORARY RETAIL SALES USE — Selling products, merchandise
or service to the public, conducted on a temporary basis and not
occupying a permanent structure on the property on which it is located.
The use may or may not occupy a tent or other removable structure and
may or may not be conducted by the owner or lessee of the property.
The use may, but need not, be associated with a permanent use on the
property.
C. Temporary Retail Sales Permitted In Non-Residential Zoning Districts.
If not already provided for as a permitted or conditional use by this
Chapter, a temporary retail sales use shall be a conditional use in the
non-residential zoning districts of the City, provided the use meets the
criteria set forth in this Section. This Section shall not supersede or
substitute for any other Section of this Chapter that requires another
type of permit, certification or approval.
D. Criteria For Temporary Retail Sales Uses. A temporary retail sales use
may be conducted by the owner, tenant or lessee of any property
located within a non-residential zoning district, provided the use meets
the following criteria:
Section
400.480
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.480
100:892
1. The temporary retail sales use shall obtain a conditional use permit
as recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission and as
approved by the City Council. In reviewing the conditional use
permit application, the following criteria and standards shall apply:
a. Sales of products, services or merchandise not allowed by the
specific zoning district in question shall not be permitted.
b. The temporary retail sales use shall not generate noise,
vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference beyond
what normally occurs in the applicable zoning district.
c. No more than one (1) temporary retail sales use may operate at
any given time on the same property, unless approved by the
same or a separate conditional use permit.
d. The same location on private property may not have a
temporary use more than six (6) times within a calendar year,
unless approved by the conditional use permit.
e. Adequate parking for the customers of the temporary retail
sales use shall be provided in accordance with Sections
400.660 through 400.700, and required spaces for the
principal use of the property shall not be reduced, unless
approved by the conditional use permit.
f. The temporary retail sales use shall be limited in duration by
the purpose for which the permit is sought and as specified
through the conditional use permit.
g. A bond or other security agreement, in such amount to be
determined by the City, as necessary, requiring and ensuring
that the property be kept clean of all trash and debris during
and immediately after the temporary retail sales use must be
posted with the City prior to the establishment of the use.
h. Information on parking, traffic circulation, fire prevention,
insurance vendors and health certificates where applicable
shall be evaluated. If off-site parking is to be used, then written
permission from the owner of the property on which parking is
proposed must be provided.
i. In issuing a conditional use permit, the Planning and Zoning
Commission may recommend and the City Council may
approve appropriate conditions and safeguards as are
necessary to protect the public interest and ensure harmony
with the intent and purpose of this Section. If an applicant fails
to meet such conditions, if the use becomes a nuisance or if any
provision of the Code of Ordinances is violated by the use, the
conditional use permit may be revoked by the Department of
Community Development upon providing the applicant with
written notice of the revocation. If the use endangers the
Section
400.480
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.480
100:893
public health or safety, then the Director of Community
Development may revoke the permit immediately. The
applicant may appeal the revocation of the conditional use
permit to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
j. No conditional use permit authorizing a temporary retail sales
use shall be transferable, assignable or otherwise alienable,
nor shall any such permit be granted authorizing a temporary
retail sales use in a residential zoning district. Temporary retail
sales uses shall be expressly prohibited in residential zoning
districts.
2. Natural disaster or other health and safety emergencies.
Temporary uses and structures that may be necessary as a result of
a natural disaster or other health and safety emergencies, as
determined by the Mayor, shall be permitted for the duration of the
emergency or a maximum of sixty (60) days.
E. Criteria For Outdoor Display Of Merchandise. Except for outdoor
displays of merchandise in the South Main Preservation District which
shall be governed by Subsection 400.480(G) and outdoor displays of
merchandise approved by the City as part of a development plan,
merchandise (items that are typically offered for sale within the
corresponding business) may only be displayed outside an allowed,
licensed business within a "C-1," "C-2," "C-3," "I-1" or "I-2" Zoning
District, provided that the following conditions are met:
1. Display area.
a. The display area shall not extend beyond an area ten (10) feet
beyond the storefront; and
b. There shall be a continuous, unobstructed four-foot-wide path
from the back of the curb or street and/or drive aisle if no curb
exists. No portion of the display shall be on publicly owned
property unless the applicant shall first have obtained approval
for such uses from the City; and
c. The display of merchandise shall not extend beyond the width
of the storefront; and
d. No required off-street parking space or loading area will be
utilized for such display; and
e. For any business that is located on a corner, merchandise may
only be displayed in the area along the main entrance; and
f. Merchandise shall not be attached to or hanging from any
structure; and
g. Merchandise may only be displayed during the business hours
of operation.
Section
400.480
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.480
100:894
2. This Subsection (E) shall in no way be deemed to authorize the
outdoor display of salvage material or any other items not
ordinarily allowed for sale in the corresponding zoning district in
which the use is situated.
3. The provisions of this Subsection (E) shall not apply in the "HCD"
Historic Commercial District, the "SMPD" South Main Preservation
District or "LMPD" Landmark Preservation District.
4. The requirements of Subsection (E)(1)(a) through (g) may be
modified if the Planning and Zoning Commission recommends and
the City Council approves a conditional use permit granting the
modification in accordance with the following criteria:
a. How the proposed conditional use (the use in general) is in
harmony with the purposes, goals, objectives, policies and
standards of the St. Charles Comprehensive Plan and any other
plan, program or ordinance adopted or under consideration
pursuant to official notice by the City;
b. How the proposed conditional use (in its proposed location) is
in harmony with the purposes, goals, objectives, policies and
standards of the St. Charles Comprehensive Plan and any other
plan, program or ordinance adopted or under consideration
pursuant to official notice by the City;
c. Whether the proposed conditional use, in its proposed location
and as depicted on the required site plan, results in a
substantial or undue adverse impact on the adjacent property,
the character of the neighborhood, environmental factors,
traffic factors, parking, public improvements, public property
or rights-of-way or other matters affecting the public health,
safety or general welfare, either as they now exist or as they
may in the future be developed as a result of the
implementation of the provisions and policies of the Zoning
Ordinance, Comprehensive Plan or any other plan, program or
ordinance adopted or under consideration pursuant to official
notice by the City;
d. Whether the proposed conditional use maintains the desired
consistency of land uses, land use intensities and land use
impacts as related to the environs of the subject property as
directed by the Comprehensive Plan;
e. Whether the proposed conditional use is located in an area that
will be adequately served by and will not impose an undue
burden on any of the improvements, facilities, utilities or
services provided by public agencies serving the subject
property;
f. Whether the potential public benefits of the proposed
conditional use outweigh the potential adverse impacts of the
Section
400.480
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.480
100:895
proposed conditional use as identified above, after taking into
consideration any proposal by the petitioner and any
requirements recommended by the petitioner and/or City staff
to ameliorate such impacts.
F. Criteria For Special Events. Special events may be conducted on
private property within the "C-1," "C-2," "C-3," "O-I," "I-1," "I-2," "CBD,"
"FHCD" or "HCD" zoning districts and within the commercial portion of
any planned development district, provided the following conditions are
met:
1. Permit required.
a. A special event permit shall be required for a special event.
b. A special event permit application shall be submitted to the
Department of Community Development at least fourteen (14)
days prior to the start date of the special event to allow
sufficient time for review of the application. Additional
requirements associated with a special event such as a liquor
license may require additional review time.
c. The fee for a special event permit is twenty-five dollars
($25.00) and shall be paid at the time the special event permit
application is submitted.
d. A special event permit application shall be reviewed by the
Director of Community Development in conjunction with the
Departments of Fire, Police and Public Works.
e. Each special event permit application shall include a site
sketch; the dates and hours of the special event; anticipated
attendance each day; an agenda, itinerary or schedule of
events for each day; a detailed plan for parking both on site
and off site, a traffic management plan, a sign plan,
identification of all temporary structures; food, vending, and
alcoholic beverages service or sales, on-site restroom facilities
plan, litter receptacle plan and security plan; the dates, times
and location of any live music performance or music broadcast
that is amplified by speakers or any other means; a site
remediation plan; and any other information deemed
necessary by the City.
f. Each special event permit application shall include
documentation that the owner of the property where the
special event will be held has authorized the property to be
used for the special event. This requirement includes property
used for parking.
2. Standards for special event permits.
Section
400.480
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.480
100:896
a. There shall not be more than four (4) special events located
upon the same property within the same calendar year, and
each special event shall not exceed a period of three (3)
consecutive days. These requirements may be modified by a
conditional use permit issued by the City Council upon
recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
b. The special event shall only be conducted in accordance with
the special event permit issued, including any conditions or
restrictions.
c. It is the sole responsibility of the special event applicant to
demonstrate and ensure that public safety, adequate on-site
restroom facilities and litter control are provided.
d. The special event applicant shall demonstrate that the special
event will not cause traffic congestion given the anticipated
attendance in relation to the design of adjacent streets and
intersections. A traffic management plan shall be submitted as
part of the request for a special event permit.
e. The special event applicant shall demonstrate that adequate
off-street parking is available for the anticipated attendance of
the special event and that the event shall not cause a shortage
of parking for any other use. Off-street parking used for a
special event must be a solid surface such as asphalt or
concrete.
f. The sign plan submitted with the special event permit
application shall be reviewed in accordance with Chapter 400,
Article XVI, Sign Regulations. Notwithstanding, the Director of
Community Development may approve temporary signage
totaling twenty-four (24) square feet in the form of a banner or
portable sign. Properties with multiple street frontages may
have such signs totaling twenty-four (24) square feet on each
frontage.
g. Upon conclusion of the special event, the site must be restored
to its previous condition within twenty-four (24) hours.
h. The City may inspect, as may be necessary, to ensure
compliance with this Section and all other ordinances relating
thereto.
3. Other requirements.
a. No special event permit shall be issued unless all other City,
County and State licenses and permits required for the special
event have been issued. These licenses and permits include but
are not limited to business license, Missouri liquor license,
County liquor license, City liquor license, County Health
Department, City electrical code and fire code. It is the
Section
400.480
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.480
100:897
responsibility of the special event permit applicant to ensure
all licenses and permits are timely obtained.
b. The special event shall comply with noise control provisions
found in Chapter 230 of the Code of Ordinances.
c. The special event shall comply with all applicable City, County,
State and Federal health, safety, environmental and other
applicable requirements.
4. Denial of special event permit. The Director of Community
Development shall have the authority to deny a special event
permit application based on incomplete information or if, in the
opinion of the Director of Community Development, the proposed
special event will have a negative impact on the health, safety and
general welfare of the community. In addition, the Director of
Community Development may deny a special event permit
application if the applicant has failed to comply with the
requirements of any previously issued special event permit.
5. Appeals of permit denial. An applicant may appeal a denial of a
special event permit within ten (10) days of the decision by the
Director of Community Development to the City Council. The City
Council shall, at its next regularly scheduled Council meeting at
least ten (10) days after the applicant's appeal to the City Council,
consider the facts relevant to the denial of the permit and either
shall uphold the denial or reverse the decision of the Director of
Community Development.
G. Criteria For Outdoor Display Of Merchandise In The South Main
Preservation District. The outdoor display of merchandise is allowed
within the South Main Preservation District (SMPD) subject to the
following conditions:
1. Merchandise may be displayed outdoors only when the business is
open to the public. In no case shall merchandise be displayed
overnight.
2. Merchandise displayed outdoors must be available for purchase or
rent inside the business.
3. A clear and unobstructed path at least forty-four (44) inches wide
must be maintained on the sidewalk adjoining the business at all
times.
4. Merchandise may not encroach upon parking spaces or driveways.
Merchandise may be displayed in a front, side or rear yard,
provided that:
a. All merchandise displayed in a yard is kept a minimum of three
(3) feet from all property lines;
Section
400.480
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.480
100:898
b. Not more than fifty percent (50%) of the total yard area is
occupied by merchandise; and
c. All other conditions of this Section are observed.
5. Merchandise may not obstruct sight distance for vehicular or
pedestrian traffic, and it may not be located within five feet of a bus
stop, fire hydrant, pedestrian crosswalk or handicapped corner
curb cut. Merchandise may not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular
access to the curb.
6. Merchandise, whether individual items or stacked items, may not
exceed four (4) feet in height above grade.
7. Merchandise affixed to the building may be located only on the
front (street facing) facade and may not occupy more than ten
percent (10%) of the total square feet of the building's front facade.
Clothing or wearable goods may only be displayed on freestanding
body forms (as delineated in Subsection (G)(9) of this Section) and
not hung or attached to any portion of the front facade, including,
but not limited to, shutters, doors and windows.
8. No sales may take place outside the place of business, and all
transactions must take place indoors except during the Festival of
the Little Hills. During the Festival of the Little Hills, sales may
take place outside the business on private property during the
posted event hours. [See Condition No. 12 in Subsection (G)(12).]
9. Not more than two (2) body forms made of wood, wire or metal may
be displayed outside a business, provided that the merchandise
displayed on the body form is representative of at least fifty percent
(50%) of the stock offered for sale and provided that all other
conditions of this Section are observed. Body forms may exceed the
maximum height of four (4) feet, but in no case shall they exceed
six (6) feet in height. Under no circumstances may clothing racks,
hat racks or tables be displayed outside.
10. Merchandise may not be displayed on a public right-of-way without
a right-of-way encroachment license from the City.
11. Tents made of any material may not be used except during the
Festival of the Little Hills. [See Condition No. 12 in Subsection
(G)(12).]
12. During the Festival of the Little Hills, merchants that normally
operate in the SMPD may display merchandise outside on the
sidewalk adjacent to their premises or private property without
approval of the Festival Committee set forth in Code Section
125.810, provided that the merchandise displayed is normally
offered for sale and provided that all conditions of this Section are
observed. Merchants that do not normally operate in the SMPD
may display merchandise outside, provided that they obtain the
Section
400.480
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.480
100:899
Section 400.490. Sidewalk Cafes — Definitions, Standards and
Criteria. [R.O. 2009 §156.095; Ord. No. 08-77, 4-16-2008; Ord. No.
10-144 §1, 7-8-2010; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
approval of the Festival Committee and display merchandise only in
the location authorized by the Festival Committee. Tents no larger
than ten (10) feet by ten (10) feet [one hundred (100) square feet]
may be used for the outdoor display of merchandise only during the
Festival of the Little Hills.
13. Deviations from these conditions may be allowed only with a
conditional use permit reviewed by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and approved by the City Council per the procedure in
Section 400.990(E). The application fee for a conditional use permit
in this case shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00).
A. Intent And Purpose. It is the intent and purpose of this Section and
Section 400.500 to allow sidewalk cafes upon City right-of-way through
the issuance of a sidewalk cafe permit and right-of-way encroachment
license to control and limit any adverse impact on pedestrian traffic and
other uses of the right-of-way. Notwithstanding the forgoing, sidewalk
cafes permits shall not be available to businesses located on that
portion of South Main bordered on the north by First Capitol Drive and
bordered on the south by Reservoir Drive. This Section and Section
400.500 shall be exempt from the requirements of Sections 400.340(C),
400.350(C), 400.360(C—D), 400.370(C—D), 400.380(C) and 400.1180
through 400.1320, inclusive.
B. Definitions. When used in this Section and Section 400.500, the
following words shall have the following meanings unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
PERMIT — A sidewalk cafe permit issued pursuant to this Section and
Section 400.500.
PERMITTEE — The recipient of a sidewalk cafe permit.
RESTAURANT — A food service establishment that is maintained and
operated as a place where food and beverages are prepared, served and
sold for consumption on the premises.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land in which the City has an easement, has been
dedicated by use or is required for use as a sidewalk, street or alleyway.
RIGHT-OF-WAY ENCROACHMENT LICENSE — A revocable license to
operate a sidewalk cafe on the City right-of-way.
SIDEWALK — That portion of the right-of-way which is located between
the curb line or the lateral line of a street and the adjacent property
line and which is intended for use by pedestrians.
SIDEWALK CAFE — A use located on a public sidewalk that is
associated with a restaurant where food and beverages are prepared,
served, sold and are delivered for consumption on the sidewalk. A
Section
400.480
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.490
100:900
sidewalk cafe is characterized by tables and chairs and may be shaded
by awnings, canopies or umbrellas. Special events permitted by the City
shall not be deemed sidewalk cafes.
STREET — That portion of a right-of-way improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular traffic or parking.
C. Standards, Criteria And Conditions. The following standards, criteria
and conditions shall apply to the establishment and operation of
sidewalk cafes:
1. Sidewalk cafes are restricted to the sidewalk frontage of the
building where the restaurant is located. The design of sidewalk
cafes shall be so that there is a free flow of pedestrian access on the
sidewalk.
2. No sidewalk cafe permit shall be issued where the tables and chairs
would be placed within five (5) feet of bus stops, fire hydrants, nonpedestrian
alleyways, a pedestrian crosswalk or a handicapped
corner curb cut.
3. Sidewalk cafes shall be located in such a manner that a distance of
not less than forty-four (44) inches is maintained at all times as a
clear and unobstructed pedestrian path between the curb line or
the lateral line of a street and the adjacent property line or shall
comply with the American with Disabilities Act requirements,
whichever is greater.
4. No object shall be permitted around the perimeter of an area
occupied by tables and chairs which would have the effect of
forming a physical or visual barrier discouraging the free use of the
tables and chairs by the general public or which would have the
effect of obstructing the pedestrian path. Exceptions to this
requirement may be granted by the City Council through the
approval of a right-of-way encroachment license when sidewalk
cafes are located on street right-of-way used solely for pedestrian
traffic provided that adequate walkway space, as determined by the
City Engineer, is provided for pedestrian traffic.
5. Tables, chairs, umbrellas and other permissible objects provided
within the sidewalk cafe shall be of quality, design, materials, size,
elevation and workmanship both to ensure the safety and
convenience of users.
6. Umbrellas and other decorative material shall be fire-retardant,
pressure-treated or manufactured of fire-resistant material.
7. Tables, chairs, umbrellas and other permissible objects provided
with a sidewalk cafe shall be maintained with a clean appearance
and shall be in good repair at all times.
8. Except for in any of the recognized historic districts, the following
condition shall apply: a maximum of one (1) menu board and one
Section
400.490
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.490
100:901
(1) specials board shall be permitted per sidewalk cafe. The board
shall be in compliance with the sign ordinance. Signs are permitted
on umbrellas and shall be in compliance with the sign ordinance.
9. The permit may be transferred to a new owner only for the location
and area listed on the permit. The transferee of the permit shall be
required to comply with this Section, Section 400.500, applicable
insurance requirements and execute a right-of-way encroachment
license.
10. The Mayor may require the temporary removal of sidewalk cafes
for special events, or when street, sidewalk or utility repairs
necessitate such action.
11. The Mayor may order the immediate removal or relocation of all or
parts of a sidewalk cafe in emergency situations or for safety
considerations, without notice. The City and its officers and
employees shall not be responsible for sidewalk cafe fixtures
relocated during emergencies.
12. The permittee shall use positive action to assure that its use of the
sidewalk in no way interferes with sidewalk users or limits their
free, unobstructed passage.
13. The area covered by the permit, including the sidewalk, curb and
gutter immediately adjacent to it and all sidewalk frontage of the
restaurant for which the permit is issued, shall be maintained in a
neat and orderly appearance at all times by the permittee. The area
shall be kept clear of all debris. The permittee shall also be
responsible for cleaning the ground or floor surface on which the
sidewalk cafe is located and the gutter area immediately adjacent
to the sidewalk cafe. Such cleaning shall include pressure cleaning.
If the area covered by the permit is not maintained in a neat and
orderly appearance after five (5) days' written notice, the City may
then take steps necessary to place the property in a neat and clean
order and charge the permittee with the reasonable cost of repairs.
Such action by the City does not create a continuing obligation on
the part of the City to make further repairs or to maintain the
property and does not create any liability against the City for any
damages to the property if such repairs were completed in good
faith.
14. No advertising signs or business identification signs shall be
permitted in the public right-of-way except as permitted in
Subsection (C)(8) of this Section.
15. No tables, chairs or any other parts of sidewalk cafes shall be
attached, chained or in any manner affixed to any tree, post, sign or
other fixture, curb or sidewalk in or near the permitted area.
16. Sidewalk cafe seating shall be included when determining the
requirements for parking and bathroom facilities of the restaurant.
Section
400.490
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.490
100:902
Section 400.500. Sidewalk Cafes — Permit Application, Approval,
Renewal and Revocation. [R.O. 2009 §156.096; Ord. No. 08-77,
4-26-2008]
17. No cooking or fire apparatus shall be allowed on the public
sidewalk whether or not such area is covered by this permit.
18. Only the sidewalk cafe equipment specifically shown on the
approved site plan drawing referenced in Section 400.500(B)(5)
shall be allowed in the permit area. The estimated chair count per
table may vary within the prescribed area, provided that the chairs
remain within the approved sidewalk cafe area. No permanent
storage of chairs, tables, dishes, silverware or other sidewalk cafe
equipment shall be allowed in the permit area, in any portion of the
public right-of-way or outside the structural confines of the building
in which the restaurant is located; however, the permittee may
maintain such non-permanent structures as rolling service stations
in the permit area during hours of operation.
19. There shall be no live entertainment or speakers placed in the
permit area unless approved and properly permitted by the City.
20. The City shall, as deemed necessary, inspect all sidewalk cafes for
which permits have been issued to determine whether such
sidewalk cafes conform to the criteria set forth in this Subsection.
21. The hours of operation for a sidewalk cafe shall be from the start of
business until 11:00 P.M. or thirty (30) minutes after last food
service, whichever is earlier, unless the sidewalk cafe is completely
enclosed by fencing or barricades in which case the hours of
operation for the sidewalk cafe shall cease at 1:00 A.M.
22. Section 600.100 of this Code, which prohibits drinking in public
places, shall not be enforceable against patrons of a duly permitted
sidewalk cafe so long as open containers of alcohol remain within
the sidewalk cafe's premises and are only available for
consumption during the sidewalk cafe's hours of operation.
A. No person shall establish a sidewalk cafe on any public right-of-way or
sidewalk until a permit to operate the sidewalk cafe has been issued
and where a right-of-way encroachment license has been executed by
the applicant and the City. Sidewalk cafes shall only be located where
permitted by the City's zoning regulations. Sidewalk cafe permit
applications shall be reviewed and approved in the manner as set forth
in this Section.
B. General Application Criteria. Application for a sidewalk cafe permit
shall be made to the City on a form provided by the Director of
Community Development. The application shall include, but not be
limited to, the following information and attachments:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
Section
400.490
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.500
100:903
2. The name and address of the restaurant;
3. A copy of a valid occupancy permit for the building where the
proposed sidewalk cafe will be located;
4. A copy of a current certificate of insurance in the following
categories and amounts:
a. Commercial general liability insurance in the amount of no less
than the minimum amount stated in Section 537.610.1, RSMo.,
and as adjusted annually as determined pursuant to Section
537.610.5, RSMo., for all claims arising out of a single
occurrence and for any one (1) person in a single accident or
occurrence. All insurance shall be from companies duly
authorized to do business in the State of Missouri. All liability
policies shall provide that the City, its elected officials and
employees are an additional insured as to the operation of the
sidewalk cafe and shall provide the severability of interest
provision.
5. A detailed site plan including, but not limited to, the following:
a. The proposed use, materials, colors and design;
b. Relationship of the sidewalk cafe to the adjacent existing
building and their uses and entrance locations;
c. The location of any utilities that might effect or be affected by
the proposal;
d. The relationship of the sidewalk cafe to the centerline of the
adjacent street, if applicable, and to any existing or proposed
public improvements including, but not limited to, benches,
fire hydrants, light standards and landscaping;
e. A drawing (to scale) showing the layout and dimensions of the
existing sidewalk area and adjacent private property, existing
fire hydrants, tree guard railings, fixed tree planters, utility
and above ground fixtures, proposed location, size and number
of tables, chairs, steps, planters, umbrellas, location of
doorways, location of trees, parking meters, bus stops and
shelters, sidewalk benches, trash receptacles and any other
sidewalk obstructions, either existing or proposed, within the
pedestrian area;
f. Photographs, drawings or manufacturer's brochures fully
describing the appearance of all proposed tables, chairs,
umbrellas or other objects related to the sidewalk cafe;
g. A legal description of the property and the total square footage
and exact dimensions of the proposed sidewalk cafe;
h. The existing and proposed pedestrian circulation pattern; and
Section
400.500
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.500
100:904
i. Floor plan of the existing building and any proposed
modification showing the relationship of food preparation
areas to the sidewalk cafe.
6. Plans for the operation of the sidewalk cafe including, but not
limited to, hours of operation, maintenance of the sidewalk cafe
and services to be provided; and
7. A right-of-way encroachment license in the form required by the
City and signed by the applicant.
C. Application Review. The Department of Community Development shall
review the application and approve or deny the permit. The Department
of Community Development may deny an application for a sidewalk cafe
permit where:
1. The applicant has failed to comply with any of the submission
requirements contained in this Section;
2. The sidewalk cafe, as the applicant represents how it will be
operated, fails to comply with the criteria set forth in this Section
or the conditional use permit requirements of Section 400.980(J);
3. Any information submitted by the applicant is found to be
incorrect; or
4. Staff review indicates that the sidewalk cafe would create an
obstruction to or cause congestion of pedestrian or vehicular traffic
due to existing conditions on the surrounding public right-of-way so
as to represent a danger to the health, safety or general welfare of
the public. In the event the Department of Community
Development denies a permit, the applicant may within ten (10)
days of the date of the denial appeal the denial to the City Council.
Notice of denial shall be sent to the applicant by United States mail,
certified mail, return receipt requested at the address shown on the
permit application. Upon an appeal of the denial of a permit, the
Department of Community Development shall prepare a report to
the City Council. The Council shall hear the appeal in no less than
ten (10) days' notice to the applicant. The Council may affirm or
reverse the decision of the Department of Community
Development.
D. Permit Issuance. A sidewalk cafe permit shall be subject to the
following conditions:
1. Effective period. Each permit shall be effective for one (1) year
subject to annual renewal as provided below.
2. Hold harmless provision. Both the permit and the right-of-way
encroachment license shall include an explicit hold harmless
provision holding the City harmless from any and all liability arising
out of the issuance of a sidewalk cafe permit, execution of the right-
Section
400.500
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.500
100:905
of-way encroachment license and the operation of the sidewalk
cafe.
3. Site plan controlled. The permit shall be specifically limited to the
area shown on the exhibit attached to the application and made
part of the permit. The right-of-way encroachment license shall be
specifically limited to the area described in the permit and right-ofway
encroachment license or any attached exhibits.
E. Permit Renewal. The permit renewal fee will become due and payable
thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the permit. Together with such
fee, the permittee shall provide the Department of Community
Development with a renewal application on a form provided by the
department containing the location of the sidewalk cafe. An application
for renewal must include a new site plan if any changes are being made
to the previously approved sidewalk cafe's structure or layout. Failure
to pay the renewal fee or submit the renewal application with
supporting documentation (where applicable) at least thirty (30) days
prior to the expiration of the existing sidewalk cafe permit shall be
grounds to reject the renewal application. In the event of rejection, the
permittee shall remove the sidewalk cafe upon the expiration of the
existing sidewalk cafe permit.
F. Permit Suspension Or Revocation. The City may, as deemed necessary,
inspect sidewalk cafes to determine compliance to the criteria set forth
in this Section and Section 400.490. The Department of Community
Development may revoke or suspend a permit for any sidewalk cafe if it
is found that:
1. Any necessary business or health permit has been suspended,
revoked or canceled;
2. Permittee does not have insurance which is correct and effective in
the minimum amount as required in this Section;
3. Changing conditions of pedestrian or vehicular traffic cause
congestion necessitating the removal of the sidewalk cafe. Such
decisions shall be based upon findings that the existing conditions
represent a danger to the health, safety or general welfare of the
public;
4. Permittee fails to maintain or keep the sidewalk safe and clean; or
5. Permittee has failed to correct violations of the City Code of
Ordinances within five (5) working days of receipt of the official's
notice of same delivered in writing to the permittee. Upon
revocation or suspension of a permit, the Department of
Community Development shall give notice of such action to the
permittee in writing stating the action which has been taken and
the reason therefor. The revocation or suspension shall become
effective within fifteen (15) days following receipt of the notice by
the permittee unless appealed as provided in this Code.
Section
400.500
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.500
100:906
Section 400.510. Portable On Demand Storage Containers. [R.O.
2009 §156.097; Ord. No. 08-195, 9-17-2008]
G. Fee. The annual fee for a sidewalk cafe permit is fifty dollars ($50.00)
and shall not be prorated.
A. Intent And Purpose. It is the intent and purpose of this Section to allow
the use of portable on demand storage containers on a controlled, time
limited basis.
B. Definition. For purposes of this Section, a "portable on demand storage
container" is a portable container designed, constructed and used for
temporary storage of property. Typically, a portable on demand storage
container is rented for a short time period and is removed by truck upon
the expiration of the rental period. A portable on demand storage
container is not a dumpster or receptacle used for the disposal of solid
waste.
C. Permit Required. No person shall park or cause to be parked a portable
on demand storage container on residential property for longer than
five (5) days without first obtaining a permit from the Department of
Community Development.
D. Permit Duration And Display. A portable on demand storage container
permit shall be valid for thirty (30) days and may be renewed for one (1)
additional thirty (30) day period. Persons applying for a permit for use
in conjunction with fire, flood, storm or other disaster repair may be
issued a ninety (90) day permit which may be renewed for one (1)
additional ninety (90) day period. The permit shall specify the dates
during which the container may be located on the property; the location
where the container will be situated on the property; and be affixed to
the container and displayed as long as the container remains on the
property. Not more than three (3) permits may be issued for any lot or
parcel of property in any consecutive twelve (12) month period. There
shall be no fee for the issuance of the permit.
E. Restrictions On Placement. Portable on demand storage containers:
1. Shall be placed on a solid surface;
2. Shall not be placed on public streets or in the right-of-way, except
in case of when no driveway is present, containers may be stored
upon the public right-of-way with permission of the Department of
Engineering; [Ord. No. 18-258, 11-20-2018]
3. Not placed on a driveway shall be set back at least five (5) feet from
the property line; and
4. Shall not be situated in front of a residential structure's windows or
doors so as to impede ingress or egress from the structure in the
case of an emergency.
Section
400.500
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.510
100:907
Section 400.515. Temporary Tents. [Ord. No. 10-244 §1,
11-18-2010]
Nothing in this Subsection is intended to prohibit the placement of
a container in front of a garage door.
A. Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to regulate the location,
placement and duration of temporary tents in non-residential areas.
B. Exceptions. The following regulations shall not apply to construction
trailers or any other type of temporary shelter as otherwise regulated
within the Zoning Ordinance.
C. Definitions. For the purposes of this Section, the definitions in Section
400.050 shall apply.
D. Areas Permitted. Temporary tents are permitted on properties zoned
"C-1", "C-2", "C-3", "I-1", "I-2" and "CBD" occupied by an existing nonresidential
land use.
E. Permits. No person shall construct a temporary tent for commercial use
without first obtaining a tent permit. No tents shall be erected prior to
the issuance of an approved tent permit.
1. Permit length. The maximum length of a temporary tent permit
shall be thirty (30) days. Additional time shall only be granted
through the approval of a conditional use permit.
2. Frequency. One (1) permit per calendar year shall be issued per
commercial business. In the case of multiple-tenant buildings, only
one (1) permit shall be allowed at any one time. Additional permits
may be granted through the approval of a conditional use permit.
F. Information Required For Permit. The following information is required
to apply for a tent permit:
1. Site plan or location map drawn to scale showing the placement of
the tent;
2. Location of on-site parking facilities; and
3. Size of tent.
G. Uses For Tents. Tents may be only used as an accessory use to an
existing primary use permitted within the applicable zoning district, or
for an approved temporary retail sales use.
H. Conditions For Tent Approval. The following minimum conditions are
required for approval of a tent permit:
1. Shall not be located within any required yards or buffer areas;
2. Shall not be located within the sight triangles for any intersections,
public or private;
Section
400.510
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.515
100:908
Section 400.520. Commercial Storage Containers. [Ord. No. 10-98
§1, 5-20-2010]
3. Shall not reduce the available parking spaces below what is
required for the site through the Zoning Code;
4. Shall be located upon a paved surfaced area;
5. Are subject to any applicable building or Fire Department codes or
regulations;
6. All signage must comply with the sign regulations; and
7. May be subject to additional conditions as deemed necessary to
protect the public health, safety and welfare by the City of St.
Charles.
I. Removal. Tents must be dismantled and removed within twenty-four
(24) hours after the expiration date of the permit. Failure to comply
with the removal provisions within seventy-two (72) hours from the
expiration date of the permit may result in citation, subject to a fine of
not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each subsequent day
of non-compliance.
A. Intent And Purpose. It is the intent and purpose of this Section to allow
the use of commercial storage containers on property zoned "C-1"
Neighborhood Business District or higher on a controlled, time limited
basis.
B. Definition. For purposes of this Section, a "commercial storage
container" is a portable container designed, constructed and used for
temporary storage of goods, merchandise and supplies offered for sale
or used by a permitted retail operation. Typically, a commercial storage
container is rented for a short time period and is removed by truck upon
the expiration of the rental period. A commercial storage container is
not a dumpster or receptacle used for the disposal of solid waste.
C. Permit Required. No person shall park or cause to be parked a
commercial storage container on commercial property without first
obtaining a permit from the Department of Community Development.
D. Permit Duration And Display. A commercial storage container permit
shall be valid for ninety (90) days. Additional time may be granted by
the Director of Community Development upon a showing of good and
sufficient cause. The permit shall specify the dates during which the
container may be located on the property; the location where the
container will be situated on the property; be affixed to the container
displayed long as the container remains on the property. There shall be
no fee for the issuance of the permit.
E. Restrictions On Placement And Condition. One (1) commercial storage
container is permitted per business. Additional permits, allowing
Section
400.515
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.520
100:909
Section 400.525. Short Term Rentals. [Ord. No. 19-198, 10-1-2019]
additional commercial storage containers on the same property, may
be issued where the Director of Community Development determines
the lot is of sufficient size to accommodate the additional commercial
storage container(s). The proposed location of a commercial storage
container shall be approved by the Fire Marshall to insure that
firefighting equipment and personnel have adequate access to the
building. In addition, commercial storage containers:
1. Shall be placed on a paved surface behind the back of the building,
between the side yards;
2. Shall not be placed on public streets or in the right-of-way;
3. Shall not be situated on a parking lot in such a way that it reduces
the minimum number of available parking spaces required by City
ordinance;
4. Shall not create a traffic hazard or cause an obstruction to the flow
of customer traffic or service vehicles including, but not limited to,
delivery vehicles and solid waste collection trucks; and
5. Shall be maintained in a clean and orderly condition, kept free of
trash and debris and be locked and secure at all times except when
being accessed by authorized personnel.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to establish regulations for short
term rentals in order to safeguard the peace, safety and general welfare
of neighborhoods within the City of St. Charles by minimizing negative
secondary affects related to short term rentals including excessive
noise, disorderly conduct, illegal parking, overcrowding and excessive
accumulation of refuse. This Section is not intended to provide any
owner of residential property with the right or privilege to violate any
deed restriction or private conditions, governance or restrictions
applicable to the property's owner that may prohibit the use of such
owner's residential property for short term rentals as defined in this
Section. Short term rentals are not permitted in dwelling units that
have deed restrictions or any City imposed conditions of approval or
restrictions that would prohibit the use of such a dwelling as a short
term rental as defined herein.
B. Definitions.
OWNER — The person or entity that holds legal and equitable title to a
short term rental property.
SHORT TERM RENTAL — See Section 400.050.
SHORT TERM RENTAL PROPERTY — See Section 400.050.
TRANSIENT — See Section 400.050.
C. Short Term Rentals.
Section
400.520
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.525
100:910
1. Short term rentals shall be permitted in the "HCD" Historic
Commercial District, "R-1C," "R-1D" and "R-1E" Single-Family
Residential Districts, the "R-2" Two-Family Residential District and
the "R-3A" Multi-Family Residential District subject to the
requirements of this Section.
2. Short term rentals shall be subject to and shall comply with all
requirements of City and State building, fire safety and occupancy
codes and limits.
3. The owner shall not provide any meals as part of a short term
rental.
4. No short term rental shall occur in any location on the short term
rental property except within the dwelling unit.
5. The owner of any short term rental shall be required to apply for
and obtain a short term rental permit and business license from the
City before renting or advertising the availability of the short term
rental.
6. A short term rental permit shall be valid from July 1 and shall
expire on the following June 30.
7. The owner of the short term rental property shall submit the
following information on a short term rental permit application
form provided by the Department of Community Development,
which shall include, at a minimum, the following information: (a)
the name, address and telephone number of the owner of the short
term rental property; and (b) such other information as the City
deems reasonably necessary to administer this Section.
8. Any false statements or false information provided in the
application for a short term rental permit shall be grounds for
denial of the permit, permit revocation or imposition of penalties as
outlined in Section 400.1890.
9. A short term rental application shall be denied if the owner has had
a short term rental permit revoked within the past twelve (12)
months for the same or other short term rental property. If a short
term rental permit is revoked twice, no short term rental permit
shall subsequently be approved for such owner.
10. The owner shall use reasonable, prudent business practices to
insure that the short term rental property is used in a manner that
complies with all applicable Statutes, ordinances, rules and
regulations pertaining to the use and occupancy of the short term
rental property.
11. The name, address and telephone number of a local contact person
who shall be available twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days
per week, for the purpose of responding within forty-five (45)
Section
400.525
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.525
100:911
minutes to complaints regarding the condition, operation or
conduct of occupants of the short term rental property or their
guests, shall at all times be kept on file with the City.
12. The owner or local contact shall upon notification that any
transient, occupant or guest of the short term rental property has
created unreasonable noise or disturbances, engaged in disorderly
conduct or committed a violation of any applicable law, ordinance,
rule or regulation pertaining to the use and occupancy of the short
term rental property, respond in a timely and appropriate manner
to immediately halt or prevent reoccurrence of such conduct.
Failure of the owner or local contact to respond to such calls or
complaints regarding the condition, operation or conduct of the
occupants and/or guests of a short term rental property in a timely
and appropriate manner shall be grounds for revocation of the
short term rental permit and shall subject the owner to all
administrative, legal and equitable remedies available to the City.
13. The owner or local contact shall use reasonably prudent business
practices to insure that the occupants and/or guests of a short term
rental property do not create unreasonable noise or disturbances,
engage in disorderly conduct or violate any applicable law,
ordinance, rule or regulation pertaining to the use and occupancy
of the short term rental property.
14. No amplified or reproduced sound shall be used outside or audible
from the property line of any short term rental property between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.
15. No short term rental property shall be rented more than one (1)
time between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
16. On-site parking for transients of a short term rental property shall
be allowed on approved driveway, garage and/or carport areas only.
17. Prior to the rental of a short term rental property, the owner shall:
a. Obtain through positive identification by driver's license or
passport the contact information of all transients, including the
name, permanent address, telephone number and emergency
contact for each person to occupy the short term rental
property.
b. Require the transient to execute a formal acknowledgement
that he or she is legally responsible for compliance by all
occupants or guests of the short term rental unit with all
applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining
to the use and occupancy of the short term rental unit.
c. Information required in Subsection (C)(17)(a) and (b) above
shall be maintained by the owner for a period of three (3) years
and shall be made available upon request to any employee of
Section
400.525
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.525
100:912
the City responsible for the enforcement of any law, ordinance
rule or regulation pertaining to the use and occupancy of the
short term rental property.
d. The Director of Community Development shall have the
authority to impose additional conditions on the use of any
short term rental property to insure that any potential
secondary affects unique to the subject short term rental
property are avoided or adequately mitigated.
18. The owner shall post the current short term vacation rental permit
number on or in any advertisement appearing in any written
publication or any website that promotes the availability or
existence of a short term vacation rental property.
D. Permit Procedure.
1. Upon receiving an application for a permit for a short term rental
property that complies with the provisions of this Section, the
Department of Community Development shall notify the owners of
all real property within two hundred (200) feet of the property lines
of the subject short term rental property of the short term vacation
rental permit application. The fee for a short term rental permit
shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00) annually.
E. Penalties And Enforcement.
1. The Director of Community Development or designee or the Chief
of Police or designee are responsible for enforcement of this
Section.
2. The Director of Community Development is authorized to suspend
or revoke a short term rental permit for violation of this Section.
Appeal of a permit suspension or revocation shall be in accordance
with Section 605.240 pertaining to business licenses.
3. Upon request by the Director of Community Development or
designee or the Chief of Police or designee, the owner shall provide
access to the short term rental property and to any records related
to the use and occupancy of the short term rental property during
normal business hours for the purpose of determining compliance
with this Section.
4. Pursuant to Section 400.1890, each day during any portion of
which a violation of this Section is committed, continued or
permitted shall be a separate offense.
Section
400.525
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.525
100:913

DIVISION 2
Design Standards
Section 400.530. Accessory Buildings.402 [R.O. 2009 §156.100; CC
1981 §30-51; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998;
Ord. No. 10-143 §2, 7-8-2010; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010; Ord.
No. 16-266 §5, 12-20-2016; Ord. No. 17-151 § 4, 7-28-2017; Ord. No.
18-231, 10-16-2018]
A. Residential Accessory buildings, where permitted, shall be subject to
the following regulations. See Figure 1 following Section 400.050.
1. Use. No accessory building shall be used for a dwelling.
2. A detached accessory building shall not be erected in a required
front yard, except on a double frontage lot. Accessory buildings
located on double frontage lots may be placed in the yard space at
the rear of the building, provided no portion of the frontage along
the same street where the accessory building is proposed to be
located is utilized as the principal entrance for the main building of
any lot in the block.
3. Minimum setback from side or
rear yard lot lines:
5 feet, except 0 feet in the
Central Residential District
Accessory buildings located on double frontage lots and placed in the
yard space at the rear of the building shall be set back at least ten
(10) feet from the property line.
4. Minimum setback from the main
building:
10 feet.
5. Minimum setback from other
accessory buildings:
5 feet.
6. Maximum height in a residential
zoning district:
building shall not exceed the
height of the principal building
as measured according to
Section 400.050.
7. Maximum size shall not be equal to or greater than the base area of
the principal building.
8. The total square footage of all accessory buildings shall not exceed
the square footage of the ground floor of the principal building.
402. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
Section
400.530
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.530
100:915
Section 400.540. Corner Visibility.403 [R.O. 2009 §156.101; CC 1981
§30-55; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord.
No. 16-287 §1, 12-20-2016]
Within the visible area of a corner lot that is included between the lines
of the intersecting streets and a straight line connecting them at points
thirty (30) feet distant from the intersection of the street right-of-way lines,
nothing extending to a height in excess of eighteen (18) inches above the
established street grade shall be erected, planted or maintained. See Figure
7 below.
Figure 7
Corner Visibility
(Example only)
Section 400.550. Fences.404 [R.O. 2009 §156.102; Ord. No. 94-97,
4-19-1994; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 07-186, 6-22-2007;
Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
9. Shipping container structures may be used as accessory buildings
provided all other requirements of this Section are met and
provided further that the conditions enumerated in Section
400.150(D)(1)(q) are met.
10. The accessory building shall comply with the maximum lot
coverage requirement of the zoning district.
B. There shall be no limit to the number of accessory buildings within nonresidential
zoning districts, provided the district's minimum Design
Standards are met.
A. This Section contains the regulations for the erection or alteration of
fences in the City.
403. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
404. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
Section
400.530
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.550
100:916
1. General provisions. [Ord. No. 18-072, 3-20-2018; Ord. No.
18-131, 6-5-2018]
a. Customary fencing around tennis courts and other recreational
amenities shall be exempt from height restrictions but shall
comply in all other respects with the terms of this Section.
b. Fences for pools shall meet the requirements of this Section as
well as all other applicable regulations of the City.
c. It shall be the responsibility of the property owners to insure
that a fence does not block or obstruct the flow of storm water.
d. A permit is required for the construction or replacement of
fences.
e. Fences constructed in the Historic Downtown District, South
Main Historic Preservation District and all fences on corner
lots in all superimposed historic districts shall require approval
by the Landmarks Board. [Ord. No. 19-219, 10-15-2019]
2. Residential districts. [Ord. No. 17-220, 10-17-2017]
a. Fences located within a front yard.
(1) A fence or wall not more than four (4) feet in height, with
distances between its pickets being equal or greater than
the width of its pickets may project into any required front
yard.
(2) A fence greater than four (4) feet in height or constructed
with the distance between its pickets being less than the
width of its pickets are subject to the following
regulations:
(a) Such fences or walls located within a front yard on a
lot with single frontage are prohibited.
(b) Such fences or walls located on a double frontage lot
as defined in Section 400.050, (Excluding Corner Lots)
may project into the front yard space at the rear of the
building, provided no portion of the frontage along the
same street where the fence is proposed to be located
is utilized as the principal entrance for the main
building of any lot in the block. These fences shall not
exceed seven (7) feet in height, and the design, color
and material of the fence shall be complementary or
shall match the color of the principal structure on the
property.
(c) Such fences or walls located on a corner lot and within
a required front yard on the side of a property used as
Section
400.550
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.550
100:917
a principal entrance to the building on the lot are
prohibited.
(d) Such fences or walls located on a corner lot and within
a required front yard on the side of a property not
used as a principal entrance to the building on the lot
shall not exceed seven (7) feet in height, shall be set
back from the property line at least ten (10) feet, and
shall comply with Section 400.540 regarding corner
visibility.
(3) Chain link fencing is prohibited within a required front
yard unless such fence is located on a corner lot and within
a required front yard on the side of a property not used as
the principal entrance to the building. Such a fence will be
subject to the regulations provided within Section
400.550(A)(2). [Ord. No. 18-072, 3-20-2018; Ord. No.
18-131, 6-5-2018]
b. Fences located within a side or rear yard. A fence of up to
seven (7) feet in height may be located within the yard space at
the side or rear of the property regardless of picket spacing.
c. The use of barbed wire, single strand wire, wire mesh, wire
grid or chicken wire fences along the perimeter or boundary of
a property in a residential zoning district is prohibited.
d. Fences or enclosures charged with, or designed to be charged
with, electrical current are prohibited. [Ord. No. 18-072,
3-20-2018; Ord. No. 18-131, 6-5-2018]
3. Commercial and industrial districts. [Ord. No. 18-072,
3-20-2018; Ord. No. 18-131, 6-5-2018]
a. Fences shall be limited to eight (8) feet in height, except as
required for junk yards in Section 400.450(A) and except for
electric fences as provided within Section 400.550(A)(3)(c).
b. Barbed wire shall be permitted only if the lowest strand is at
least seven (7) feet above grade and when used for security
purposes in addition to a regular fence.
c. Fences or enclosures charged with, or designed to be charged
with, electrical current are permitted, subject to the following:
(1) Such fences shall be permitted within the "I-1" Light
Industrial District and "I-2" Heavy Industrial District only.
(2) Such fences shall have a perimeter fence that is not
designed to be charged with an electrical current. The
perimeter fence shall be located between the electric
fence and the property line.
Section
400.550
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.550
100:918
(3) Such fences may not exceed ten (10) feet in height, and
may not extend more than two (2) feet above the height of
the perimeter fence.
(4) The required perimeter fence shall be at least six (6) feet
tall.
(5) Such fences may project toward the perimeter fence no
lower than six (6) feet above grade and may not project
beyond the vertical plane established by the perimeter
fence.
(6) Such fences shall be setback from the perimeter fence a
distance of six (6) inches to one (1) foot..
(7) Where such fences are located on a property that abuts a
residentially zoned parcel, the perimeter fence shall be
sightproof.
(8) Signage identifying the presence of an electrified fence
shall be posted on the required perimeter fence at
intervals no less than sixty (60) feet.
(9) Such fences shall be certified by UL or another nationally
recognized testing agency.
4. Construction and maintenance.
a. All fences must be constructed in a workmanship-like manner
so that the horizontal and vertical support posts are inside of
the fence area or hidden from both the neighbor's and general
public's view. Fences must be straight and run parallel to the
lot line.
b. No more than two (2) different types of fencing material (wood
and chainlink or two (2) types of wood) are permitted. No fence
shall be made of, in whole or in part, cloth, slatted chainlink,
sheet metal, corrugated metal, metal scraps, canvas or other
like material. [Ord. No. 16-267 §1, 12-20-2016]
c. Property owners shall be responsible for maintaining fences on
their property and for removal of any fence if it becomes
unsightly or a menace to public safety, health or welfare.
d. Fences shall be maintained in an upright condition.
e. Missing boards, pickets or posts shall be replaced within fortyfive
(45) days with material of the same type and quality.
f. Fences designed for painting or similar surface finishes shall
be maintained in their original condition as designed. All
exposed steel, except the galvanized metal fences, shall have a
Section
400.550
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.550
100:919
Section 400.560. Grades. [R.O. 2009 §156.103; CC 1981 §30-53;
Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No.
10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
Section 400.570. Lighting. [R.O. 2009 §156.104; Ord. No. 98-209,
5-15-1998]
All exterior lighting including illuminated signs, shall be erected and
hooded or shielded, so as to direct light away from any adjacent residential
zoning district.
Section 400.580. Maximum Heights. [R.O. 2009 §156.105; CC 1981
§30-61; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 96-24, 1-18-1996; Ord.
No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 00-78, 4-5-2000; Ord. No. 14-282
§1, 12-16-2014]
colored finish coat applied to them and be preserved against
rust and corrosion.
A. Any building requiring yard space shall be located at such an elevation,
as determined by the Department of Community Development, that a
sloping grade shall be maintained to cause the flow of surface water to
run away from the walls of the building. The rear and side yards shall be
sloped to allow for the flow of surface water away from the building
without creating a nuisance. However, this shall not prevent the
grading of a yard space to provide sunken or terraced areas; provided
proper means are constructed and maintained to prevent the runoff of
surface water from creating a nuisance on the adjacent properties.
B. When a new building is constructed on a vacant lot between two (2)
existing buildings or adjacent to an existing building, the new building
and the yard around the new building shall be graded in such a manner
as to meet existing grades and not to permit runoff of surface water to
flow onto the adjacent properties.
C. Final grades shall be approved by the Department of Community
Development and the Department of Public Works.
A. Church spires, belfries, monuments, tanks, private water and fire
towers, stage towers or scenery lofts, cooling towers, ornamental
towers and spires, non-residential chimneys, elevator bulkheads,
stacks, conveyors, flagpoles and similar structures or architectural
features not intended for human occupancy may be erected in excess of
the district height regulations if sited in such a way that, should the
structure fall, it will not fall upon any property adjacent to the lot where
the structure is located.
B. Buildings in the "C-2," "C-3," "1-1," "1-2" and "OBP" Districts may be
erected to a maximum height of eight (8) stories or ninety (90) feet if
the building setbacks and/or minimum distances between buildings are
also increased one (1) foot for each one (1) foot of additional building
Section
400.550
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.580
100:920
Section 400.590. Moving of Buildings.405 [R.O. 2009 §156.106; CC
1981 §30-54; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998;
Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
Section 400.600. Parking and Storage of Boats, Trailers, Camper
Shells and Recreational Vehicles On Residential Property, City
Streets and in Mobile Home Parks.406 [R.O. 2009 §156.107; CC 1981
§30-72; Ord. No. 92-70, 4-21-1992; Ord. No. 92-139, 6-17-1992; Ord.
No. 92-170A, 7-22-1992; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No.
01-126, 6-20-2001; Ord. No. 02-171, 7-10-2002; Ord. No. 08-244,
11-25-2008; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010; Ord. No. 11-098 §1,
5-20-2011]
height above the district regulations, with approval of the City Council.
Buildings in the "CBD" may be erected to a maximum height of eight (8)
stories or ninety (90) feet, with approval of the City Council.
C. Water storage tanks tor public drinking water supply are exempted
from the maximum height requirements of Chapter 400.
A. Any building or structure shall not be moved to and placed upon any
other premises in the City until a permit for such removal shall have
been secured from the Department of Community Development.
B. Any such building or structure shall fully conform to all the provisions
of these regulations in the same manner as a new building or structure.
C. No building or structure shall be moved into the jurisdiction of the City
from outside the jurisdiction of the City until such permit has been
secured.
D. Before a permit may be issued for moving a building or structure, the
Department of Community Development shall inspect the building and
shall determine if it is in a safe condition to be moved and whether it
may be reconditioned to comply with the adopted building code(s) and
other requirements of the City for its use and occupancy.
A. Locational Requirements. Recreational vehicles (RV) as defined in
Section 400.050, boats, boats on a trailer, recreational and camping
trailers and camper shells may be parked on a residential lot only under
the following circumstances: [Ord. No. 19-093, 4-16-2019]
1. Enclosed within a garage or accessory structure.
2. In a rear yard, defined for the purposes of this Section as the area
extending along the full width of the rear lot line between the side
lot lines and extending toward the front lot line for a depth as
specified in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is
405. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
406. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
Section
400.580
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.600
100:921
located. The entire area beneath the RV, boat, trailer or camper
must be a paved surface area as defined in Section 400.050.
3. In a side yard, defined for the purposes of this Section as a yard
extending along the side lot line between the front and rear yards
having a width as specified in the yard regulations for the district in
which the lot is located. The entire area beneath the RV, boat trailer
or camper must be a paved surface area as defined in Section
400.050. An RV, boat, trailer or camper may be placed in a side yard
only if:
a. The area of the rear yard is not sufficient to allow parking or
storage; or
b. Access to the rear yard is obstructed by utility facilities or is
not wide enough so that there is insufficient access for parking
or storage; or
c. The grade of the rear yard is in excess of ten percent (10%) and
therefore will not allow the safe creation of a driveway or
parking or storage space; or
d. Trees of at least four (4) inches in diameter block access to the
rear yard for parking or storage.
4. An RV may be parked within a front yard of a corner lot which is not
used as the principal frontage of the lot. The entire area beneath
the RV must be a paved surface area as defined in Section 400.050.
An RV may be placed in a non-primary front yard only if:
a. The property owner possesses an RV permit issued by
Community Development before July 10, 2005.
b. The RV is parked within a non-primary front yard and
encroaches into the front yard setback for the district by no
greater than fifteen (15) feet;
c. No portion of any sidewalk shall be obstructed by the
projection of an RV; and
d. Parking in the side or rear yards is infeasible due to one of the
following:
(1) The area of the rear or side yards are not sufficient to
allow parking or storage:
(2) Access to the rear or side yard is obstructed by utility
facilities or access is too narrow to provide access for
parking or storage;
(3) The grade of the rear or side yards is in excess of ten
percent (10%) and therefore will not allow the safe
creation of a driveway or parking or storage space:
Section
400.600
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.600
100:922
(4) Trees of at least four (4) inches in diameter block access to
the rear or side yards for parking or storage; or
(5) A permitted structure blocks access to the rear or side
yards for parking or storage.
5. Notwithstanding the above restrictions, recreational vehicles,
trailers designed or utilized as temporary living quarters for
recreation, camping or travel use, trailers designed or utilized for
the transportation of a boat or camper shell may be parked on a
residential lot for no more than forty-eight (48) consecutive hours
for the purpose of loading or unloading if the owner is present.
6. Recreational vehicles (RV) as defined in Section 400.050, boats,
boat trailers, recreational and camping trailers, and camper shells
shall not be parked between the front facade of a building and the
street, except for a period not to exceed forty-eight (48)
consecutive hours for the purposes of loading or unloading if the
owner is present.
B. Locational Requirements. Trailers including, but not limited to, the
following: cargo/enclosed trailers, race car trailers, equipment trailers,
car haulers, concession/specialty trailers, motorcycle, ATV and
snowmobile trailers, and landscape trailers shall only be parked or
stored on residential lots under the following circumstances:
1. Enclosed within a garage or accessory structure; or
2. In a rear yard only if entire area beneath the cargo/enclosed trailer,
race car trailer, equipment trailer, car hauler, concession/specialty
trailer, motorcycle, ATV or snowmobile trailer is a paved surface
area as defined in Section 400.050; or
3. In a side yard, defined for the purposes of this Section as a yard
extending along the side lot line between the front and rear yards,
having a width as specified in the yard regulations for the district in
which the lot is located. The entire area beneath the trailer must be
a paved surface area as defined in Section 400.050. A cargo/
enclosed trailer, race car trailer, equipment trailer, car hauler,
concession/specialty trailer, motorcycle, ATV or snowmobile trailer
may be placed in a side yard only if:
a. The area of the rear yard is not sufficient to allow parking or
storage; or
b. Access to the rear yard is obstructed by utility facilities or is
not wide enough so that there is insufficient access for parking
or storage; or
c. The grade of the rear yard is in excess of ten percent (10%) and
therefore will not allow the safe creation of a driveway or
parking or storage space; or
Section
400.600
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.600
100:923
d. Trees of at least four (4) inches in diameter block access to the
rear yard for parking or storage.
4. A cargo/enclosed trailer, race car trailer, equipment trailer, car
hauler, concession/specialty trailer, motorcycle, ATV or snowmobile
trailer shall not be parked or stored between the front facade of a
building and the street.
C. Design Standards. To be parked in a residential zoning district,
recreational vehicles as defined in Section 400.050 of this Code, boats,
boats on a trailer, recreational and camping trailers, camper shells,
cargo/enclosed trailers, race car trailers, equipment trailers, car
haulers, concession/specialty trailers, motorcycle, ATV and snowmobile
trailers and landscape trailers must meet the following design
standards:
1. They shall not be used for storage of materials, goods or
equipment, other than those items considered to be a part of the
unit or essential to its immediate use; and
2. They shall not be wrecked, damaged, inoperative, disassembled or
disabled; and
3. They shall not be used as dwelling units while parked in any
residential zoning district; and
4. They shall only be connected to an electrical power outlet or water
connection for maintenance purposes only in any residential zoning
district; and
5. The maximum length of any recreational vehicle, recreational or
camping trailer, camper shell, boat or boat on a trailer, cargo/
enclosed trailers, race car trailers, equipment trailers, car haulers,
concession/specialty trailers, motorcycle, ATV and snowmobile
trailers and landscape trailers parked on a residential lot shall not
exceed thirty-two (32) feet; and
6. A maximum of two (2) of the following shall be allowed for any one
(1) residential lot: recreational vehicle, recreational or camping
trailer, camper shell, boat or boat on a trailer, cargo/enclosed
trailers, race car trailers, equipment trailers, car haulers,
concession/specialty trailers, motorcycle, ATV and snowmobile
trailers, and landscape trailers.
7. The parking surface shall be designed, constructed and intended to
be used expressly for the purpose of parking or storing recreational
vehicles, recreational or camping trailers, camper shells, boats or
boat trailers, cargo/enclosed trailers, race car trailers, equipment
trailers, car haulers, concession/specialty trailers, motorcycle, ATV
and snowmobile trailers, and landscape trailers.
Section
400.600
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.600
100:924
Section 400.610. Public Utilities.408 [R.O. 2009 §156.108; CC 1981
§30-64; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 96-113, 4-4-1996; Ord.
No. 97-370, 10-22-1997; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No.
00-78, 4-5-2000]
D. Nothing contained in this Section is intended to invalidate any
subdivision covenant or homeowners' association covenant which is
more stringent than the provisions of this Section.
E. Except as specified in this Section, recreational vehicles, boats, boats
on a trailer, all trailers including, but not limited to, the following:
cargo/enclosed trailers, race car trailers, equipment trailers, car
haulers, concession/specialty trailers, motorcycle, ATV and snowmobile
trailers, landscape trailers, recreational and camping trailers, and
camper shells shall not be parked or stored in any portion of a
residential zoning district including residential lots and residential
streets.
F. In a mobile home park as defined in Section 400.050, recreational
vehicles (RV's), boats, boats on a trailer, recreational and camping
trailers, camper shells, trailers, cargo/enclosed trailers, race car
trailers, equipment trailers, car haulers, concession/specialty trailers,
motorcycle, ATV and snowmobile trailers, and landscape trailers
(hereinafter, collectively "items") may be parked and stored on a lot
only under the following circumstances: [Ord. No. 15-294 §1,
12-15-2015407]
1. Only one (1) item may be parked on a lot.
2. The item shall be parked on a paved surface adjacent to the street.
The item shall not be parked on the street or on any unpaved
surface.
3. The item shall have all required licenses, registrations and permits
and shall be in operable condition.
A. Electrical, Communication And The Like. All electric lines, telephone
lines, cable television lines and related lines for the transmission of
telecommunication services shall be installed underground, except in
residential zoning districts where existing electric and communication
distribution lines are located overhead. Overhead electric and
telecommunication lines may be installed in said residential zoning
districts for infill housing, building additions, new accessory buildings
and upgrading of electrical services. Cable switching enclosures, pad-
407. Editor's Note: Section 1 of Ord. No. 15-294 also changed the title of Section 400.600 from
"Parking and Storage of Boats, Trailers, Camper Shells and Recreational Vehicles on
Residential Property and City Streets" to "Parking and Storage of Boats, Trailers, Camper
Shells and Recreational Vehicles on Residential Property, City Streets and in Mobile Home
Parks."
408. Cross References—As to business regulations relating to public utilities, ch. 615; as to
water, sewers and sewage disposal, Title VII.
Section
400.600
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.610
100:925
Section 400.615. Facilities Permits. [Ord. No. 19-152, 7-16-2019]
mounted transformers and service pedestals may be installed above
ground.
B. Accessible Public Water Supply. Where public water is within one
hundred (100) feet, each lot within the subdivision area shall be
required to connect thereto. All connections shall be subject to the
approval of the Board of Public Works.
C. Non-Accessible Public Water Supply. In a proposed subdivision
(pending accessibility of a public water supply) the subdivider may be
required to construct wells or a private water supply system in such a
manner that an adequate supply of potable water, approved by the
State Board of Health, will be available to every lot in the subdivision at
the time improvements are erected thereon.
D. Sanitary Sewer System. Each lot within the subdivided area shall
connect to the public sanitary sewer system from a single lateral, in
accordance with Chapter 705 of the City Code of Ordinances. All
connections to the public sanitary sewer system shall be subject to the
approval of the Board of Public Works. [Ord. No. 13-178 §1,
9-24-2013]
A. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
UTILITY FACILITY — Any line, facility or system for producing,
transmitting or distributing communications, cable television, power,
electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water, steam, waste,
storm water not connected with highway drainage or any other similar
commodity which directly or indirectly serves the public, owned by
a privately, publicly or cooperatively owned utility company, inclusive
of any substantially owned or controlled subsidiary of such utility
company.
B. Any utility company desiring to place utility facilities on private
property must first apply for and obtain a utility facility(ies) permit, in
addition to any other permit, license, easement, franchise or
authorization required by law. The Director of Community Development
may design and make available standard forms for such applications,
requiring such information as allowed by law and as the Director of
Community Development determines in his or her discretion is
necessary and consistent with the provisions of this Article and to
accomplish the purposes of this Article. Each application shall at
minimum contain the following information, unless otherwise waived by
the Director of Community Development:
1. The name of the utility company on whose behalf the utility
facility(ies) are to be installed and the name, address and telephone
number of a representative whom the City may notify or contact at
Section
400.610
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.615
100:926
any time (i.e., twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per
week concerning the utility facility(ies); and
2. A description of the proposed work, including a site plan and such
plans or technical drawings or depictions showing the nature,
dimensions and description of the utility facility(ies), their location
[including an identification of the interest of the applicant or the
utility facility(ies) owner in the property where the utility
facility(ies) are proposed to be located] and their proximity to other
utility facility(ies) that may be affected by their installation.
C. Each such application shall be accompanied by an application fee in the
sum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) or such other amount as may
be approved by the City to cover the cost of processing the application.
D. Application Review And Determination.
1. On submission of an application for a new or expanded utility
facility(ies) installation, the applicant shall provide written
verification that written notice of the proposed work and location
was provided to the owner of the property on which the new or
expanded utility facility(ies) are proposed and to the owners of all
directly adjoining properties. The Director of Community
Development shall promptly review each application and shall
grant or deny the application within thirty-one (31) days.
2. Unless the application is denied pursuant to Subsection (D)(5)
hereof, the Director of Community Development shall issue a utility
facility(ies) permit upon determining that the applicant:
a. Has submitted all information required in Subsection (B)(1)
and (2) above, Subsection (D)(3) below; and
b. Has paid the appropriate fees; and
c. Is in full compliance with this Article and all other City
ordinances.
The Director of Community Development may establish procedures
for bulk processing of applications and payment of fees to avoid
excessive processing and accounting costs.
3. It is the intention of the City that proposed utility facility(ies) will
not impair public safety; harm property values or significant sight
lines, or degrade the aesthetics of the adjoining properties or
neighborhood, and that the placement and appearance of the utility
facility(ies) on private property should be minimized and limited in
scope to the extent allowed by law to achieve the purposes of this
Section and comply with Section 400.540 Corner Visibility. To
accomplish such purposes the Director of Community Development
may impose conditions on utility facility(ies) permits, including
alternative landscaping, designs or locations, provided that such
Section
400.615
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.615
100:927
conditions are reasonable and necessary, shall not result in a
decline of service quality and are competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory.
4. An applicant receiving a utility facility(ies) permit shall promptly
notify the Director of Community Development of any material
changes in the information submitted in the application or included
in the permit. The Director of Community Development may issue
an addendum to the approved permit, a revised utility facility(ies)
permit or require that the applicant reapply for a utility facility(ies)
permit.
5. The Director of Community Development may deny an application,
if denial is deemed to be in the public interest, for the following
reasons:
a. Delinquent fees, costs or expenses owed by the applicant;
b. Failure to provide required information;
c. The applicant being in violation of the provisions of this Article
or other City ordinances;
d. For reasons of environmental, historic or cultural sensitivity as
defined by applicable Federal, State or local law;
e. For the applicant's refusal to comply with conditions required
by the Director of Community Development; and
f. For any other reason to protect the public health, safety and
welfare, provided that such denial does not fall within the
exclusive authority of the Missouri Public Service Commission
and is imposed on a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory
basis.
E. Permit Revocation And Ordinance Violations.
1. The Director of Community Development may revoke a utility
facility(ies) permit without fee refund after notice and an
opportunity to cure, but only in the event of a substantial breach of
the terms and conditions of the permit or this Article. Prior to
revocation the Director of Community Development shall provide
written notice to the responsible person identifying any substantial
breach and allowing a reasonable period of time not longer than
thirty (30) days to cure the problem, which cure period may be
immediate if certain activities must be stopped to protect the public
safety. The cure period shall be extended by the Director of
Community Development on good cause shown. A substantial
breach includes, but is not limited to, the following:
a. A material violation of the utility facility(ies) permit or this
Article;
Section
400.615
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.615
100:928
b. An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the
permit or this Article or the perpetration or attempt to
perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the City or its residents;
c. A material misrepresentation of fact in the permit application;
d. A failure to complete facilities installation by the date specified
in the permit, unless an extension is obtained or unless the
failure to complete the work is due to reasons beyond the
applicant's control; and
e. A failure to correct, upon reasonable notice and opportunity to
cure as specified by the Director of Community Development,
work that does not conform to applicable national safety
ordinances, industry construction standards or the City's
pertinent and applicable ordinances, including, but not limited
to, this Article, provided that City standards are no more
stringent than those of a national safety ordinance.
2. Any breach of the terms and conditions of a utility facility(ies)
permit shall also be deemed a violation of this Article and in lieu of
revocation the Director of Community Development may initiate
prosecution of the applicant or the utility facility(ies) owner for
such violation. Concurrent with prosecution of the violation, the
Director of Community Development may issue a "stop work order"
as defined and provided for in Section 400.050 of the Code of
Ordinances - Zoning Code.
F. Appeals And Alternative Dispute Resolution.
1. Any person aggrieved by a final determination of the Director of
Community Development may appeal in writing to the Director of
Administration within five (5) business days thereof. The appeal
shall assert specific grounds for review, and the Director of
Administration shall render a decision on the appeal within fifteen
(15) business days of its receipt affirming, reversing or modifying
the determination of the Director of Community Development. The
Director of Administration may extend this time period for the
purpose of any investigation or hearing deemed necessary. A
decision affirming the Director of Community Development's
determination shall be in writing and supported by findings
establishing the reasonableness of the decision. Any person
aggrieved by the final determination of the Director of
Administration may file a petition for review pursuant to Chapter
536, RSMo., as amended, in the Circuit Court of the County of St.
Charles. Such petition shall be filed within thirty (30) days after the
Director of Administration's final determination.
2. On agreement of the parties and in addition to any other remedies,
any final decision of the Director of Administration may be
submitted to mediation or binding arbitration.
Section
400.615
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.615
100:929
Section 400.620. Setback Requirements Generally.409 [R.O. 2009
§156.109; CC 1981 §§30-66, 30-69; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord.
No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 03-205, 8-25-2003; Ord. No.
07-167, 6-13-2007; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010; Ord. No. 17-115
§ 1, 6-20-2017]
a. In the event of mediation, the Director of Administration and
the applicant shall agree to a mediator. The costs and fees of
the mediator shall be borne equally by the parties, and each
party shall pay its own costs, disbursements and attorney fees.
b. In the event of arbitration, the Director of Administration and
the applicant shall agree to a single arbitrator. The costs and
fees of the arbitrator shall be borne equally by the parties. If
the parties cannot agree on an arbitrator, the matter shall be
resolved by a three-person arbitration panel consisting of one
(1) arbitrator selected by the Director of Administration, one
(1) arbitrator selected by the applicant or utility facility(ies)
owner and one (1) person selected by the other two (2)
arbitrators, in which case each party shall bear the expense of
its own arbitrator and shall jointly and equally bear with the
other party the expense of the third arbitrator and of the
arbitration. Each party shall also pay its own costs,
disbursements and attorney fees.
A. Generally.
1. Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky, except as
authorized by this Article and except ordinary projections of sills,
belt courses, window air-conditioning units, chimneys, cornices
and ornamental features which may project to a distance not to
exceed twenty-four (24) inches into a required yard. For purposes
of this item, landscaped areas are considered to be open to the sky.
2. On double frontage lots the required front yard shall be provided
on each street.
3. There shall be a front yard on each street side of a corner lot in any
district; provided that the buildable width of a lot of record at the
time of passage of this Section shall not be reduced to less than
twenty-eight (28) feet.
4. Open, unenclosed porches, decks or platforms, including those not
covered by a roof or canopy and which do not extend above the
level of the first floor of the building, may extend or project into any
required front yard setback no more than six (6) feet. Open,
unenclosed decks or porches or decks or porches covered by a roof
or canopy and/or enclosed by screening may encroach into the
required rear yard setback no more than ten (10) feet. Deck
409. Cross References—As to penalty, §400.1890; as to parks and recreation, ch. 255.
Section
400.615
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.620
100:930
enclosures that consist of any material other than screening, such
as glass or solid walls or that consist of less than ninety percent
(90%) screening, are considered room additions and must meet the
required rear yard setback for the zoning district in which they are
located. [Ord. No. 18-231, 10-16-2018]
5. Where a lot is within one hundred (100) feet of one (1) or more
buildings existing on each side, the front yard setback line shall be
the average setback of these adjoining buildings.
6. Interior lots abutting on a pedestrian walkway shall be required to
have a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet abutting the walkway.
B. Fences. See Section 400.550.
C. Swimming Pools. [Ord. No. 18-231, 10-16-2018]
1. In all residential zoning districts, the "A" district and for any
dwelling unit in the "C-1", "HCD" or "CBD" districts, swimming
pools shall not be constructed in any required yard, except the
required rear yard and not closer than six (6) feet to a side or rear
property line. Swimming pools located on double frontage lots may
be placed in the yard space at the rear of the building, provided no
portion of the frontage along the same street where the swimming
pool is proposed to be located is utilized as the principal entrance
for the main building of any lot in the block. Swimming pools
located on double frontage lots and placed in the yard space at the
rear of the building must meet one-half (1/2) of the front yard
setback.
2. In no instance shall the deck area be nearer than five (5) feet to an
adjoining lot line. For the purposes of this requirement, a
"swimming pool deck area" shall be defined as any constructed
surface directly abutting the pool which provides access to the
water, lounging space or serves as a walkway around the perimeter
of the pool. Swimming pool deck area shall exclude any paved
surface, including, but not limited to, paving blocks, bricks or other
similar material.
3. In commercial zoning districts a swimming pool utilized as part of a
sales/display facility or motel complex or other non-residential use
shall be located no closer than twenty (20) feet to the front
property line and no closer than five (5) feet to a side or rear
property line.
D. Generators.
1. In all residential zoning districts, permanent generators shall not
be located in front of the principal structure or within any required
side yard or rear yard setback.
Section
400.620
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.620
100:931
2. A generator permanently installed in a residential zoning district
shall be shielded with a cover designed and manufactured to muffle
the sound.
3. The testing of generators is prohibited before 7:00 A.M. or after
10:00 P.M. on any day in any residential zoning district.
4. In commercial districts, generators shall be located and screened
in the same manner as required for mechanical equipment.
E. Firewood. [Ord. No. 18-048, 2-20-2018]
1. Firewood may be stored on residential property only for
consumption on the premises. Firewood may not be stored on
residential property for sale, donation or conveyance to any person
other than the residents of said property.
2. Firewood stored on residential property for consumption on the
premises must meet the following conditions:
a. A maximum of four (4) full cords may be stored in the rear yard
behind the rear building line of the residence. The firewood
must be evenly piled or stacked either on open racks elevated
to not less than six (6) inches above the ground or on a durably
paved surface.
b. A clear space of at least twelve (12) inches must be maintained
between firewood stored in the rear yard and buildings, fences
and property lines.
c. A maximum of one-half (1/2) cord may be stored on a
decorative firewood rack located on a front porch or in a side
yard.
3. For purposes of this Section, a cord of firewood shall be defined as
follows: the amount of firewood that, when arranged so pieces are
aligned, parallel, touching and compact, measures four (4) feet
wide by four (4) feet high by eight (8) feet long and is one hundred
twenty-eight (128) cubic feet in volume.
Section
400.620
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.620
100:932
Article IV
Tree Preservation
Section 400.630. Scope of Article. [R.O. 2009 §156.110; Ord. No.
01-156, 7-19-2001; Ord. No. 03-98, 5-13-2003]
Section 400.640. Application of Tree Protection For Developments.
[R.O. 2009 §156.111; Ord. No. 01-156, 7-19-2001; Ord. No. 03-98,
5-13-2003]
A. Purpose And Intent. The purpose and intent of this Article is to conserve
and protect trees within the City and to prevent their unnecessary
destruction.
B. This Article shall be applicable to all properties within the City. It shall
be unlawful for any person to remove any tree (except as permitted
below) or to commence any grading, earth-moving, changing of
elevation of property without first having applied for and received a
permit in accordance with the provisions of this Section.
1. A permit shall be required for all grading, earth-moving, changing
of elevation of property or removal of fifty percent (50%) or more of
live trees ten (10) inches or greater in diameter breast height
(DBH); provided however, that no such permit shall be required for
any parcel less than one (1) acre in size or incidental to
construction on a parcel of land one (1) acre or more in size for the
purpose of constructing a single-family home, accessory structure
or private drive.
2. The requirements contained in a development plan, previously
approved by the City including established drainage design, tree
planting and preservation requirements and all other landscaping
requirements, shall continue in perpetuity or until an amendment is
duly authorized.
A. Development Plan Required. Prior to the issuance of a permit for
grading and/or tree removal, except as indicated in Section 400.630(B),
an applicant must submit a development plan to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for all developments located outside the historic
districts or to the Historic Landmarks Preservation and Architectural
Review Board for all developments located within the historic districts
and the extended historic district with a written statement of the
proposed work to be accomplished and a site plan which shall include:
1. Location of trees. Site plans for a development must provide the
species, size at diameter breast height and location of existing
trees with a DBH of ten (10) inches or greater within an area to be
disturbed by construction. Such trees are to be designated
according to whether they are to be preserved or removed.
Section
400.630
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.640
100:933
2. The nature and extent of the proposed grading, earth-moving or
change in elevation. The grading plan shall include existing and
proposed contours at two (2) foot intervals and a drainage design
plan complete with calculations supporting the design.
3. Tree protection measures consistent with the requirements of this
Article.
4. The number, species, size (DBH) and location of additional trees
that will be planted on the site.
5. Replacement requirements for all developments. Except for fifty
percent (50%) of the existing trees which may be removed without
a permit, any tree ten (10) inches DBH or larger removed from an
approved development shall be replaced at a ratio equal to the
number of inches contained in the diameter of the tree removed.
The minimum size of a replacement tree is two and one-half (2½)
inches DBH. If the carrying capacity of the site cannot
accommodate the replanting of the required number of
replacement trees on the subject tract, the owner shall be assessed
fifty dollars ($50.00) for each inch of DBH which cannot be
replaced. Such assessment shall be placed in the Tree Bank of the
City.
6. Protection measures. All trees on public or private property that
are designated for preservation shall be guarded by a four (4) foot
high barrier that designates the enclosed area as a tree protection
zone. This enclosure shall extend equal to the canopy area of the
tree (at a minimum). No building materials, waste materials, excess
dirt, construction debris, equipment or vehicles shall be allowed
within this protection zone.
7. Marking of trees. Prior to any tree removal or commencement of
construction on a site and during the plan approval process, the
following uniform colored ribbon system shall be used:
a. Red for trees to be saved;
b. Blue for trees to be removed.
B. Appeal Process. Decisions under this Article may be appealed as
follows:
1. Any dissatisfied party may appeal, in writing, to the Planning and
Zoning Commission, any decision made by the Director of
Community Development or other City Official or the Historic
Landmarks Preservation and Architectural Review Board under the
provisions of this Article within five (5) days of the decision being
rendered, specifying the grounds on which the appeal is made.
Section
400.640
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.640
100:934
Section 400.650. Establishment of A Tree Board. [R.O. 2009
§156.112; Ord. No. 03-98, 5-13-2003]
2. Any dissatisfied party may appeal the decision of the Planning and
Zoning Commission to the City Council within five (5) days of the
decision being rendered.
A. There is hereby created and established a City Tree Board for the City,
which shall operate as a function of the existing Planning and Zoning
Commission.
B. Powers And Duties.
1. It shall be the responsibility of the Tree Board to study, investigate,
counsel and develop and/or update annually and administer written
plans (annual long range) for the care, replacement, maintenance
and removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along
streets and in other public areas. Such plan shall constitute the
official comprehensive community forest plan for the City.
2. The Tree Board shall consider all existing and future utility, public
works and environmental factors when recommending
improvement for each street, park and other public lands of the
municipality.
3. The Tree Board, when requested by the City Council, shall
investigate, make finding, report and recommend upon any special
matter or questions relating to trees.
Section
400.640
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.650
100:935

Article V
Off-Street Parking And Loading
Section
400.660
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.650
100:937

DIVISION 1
Parking
Section 400.660. General Provisions.410 [R.O. 2009 §156.115; CC
1981 §30-93; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 93-130, 6-9-1993;
Ord. No. 96-168, 6-19-1996; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No.
10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
A. General.
1. In all zoning districts, off-street parking spaces and driveways for
the maneuvering, storage and parking of motor vehicles for the use
of occupants, employees and patrons of the buildings or structures
hereafter erected or enlarged or of riverboats used, after the
effective date of these regulations, shall be paved as defined in
Section 400.050 and shall otherwise be provided as herein
prescribed.
2. Required parking spaces shall be maintained and shall not be
encroached upon so long as the main building, structure, riverboat
or use remains, unless an equivalent number of such parking
spaces is provided elsewhere in conformance with these
regulations. The owners of a building, structure, riverboat or other
use requiring off-street parking space must show to the satisfaction
of the Department of Community Development that they are the
recorded title holders of the property devoted to such principal
land use and of the property proposed for off-street parking use or
that they are the lessees of such property.
3. Required off-street parking spaces which serve an existing
structure or use shall not be reduced in size less than that required
under the terms of these regulations.
4. The City Engineer or designee shall approve all off-street parking
facilities prior to the issuance of a building permit for such
development.
5. Plans for the development of any parking lot must be submitted to
and approved by the Department of Community Development and
the Department of Public Works. The plans shall be prepared at a
scale of not less than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet and shall
indicate existing and proposed grades, drainage facilities, water
mains and sewers, surfacing and base materials to be used, points
of ingress and egress and the general layout of the proposed
parking lot.
B. Definitions.
1. For the purposes of Division 1 "Parking" of this Article, the term
"structure" shall include the meaning prescribed by Section
410. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
Section
400.660
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.660
100:939
Section 400.670. Parking Schedule.411 [R.O. 2009 §156.116; CC
1981 §30-94; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 93-130, 6-9-1993;
400.050 and shall also include floating structures. The remodeling
or alteration of existing buildings or structures shall be exempt
from these provisions if:
a. The exterior dimensions are not changed; and
b. Any increase in floor space is confined within the basic
structure.
2. The term "floor area", as employed in Division 1 "Parking" of this
Article, shall mean the gross floor area of a building or structure
used or intended to be used for service to the public as customers,
patrons, clients, patients or tenants including areas occupied by
fixtures and equipment used for display or sale of merchandise.
"Floor area", for the purpose of Division 1 "Parking" of this Article,
shall not include any area used for:
a. Storage accessory to the principal use of a building or
basement.
b. Janitorial change and repair.
c. Stairways and elevators.
d. Show windows not accessible to the public.
e. Restrooms.
f. Utilities.
g. Dressing, fitting or alteration rooms.
h. Employee lounges.
C. Parking In Residential Zoning Districts. Except as allowed by Section
400.600, all motor vehicles parked or stored on residential property in
any residential zoning district shall be parked and stored:
1. Within a garage or accessory structure or on a paved driveway or
on a paved parking area immediately adjacent to the driveway,
except that any gravel surfaces used for parking of motor vehicles
on the effective date of this Chapter may continue to be used for
parking of motor vehicles; and
2. With the nearest edge of the motor vehicle at least six (6) feet from
the nearest edge of the right-of-way; and
3. With the nearest edge of the motor vehicle at least two (2) feet from
the nearest edge of a public sidewalk.
411. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
Section
400.660
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.670
100:940
Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 99-53, 2-4-1999; Ord. No.
99-205, 6-3-1999; Ord. No. 01-111, 6-8-2001; Ord. No. 10-244 §1,
11-18-2010; Ord. No. 12-231 §2, 12-6-2012; Ord. No. 15-069 §4,
4-21-2015; Ord. No. 18-115, 5-15-2018]
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, when any building or
structure is hereafter erected or structurally altered, any building or
structure hereafter erected is converted, any riverboat is used, accessory
off-street parking spaces shall be provided as follows:
Use Spaces Required
Animal hospital 1 per 400 square feet of floor area; 4
spaces minimum
Auditorium, gymnasium, stadium,
arena or convention hall or
community center
1 per 4 seats or seating spaces; see
also Section 400.680(G)
Automobile or boat sales 1 per 300 square feet of floor area; 2
spaces minimum
Automobile repair and body shops 2 per every 3 employees or fraction
thereof; 2 spaces minimum; plus 1 per
each bay
Automobile service stations that
provide repair services and
include gas pumps
1 space for every 2 gas pumps, plus 2
spaces for each service bay or similar
facility, plus 1 space for every 1.5
employees, plus 1 space for every
vehicle customarily used in the
operation
Banks 1 per 150 square feet of floor area; 5
spaces minimum
Banquet hall, party center or
meeting facility
1 space per 100 sq. ft. of floor area
Barber and beauty shops 1 per 150 square feet of floor area; 5
spaces minimum
Bowling alleys 5 per lane
Broadcasting stations 1 per 200 square feet or 5 spaces
minimum; auditorium for broadcasting
station requires space as above
Church, temple, synagogue,
auditorium or place of assembly
1 per 4 seats or bench seating spaces
(See Section 400.680(G))
Congregate Care Facilities 1 per 2 beds
Convenience store with fuel 1 space per 250 sq. ft. of floor area,
plus 1 space for every 2 gas pumps
Convenience store without fuel 1 space per 250 sq. ft. of floor area
Section
400.670
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.670
100:941
Use Spaces Required
Country club or golf club 1 per 5 members or 1 for each 400
square feet of floor area, whichever is
greater
Day care centers and adult day
care centers
1 space per every 10 children or adults
receiving care, plus 1 space per
employee
Drinking place, bar or tavern 6 per 1,000 square feet gross floor
area
Dwelling units 2 per dwelling unit
Fitness and health centers One (1) space per 200 sq. ft. of floor
area
Funeral or mortuary home 1 per 100 square feet of floor area,
excluding storage and work area; 30
spaces minimum
Furniture or appliance store,
machinery, equipment
1 per 350 square feet of floor area; 2
spaces minimum
Gaming establishments 1 space per employee on the maximum
shift; plus 1 space per 2 patrons and
customers
Guest, boarding or lodging house 1 per bedroom (See Section
400.421(A)(4))
Hospital 2 per patient bed. Bassinets and
incubators shall not be counted as
beds
Library, museum or art gallery 10 spaces minimum, plus 1 additional
space for each 300 square feet of floor
area in excess of 1,000 square feet
Manufacturing or industrial
establishment
1 per 2 employees on maximum
working shift plus space for storage of
trucks or other vehicles used in
connection with the business or
industry
Medical offices or clinic 1 per 200 square feet of floor area
Mobile home or travel trailer sales 1 per 200 square feet of sales office
area; 5 spaces minimum
Motel or hotel 5 spaces minimum, plus 1 per sleeping
room or suite
Nursing homes, convalescent
homes, homes for the aged or
similar institutions
1 per 2 patient beds
Office or office building (other
than medical), post office, studio
1 per 350 square feet of floor area, 2
spaces minimum
Section
400.670
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.670
100:942
Use Spaces Required
Printers and publishers 1 per 2 employees on maximum
working shift plus space for storage of
trucks or other vehicles used in
connection with the business
Private club, fraternity, sorority or
lodge, with sleeping rooms
2 per 3 sleeping rooms or suites or 1
per 100 square feet of floor area,
whichever is greater
Private club, fraternity, sorority or
lodge, without sleeping rooms
1 per 10 members or 1 for each 600
square feet of floor area, whichever is
greater
Recreational uses including public
or private skating rinks,
swimming pools and exhibition
halls without fixed seats
1 per 100 square feet of floor area;
does not apply to accessory uses
Repair or service establishment,
plumbing, HVAC
1 per 200 square feet or 5 spaces
minimum
Restaurant (sit-down, drive-in or
carry-out)
1 per 100 square feet of floor area
Retail store, doughnut shop or
delicatessen
1 per 200 square feet of floor area
Riverboat 1 space per employee on the maximum
shift; plus 1 space per 2 passengers,
patrons and customers; plus 1 space
per 4 passengers for overlapping
schedules; see also Section 400.680(H)
School For elementary or junior high schools,
1 per 10 seats in main assembly room
or 2 per classroom, whichever is
greater; for high school, college,
business or trade school, 1 for each
faculty and staff member plus 1 for
each 5 students
Senior Housing Facilities 1 per dwelling unit plus 1 per each
employee on the maximum shift
Speculative shopping centers and
speculative multi-tenant buildings
5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area
Theater 1 per 4 seats or seating spaces
Warehouse 1 per 2,000 square feet of warehouse
area, plus space for storage of trucks
or other vehicles
Section 400.680. Interpretation of Parking Requirements.412 [R.O.
2009 §156.117; CC 1981 §30-95; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No.
Section
400.670
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.680
100:943
93-130, 6-9-1993; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 09-227,
12-10-2009; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
A. The parking space requirements for a use not specifically listed in
Section 400.670 shall be the same as for a listed use with similar
characteristics of parking demand generation as generally described in
the most recently published Trip Generation Manual from the Institute
of Traffic Design Engineers.
B. The parking requirements in Section 400.670 are in addition to space
for storage of trucks or other vehicles used in connection with any use.
C. The parking requirements in Division 1 "Parking" of this Article do not
limit special requirements, which may be imposed with planned unit
developments or conditional uses.
D. For fractional spaces, round to the next highest whole number.
E. Except as otherwise provided, the number of employees shall be
computed on the basis of the maximum number of persons employed on
the premises at one (1) time on an average day or average night,
whichever is greater. Seasonal variations in employment may be
recognized in determining an average day.
F. For any change in use or an increase in floor area or in the number of
employees or other unit of measurement specified for the determination
of required off-street parking spaces, additional off-street parking
facilities shall be provided on the basis of the increase. However, no
additional parking facilities shall be required for any change created by
an increase of less than ten percent (10%) of the originally required
number of spaces.
G. When benches, pews or other seating arrangements are provided in a
place of public assembly, one (1) seat equals twenty (20) lineal inches.
Where specifications and plans filed with the Department of Community
Development specify a certain seating capacity for a particular
building, such specified seating capacity shall be used as the basis for
determining the required number of parking spaces.
H. The parking requirements for the overlapping schedules of riverboats
may be reduced by the following percentages:
1. If the time between cruises is at least thirty (30) minutes 25%.
2. If the time between cruises is at least sixty (60) minutes 50%.
3. If the time between cruises is at least ninety (90) minutes 75%.
I. "GPRS" Bonus.
412. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
Section
400.680
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.680
100:944
Section 400.690. Joint Use, Mixed Use and Off-Site Parking
Facilities.413 [R.O. 2009 §156.118; CC 1981 §30-96; Ord. No. 77-31,
7-5-1977; Ord. No. 93-130, 6-9-1993; Ord. No. 94-65, 4-6-1994; Ord.
No. 94-114, 5-18-1994; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 10-244
§1, 11-18-2010]
All tiers. Up to fifteen percent (15%) of the total number of required
parking spaces may be designed for compact motor vehicles. Where
possible, these spaces shall be clustered together, located in areas
with convenient access to the principal building(s) served and shall
be marked with signs restricting their use to compact motor vehicles.
For the purposes of this Subsection, "compact motor vehicles" shall be
defined as every motor vehicle fifteen (15) feet or less in length.
J. "GPRS" Bonus.
All tiers. A covered bike rack providing a minimum of five (5) bike
parking spaces may be used in lieu of one (1) vehicle parking space.
Only one (1) such reduction may be utilized per project.
K. "GPRS" Bonus.
All tiers. Each designated carpool (multi-passenger) space shall count
as two (2) required standard parking spaces. The number of carpool
parking spaces shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the total required
parking spaces on a property.
L. "GPRS" Bonus.
All tiers. Up to ten percent (10%) of the total number of required
parking spaces may be designed for motorcycles. Where possible, these
spaces shall be clustered together, located in areas with convenient
access to the principal building(s) served and shall be marked with
signs restricting their use to motorcycles. For the purposes of this
Division, "motorcycles" shall be defined as every motor vehicle having
a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not
more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a
tractor.
M. "GPRS" Bonus.
Tiers 1 and 2. The total parking requirement for a property shall be
reduced by ten percent (10%).
Tier 3. The total parking requirements for a property shall be reduced
by twenty percent (20%).
A. Joint Use Of Parking. Businesses may share up to fifty percent (50%) of
the required parking spaces; provided that the businesses sharing such
use do not normally observe the same business hours. Adjoining schools
413. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
Section
400.680
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.690
100:945
Section 400.700. Parking Design Standards.414 [R.O. 2009 §156.119;
CC 1981 §30-97; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 90-87,
and churches may share up to one hundred percent (100%) of required
spaces. All such shared uses shall be covered by a properly executed
and recorded written agreement as specified below.
B. Parking For Mixed Uses. In cases of mixed uses, the parking spaces
required shall equal the sum of the requirements of the various uses
computed separately; except that parking requirements for permitted
accessory retail and service uses in a hotel, motel or motor lodge,
containing fifty (50) or more rooms, may be reduced by the following
percentages:
1. Retail sales, offices, service establishments 30%.
2. Restaurants, cocktail lounges, nightclubs and dining rooms 50%.
3. Ballrooms, banquet halls, meeting rooms and auditoriums 50%.
C. Off-Site Parking.
1. All parking spaces required herein shall be located on the same lot
with the building or use served; except that where an increase in
the number of spaces is required by a change or enlargement of
use or for non-residential uses, the required spaces may be located
and maintained off-site, not more than three hundred (300) feet
from the building served.
2. In any case where the required parking spaces are not located on
the same lot with the building or use served or where such spaces
are collectively or jointly provided and used, such parking space
shall be established by a recorded covenant or agreement as
parking space to be used in conjunction with the principal use and
shall be reserved as such through an encumbrance on the title of
the property to be designated as required parking space, such
encumbrance to be valid for the total period that the use or uses for
which the parking is needed are in existence.
3. The parking requirements for riverboats and gaming
establishments, based upon number of employees, may be reduced
by the number of off-site employee parking spaces provided.
However, this reduction may occur only if the employer requires
the employees to use the off-site parking spaces and only if the
employer provides shuttle service for the employees to and from
the off-site parking spaces.
4. Not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the required parking
spaces may be provided at off-site locations for an "PD-RF"
development involving gaming establishments.
414. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
Section
400.690
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.700
100:946
4-18-1990; Ord. No. 95-88, 3-30-1995; Ord. No. 95-344, 12-8-1995;
Ord. No. 96-138, 5-8-1996; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No.
99-53, 2-4-1999; Ord. No. 99-205, 6-3-1999; Ord. No. 05-181,
6-22-2005; Ord. No. 09-227, 12-10-2009; Ord. No. 10-244 §1,
11-18-2010]
A. Paving. The required off-street parking facilities shall be paved in
accord with the standards of the City Council. If the off-street parking
space is required in connection with a temporary use of land not
exceeding thirty (30) consecutive days in any one (1) year, then the
space is not required to be a paved surface area except that in no
instance shall more than five (5) spaces on private property be utilized
as an unpaved, temporary parking lot during a City recognized civic
festival or event.
B. Parking Dimensions. All new parking areas shall comply with the
dimensional requirements provided in the following tables and as
illustrated in Figure 8, except for disabled parking spaces which shall
instead meet the stall width and access aisle requirements provided in
Section 350.397 of this Code.
Standard Motor Vehicle Spaces
Angle
Stall
Width
A
Vehicle
Projection
B
Aisle
Width
C
Typical
Module
D
Interlock
Reduction
E
0° 9' 0" 7' 0" 16' 3" 30' 3" 0' 0"
45° 9' 0" 17' 0" 15' 3" 49' 3" 3' 2"
50° 9' 0" 17' 7" 15' 7" 50' 9" 2' 11"
55° 9' 0" 18' 1" 16' 1" 52' 3" 2' 7"
60° 9' 0" 18' 5" 16' 11" 53' 9" 2' 3"
65° 9' 0" 18' 7" 17' 10" 55' 0" 1' 11"
70° 9' 0" 18' 8" 18' 11" 56' 3" 1' 6"
75° 9' 0" 18' 7" 20' 4" 57' 6" 1' 2"
90° 9' 0" 17' 6" 26' 6" 61' 6" 0' 0"
Note: All dimensions based on a design vehicle of six (6) feet two (2)
inches wide by sixteen (16) feet eight (8) inches in length. Parallel
parking spaces (zero degree (0°) angle) shall be a minimum of twentytwo
(22) feet in length.
Section
400.700
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.700
100:947
Compact Motor Vehicle Space
Angle
Stall Width
A
Vehicle
Projection
B
Aisle Width
C
0° 7' 0" 7' 0" 16' 3"
45° 8' 0" 17' 7" 15' 7"
60° 8' 0" 18' 5" 16' 11"
90° 8' 0" 17' 6" 26' 6"
Note: Parallel compact motor vehicle parking spaces (zero degree (0°)
angle) shall be a minimum of twenty-one (21) feet in length. For the
purposes of this Division, "compact motor vehicle" shall be defined as
every motor vehicle fifteen (15) feet or less in length. Compact motor
vehicle spaces may be utilized pursuant to Section 400.680(I).
Motorcycle Parking Space
Angle
Stall Width
A
Vehicle
Projection
B
Aisle Width
C
0° 4' 0" 7' 0" 16' 3"
45° 5' 0" 17' 7" 15' 7"
60° 5' 0" 18' 5" 16' 11"
90° 5' 0" 17' 6" 26' 6"
Note: Parallel motorcycle parking spaces (zero degree (0°) angle) shall
be a minimum of ten (10) feet in length. For the purposes of this
Division, "motorcycles" shall be defined as every motor vehicle having
a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not
more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a
tractor. Motorcycle parking spaces may be utilized pursuant to Section
400.680(L).
Figure 8
Parking Geometrics
Section
400.700
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.700
100:948
C. Marking. Parking spaces in lots of more than five (5) spaces shall be
marked by painted lines or curbs or other means to indicate individual
spaces. Signs or markers shall be used as necessary to ensure efficient
traffic operation on the lot.
D. Waiting Areas.
1. Off-street waiting spaces shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet wide
and twenty (20) feet long.
2. Facilities with drive-thru services. Three (3) off-street waiting
spaces shall be provided for each service window on the same
premises with every structure, or part thereof, erected and used for
serving customers in automobiles by means of a service window or
similar arrangement where the automobile engine is not turned off.
3. Car washes. Self-service car washes shall provide two (2) off-street
waiting spaces for each washing stall. Car washes other than selfservice
shall provide three (3) waiting spaces for each washing
stall. A drying lane fifty (50) feet long shall also be provided at the
exit of each washing stall in order to prevent undue amounts of
water from collecting on the public street and thereby creating a
traffic hazard.
4. Day care and adult day care facilities. A minimum of two (2) offstreet
waiting spaces shall be provided for each facility.
E. Drainage And Maintenance.
1. Off-street parking facilities shall be drained to eliminate standing
water and prevent damage to abutting property and/or public
streets and alleys.
2. No surface water from such parking area shall be permitted to
drain onto adjoining private property.
3. Off-street parking areas shall be maintained in a clean, orderly and
dust-free condition at the expense of the owner or lessee and not
used for the sale, repair or dismantling or servicing of any vehicles,
equipment, materials or supplies.
F. Parking Lot Lighting.
1. For parking lots with ten (10) or more parking spaces, lighting shall
be provided for all off-street parking. For parking lots with less than
ten (10) spaces, lighting of the parking lot shall be required only if
the facility is to be used at night.
2. Lighting to be used must provide not less than one-fourth (0.25)
foot-candles (horizontal illumination) over the parking lot including
the parking spaces and access aisles. A minimum of one-half (0.50)
foot-candles must be provided at driveway approaches. An iso-foot-
Section
400.700
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.700
100:949
candle diagram will be required to verify proper illumination levels
are provided on each site.
3. Lighting shall be directed away from surrounding properties and
shall be installed to minimize glare.
G. Means Of Ingress And Egress.
1. For parking facilities permitting two-way traffic, the entrance and
exit driveways shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet in width, as
measured at the property line.
2. For parking facilities accommodating one-way traffic only, the
entrance and exit driveways shall be at least fifteen (15) feet in
width, as measured at the property line.
H. Parking Wells.
1. Parallel parking wells located along public streets shall comply
with all of the requirements, except for those on maximum length,
given for curb cuts and driveways. Parallel parking wells shall be a
minimum of ten (10) feet in width and twenty-two (22) feet in
length. A row of parallel parking wells shall have a minimum ten
(10) foot taper at each end. Parallel parking wells shall not be used
to satisfy the off-street parking requirements of these regulations.
(See Figure 9.) Parallel parking wells are under the authority of the
City Engineer or designee.
2. Perpendicular and angular parking wells shall not be permitted
along public streets. Perpendicular and angular parking wells
located along private streets are under the authority of the City
Engineer or designee. (See Figure 9.)
Figure 9
Parking Well
(Example only)
Section
400.700
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.700
100:950
I. Encroachment And Protective Barriers. Off-street parking spaces and
access aisles shall not be located closer than two (2) feet to a street
right-of-way. When a parking space or access aisle is located within two
(2) to four (4) feet of a street right-of-way line, a barrier shall be placed
along the edge of the parking space or access aisle for the purpose of
preventing automobile encroachment onto the street right-of-way. The
barrier may be a fence, a wall or a vertical concrete curb measuring six
(6) inches in height.
J. Parking Lot Landscaping.
1. General landscaping requirements.
a. Landscaped areas shall not be used for any off-street parking
and may be penetrated only by drives required to provide
access to the commercial lot.
b. Trees shall be at least two and one-half (2½) inch caliper
deciduous shade trees. Shrubs shall be planted initially
eighteen (18) inches tall and maintained to a maximum of three
and one-half (3½) feet in height. All species are to be Missouri
hardy within the specified microclimate area.
c. Where quality woodland exists, existing growth shall be
preserved between the right-of-way and the parking lot and on
the interior, exclusive of space required for sidewalks.
d. With the exception of preserved quality woodland areas left in
the natural state, required ground cover may be accomplished
with mulch, sod, rock, stones or ground cover plant species.
e. All plants are required to receive periodic maintenance to
ensure good health and appearance including replacement of
diseased or dead species. All other ground cover is to receive
periodic maintenance to ensure good appearance.
2. Perimeters adjacent to public rights-of-way. When a parking lot is
located adjacent to any public right-of-way, except an alley, the
following guidelines shall be used to landscape the public right-ofway
frontage of the parking lot:
a. Provide a fifteen (15) foot landscaped area from the right-ofway
line, exclusive of space required for sidewalks, to be
planted with shade trees with a minimum of one (1) tree for
every fifty (50) feet of frontage or fraction thereof and a
minimum of one (1) shrub for every five (5) feet of lot perimeter
or fraction thereof. Shade trees are not required to be planted
fifty (50) feet on center and shrubs are not required to be
planted five (5) feet on center, but may be clustered to provide
an enhanced site landscaped appearance.
Section
400.700
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.700
100:951
b. In lieu of the provisions in Subsection (J)(2)(a), a two and onehalf
(2½) foot high earthen berm may be constructed with
slopes not to exceed a grade of twenty-five percent (25%) for
lawn or turf areas, within a minimum width area of twenty-five
(25) feet, exclusive of space required for sidewalks. Berms
planted with ground cover and shrubs can be steeper, but shall
not exceed a grade of fifty percent (50%). Shade trees are
required with a minimum of one (1) tree for every fifty (50) feet
of frontage or fraction thereof in all berm design alternatives.
c. Exceptions. In the "HDD" (Historic Downtown District) and
"CBD" (Central Business District), no landscaping of the
perimeter of a parking lot adjacent to any public right-of-way is
required.
3. Perimeters not adjacent to public rights-of-way. Along the
perimeter of the parking lot, other than along a public right-of-way
(but including alley frontages), the following guidelines shall apply:
a. Provide a minimum of a five (5) foot wide landscaped area
around the perimeter of the parking lot planted with shade
trees and low growing shrubs.
b. Provide a minimum of one (1) shade tree for every fifty (50)
feet of lot perimeter or fraction thereof. Shade trees are not
required to be planted fifty (50) feet on center.
c. Provide a minimum of one (1) shrub for every five (5) feet of lot
perimeter or fraction thereof. Shrubs are not required to be
planted five (5) feet on center, but may be clustered to provide
an enhanced site landscaped appearance.
d. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 18-258, 11-20-2018]
(1) In the "HDD" (Historic Downtown District) and "CBD"
(Central Business District), no landscaping of the
perimeter of a parking lot adjacent to an alley shall be
required.
(2) For purposes of this Subsection (J)(3), the term "parking
lot" shall not include outdoor paved storage areas of
industrial areas only. Storage areas shall include, but not
be limited to, boat storage, trailer storage, motor vehicle
storage, equipment storage.
4. Interior landscaping. Parking lots with twenty (20) or more spaces
shall also have interior landscaping to the following specifications:
For the interior of the parking lot, which excludes required
landscape areas along rights-of-way alleys and perimeter areas,
five percent (5%) of the area of each parking space shall be
calculated to determine the required area for parking lot
landscaping. A minimum of one (1) shade tree shall be provided for
Section
400.700
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.700
100:952
Section 400.705. (Reserved)415
every fifteen (15) parking spaces or fraction thereof. One (1) or
more of the following alternatives shall be used to landscape the
parking lot:
a. A continuous or interrupted raised landscape strip or island,
consisting of shade trees, shrubs and ground cover, with a
minimum width of five (5) feet, between rows or parking
spaces.
b. Raised landscaped islands of no less than one hundred (100)
square feet and not more than two hundred (200) square feet,
with a minimum width of nine (9) feet, to be located throughout
the lot so as to meet the objectives of this Subsection and
planted with shade trees, shrubs and ground cover.
c. Raised landscaped islands of no less than nine (9) feet in width
and twenty (20) feet in length, to be located at the end of or in
between rows of parking spaces and to be planted with shade
trees, shrubs and ground cover.
5. "GPRS" bonus.
All tiers. The total number of required shrubs and trees for parking
lot perimeter and interior landscape areas shall be reduced by
twenty-five percent (25%).
Additionally rain gardens may be permitted in lieu of perimeter and
interior landscaped areas with approval of the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
K. Curbing. All parking areas shall be curbed with an integral six (6)
inches of Portland cement concrete vertical curbing, unless otherwise
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
415. Editor's Note—Section 405.705 "minimum number of disabled parking spaces for retail
establishments" as amended by ord. no. 11-163 moved to section 350.397 of art. V
"reserved parking for persons with physical disabilities" at the request of the city attorney.
This section has been reserved for the city's future use.
Section
400.700
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.705
100:953

DIVISION 2
Loading
Section 400.710. General Provisions. [R.O. 2009 §156.130; CC 1981
§30-111; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998]
Section 400.720. Loading Schedule.417 [R.O. 2009 §156.131; CC
1981 §30-112; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 98-209,
5-15-1998]
A. Off-street loading facilities shall be provided for retail stores,
warehouses, factories, department stores, hotels, wholesale
establishments, truck terminals, cold storage lockers, freezers,
hospitals, laundries, dry cleaning firms and other uses similarly
involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, materials, goods or
merchandise as required by Section 400.720.
B. Loading facilities are to be located on the same lot as the building,
structure or portion thereof which they are intended to serve.
C. Off-street loading areas shall not be used for the sale, repair,
dismantling or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials or
supplies.
D. Loading operations shall be conducted at the side or rear of buildings
for department stores, restaurants, wholesale houses, warehouses,
general services, manufacturing or industrial establishments or other
similar uses. In the process of loading or unloading, no truck shall
extend into any public or private drive or street used for traffic
circulation. [Ord. No. 17-152 § 2, 7-28-2017416]
E. The Traffic Engineer or his/her designee shall approve all off-street
loading facilities prior to the issuance of a building permit for such
development.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, off-street loading spaces
shall be provided in all districts as follows:
1. Department stores, restaurants, wholesale houses, warehouses,
general services, manufacturing or industrial establishments:
Parking Area in Square Feet Loading Spaces Required
2,000—10,000 One
10,000—20,000 Two
20,000—40,000 Three
40,000—60,000 Four
416. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 17-152 also redesignated former Subsection (D), which
immediately follows, as Subsection (E).
417. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
Section
400.710
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.720
100:955
Section 400.730. Interpretation of Requirements. [R.O. 2009
§156.132; CC 1981 §30-113; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No.
98-209, 5-15-1998]
Section 400.740. Loading Design Standards.418 [R.O. 2009 §156.133;
CC 1981 §30-115; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 98-209,
5-15-1998]
Parking Area in Square Feet Loading Spaces Required
Each 50,000 over 60,000 One additional
2. Retail stores, hotels and motels (with food service), offices or office
buildings and hospitals or similar institutions:
Floor Area in Square Feet Loading Spaces Required
5,000—10,000 One
10,000—100,000 Two
100,000—200,000 Three
Each 1,000,000 over 200,000 One additional
3. Funeral homes or mortuaries.
Floor Area in Square Feet Loading Spaces Required
2,500—4,000 One
4,000—6,000 Two
Each 10,000 over 6,000 One additional
A. A loading space shall not be counted as an off-street parking space.
B. Under the provisions of Sections 400.1060 et seq., the Board of
Adjustment may waive or reduce the loading space requirements when
the full provision of loading facilities is judged to be unnecessary.
A. Minimum Size. A loading space shall have a minimum area of six
hundred (600) square feet, a minimum width of twelve (12) feet, a
minimum length of fifty (50) feet and a vertical clearance of at least
fifteen (15) feet.
B. Drainage And Maintenance.
1. Off-street loading facilities shall be designed to drain and eliminate
standing water and prevent damage to abutting property and/or
public streets and alleys.
2. Off-street loading facilities shall be surfaced with erosion-resistant
material in accordance with applicable City specifications. Off-
418. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
Section
400.720
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.740
100:956
street loading areas shall be maintained in a clean, orderly and
dust-free condition.
C. Minimum Number Of Loading Spaces. A building entrance or exit
designed for truck loading and unloading shall be designed to provide
at least one (1) off-street loading space.
D. Protective Screening. Screening as described in Section 400.700(J)
shall be provided where applicable.
Section
400.740
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.740
100:957

Article VI
Non-Conforming Uses, Structures And Lots
Section 400.750. Purpose. [R.O. 2009 §156.160; CC 1981 §30-143;
Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998]
It is the intention that non-conforming uses and non-conforming structures
will eventually be eliminated. To this end, the following regulations shall
apply to non-conformities.
Section 400.760. Non-Conforming Uses.419 [R.O. 2009 §156.161; CC
1981 §30-144; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 86-77, 4-15-1986;
Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 04-176, 8-4-2004; Ord. No.
11-219 §1, 11-4-2011]
A. A non-conforming use shall not in any way be expanded, extended, or
modified and the intensity of use or number of dwelling units shall not
be increased, except under the following conditions:
1. It is for the express purpose of converting the structure to a
conforming use.
2. It will insure compliance with the health and safety requirements of
the City.
B. Additional structures associated with the non-conforming use shall not
be erected on the premises.
C. A non-conforming use shall not be changed to another non-conforming
use unless such use is a permitted or conditional use in a more
restrictive zoning district than the zoning district in which the prior
non-conforming use would have been permitted. All such changes shall
be subject to review and approval by the Director of Community
Development before a new non-conforming use permit is issued by the
Department of Community Department. In the alternative, the City
Council may, through approval of a conditional use permit, consider and
approve a change to another non-conforming use that is equal to or of
less intensity than the prior non-conforming use regardless of whether
the new non-conforming use would be a permitted or conditional use in
a more restrictive zoning district.
D. A non-conforming use located in a structure that has been damaged by
fire, earthquake, tornado, wind, water, flood or any natural or manmade
event may be restored and used as it was before it was damaged;
except:
1. Restoration shall not result in an increase in floor area or in
building height; and
419. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
Section
400.750
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.760
100:959
Section 400.770. Non-Conforming Structures. [R.O. 2009 §156.162;
CC 1981 §30-145; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 98-209,
5-15-1998; Ord. No. 11-219 §3, 11-4-2011]
Section 400.780. Non-Conforming Lots. [R.O. 2009 §156.163; CC
1981 §30-146; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 98-209,
5-15-1998; Ord. No. 99-53, 2-4-1999; Ord. No. 99-205, 6-3-1999]
2. Restoration shall be diligently prosecuted to completion no later
than one (1) year after the date of the event unless a six (6) month
extension is granted by the Director of Community Development
upon a showing of good and sufficient cause.
E. If a non-conforming use is discontinued for a period longer than twelve
(12) months, the use shall be considered as having been abandoned.
Subsequent use of the land shall be strictly in conformance with all of
the regulations of the district in which the land is located. An
agricultural use shall not be subject to this regulation.
F. A change in tenancy, ownership, or management of an existing nonconforming
use does not affect the status of the non-conforming use.
A. A non-conforming structure that has been damaged by fire, earthquake,
tornado, wind, water, flood or any natural or man-made event may be
restored and used as it was before it was damaged; except:
1. Restoration shall not result in any further non-conformity of any
setback, height, lot coverage, density, or other zoning design
standard; and
2. Restoration shall be diligently prosecuted to completion no later
than one (1) year after the date of the event unless a six (6) month
extension is granted by the Director of Community Development
upon a showing of good and sufficient cause.
B. Any existing building or structure devoted to a use permitted in the
district in which such building or structure is situated, but failing to
comply with the yard or building setback line requirements of any
district, may be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, or structurally
altered in any manner which does not further encroach upon the
required open yard space or building setback line not complied with.
C. An existing non-conforming structure shall not be enlarged or altered
except under the following conditions:
1. Alteration is for the express purpose of converting the structure to
a conforming use.
2. Alteration will insure compliance with the health and safety
requirements of the City.
Section
400.760
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.780
100:960
A. All Zoning Districts, Except "R-M". Any lot in all zoning districts, except
in the "R-M" Manufactured/Modular Residential, which was a legal nonconforming
lot at the time of the adoption of this Chapter or became
non-conforming based on the adoption of this Chapter and does not
meet the lot area, lot width or depth regulations of such district and
does not meet the requirements of Subsection (B) below, may be
utilized for a permitted use of the district in which it is located;
provided it is approved by the Board of Adjustment as outlined in
Sections 400.1060 et seq.
B. Residential Zoning Districts. The purpose of this provision is to permit
utilization of recorded lots which lack adequate width and/or depth so
long as reasonable living standards can be provided.
1. Any lot in a residential zoning district which was recorded in the
County Recorder of Deeds office at the time of the adoption of these
regulations and which does not meet the requirements of this
Chapter for lot area, lot width or depth may be utilized for singlefamily
residential purposes under the following conditions:
a. The area of the lot shall be at least seventy-five percent (75%)
of that required by the terms of these regulations.
b. The dimensions of all required yards shall be at least seventyfive
percent (75%) of those required by the terms of these
regulations.
c. The width of the lot as measured at the building setback line
shall be at least seventy-five percent (75%) of that required by
the terms of these regulations.
2. Example. An existing lot of record is zoned "R-1E" (Single-Family
Residential). According to the "design standards" of that district, it
should have a minimum area of seven thousand (7,000) square feet
and a minimum width of sixty (60) feet. The existing lot of record is
eligible for use as long as its area exceeds five thousand two
hundred fifty (5,250) square feet (7,000 square feet X 0.75 = 5,250
feet), and its width is greater than forty-five (45) feet (60 feet X
0.75 = 45 feet). In addition, all required yards must be at least
seventy-five percent (75%) of those required under the design
standards of the "R-1E" District.
C. For the purposes of this Article, no lot, land, structure or use which
conforms to this Chapter shall become non-conforming by reason of the
diminution of the size of a lot, front yard, side yard, rear yard or the
number of parking spaces when such diminution is a result of the
exercise of the power of eminent domain or the threat of use of the
power of eminent domain in the acquisition of land by any public
authority having the power of eminent domain.
Section
400.780
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.790
100:961
Section 400.790. Non-Conforming Use Permits. [R.O. 2009
§156.164; CC 1981 §30-147; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No.
94-51, 3-3-1994; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 04-176,
8-4-2004; Ord. No. 18-231, 10-16-2018]
A. All non-conforming uses of land, structures and signs may apply for a
non-conforming use permit with the Department of Community
Development after the adoption of the zoning district change.
B. If a non-conforming use permit was not obtained after the adoption of
the zoning district change, the owner shall provide proof of nonconformity
to the Director of Community Development. If the Director
of Community Development is unable to determine from the
documentation that the use is a valid non-conforming use, then the
request shall be denied. If the Director of Community Development
determines that the documentation adequately establishes a valid nonconforming
use, then the Director shall issue a non-conforming use
permit.
Section
400.790
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.790
100:962
Article VII
"PD" Planned Development Districts
Section 400.800. Purpose. [R.O. 2009 §156.175; CC 1981 §30-159;
Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998]
A. The purpose of the Planned Development Districts is to provide a means
of achieving greater flexibility in development of land in a manner not
always possible in conventional zoning districts; to encourage a more
creative and innovative design of land development; and to promote a
more desirable community environment.
B. The City Council may, by an ordinance adopted in the same manner as a
rezoning is approved, authorize a Planned Development District when
the proposed development or use of a specific tract of land or area
warrants greater flexibility, control and density than is afforded under
the regulations of traditional zoning districts. These planned
development regulations are not intended to allow excessive densities
or the development of incompatible land uses, either within the
development or as the development relates to the general
neighborhood. The City Council may, upon proper application, approve
a planned development to facilitate the use of flexible techniques of
land development and site design by providing relief from traditional
zoning standards in order to achieve one (1) or more of the following
objectives:
1. Promote site planning that better adapts to site conditions and
surrounding properties that would not otherwise be possible or
would be inhibited under the district regulations applicable to the
property;
2. Diversification in the uses permitted and variation in the
relationship of uses, structures, open space and height of
structures in developments intended as cohesive, unified projects;
3. Provide a means to evaluate and accommodate larger
developments with unique characteristics and complexities that
would not be entirely addressed in the district regulations
applicable to the property;
4. Promote the creation and beneficial uses of open space areas;
5. Promote the preservation of natural features of a development site;
6. Creation of a safe and desirable living environment for residential
areas characterized by a unified building and site development
program;
7. Ensure that development occurs in a manner that is rational and
economical in relation to public utilities and services;
Section
400.800
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.800
100:963
Section 400.810. Relationship of Planned Development Districts To
Zoning Map and Subdivision Regulations. [R.O. 2009 §156.176; Ord.
No. 98-209, 5-15-1998]
Section 400.820. Types of Planned Developments. [R.O. 2009
§156.177; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 10-244 §1,
11-18-2010]
8. Ensure efficient and effective traffic circulation, both within and
adjacent to the development site.
A. A Mapped District. The "PD" district designation is not intended to be
attached to a parcel of land as an overlay to the zoning district
applicable to such parcel of land. The "PD" district designation, as
provided for in this Article, is a separate use district and may be
attached to a parcel of land through the Zoning Map amendment
process.
B. Plan Approval Required. No development or redevelopment of property
rezoned to the "PD" district designation shall take place until an
acceptable development plan has been reviewed and approved in
conformance with the requirements of this Article, Sections 400.1010
through 400.1050 "Amendments and Modifications" and applicable
Sections of Chapter 405 "Subdivision Regulations".
C. Subdivision Approval. When a planned development involves
subdivision of land, the subdivision review and approval procedure
requirements contained in Chapter 405 "Subdivision Regulations" shall
be carried out simultaneously with the review of a planned development
under this Article inasmuch as practicable. As applicable, reference is
made to requirements in Chapter 405 of the Code of Ordinances within
this Article.
D. Amendment Procedures. Since obtaining a "PD" district designation
requires a map amendment (rezoning), the requirements and
procedures of Sections 400.1010 through 400.1050 "Amendments and
Modifications" shall apply.
E. Approved PUD Districts. "PUD" districts existing at the time of the
adoption of these regulations will be subject to the restrictions included
in the agreement approved for that district and will not be required to
comply with the adopted regulations.
A. An area approved for a "PD" district designation shall be assigned one
(1) of the following district classifications, which shall be considered a
separate zoning district and subject to the specific restrictions and
limitations established in the ordinance creating such "PD" district.
1. Planned development—residential (PD-R). Planned developments
involving residential uses only.
Section
400.800
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.820
100:964
Section 400.830. Permitted Uses.420 [R.O. 2009 §156.178; CC 1981
§30-160; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord.
No. 01-111, 6-8-2001; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010; Ord. No.
13-015 §1, 1-15-2013]
2. Planned development—commercial (PD-C). Planned developments
involving commercial and/or office uses only.
3. Planned development—industrial (PD-I). Planned developments
involving industrial, commercial and/or office uses only.
4. Planned development—riverfront (PD-RF). Planned developments
involving tourism, retail trade, entertainment, gaming, hotels,
restaurants, residential, recreation, service and/or related
commercial uses along the City's riverfront.
5. Planned development—mixed use (PD-MU). Planned developments
involving a mixture of residential and non-residential uses.
A. Planned Development—Residential. Permitted land uses shall be
established in the conditions of the ordinance adopted by the City
Council governing the particular Planned Development—Residential
District. Specific uses may include only those uses designated as
permitted, accessory or conditional uses in any of the "R-1C", "R-1D",
"R-1E", "R-2" and "R-3A" residential districts.
B. Planned Development—Commercial. Permitted land uses shall be
established in the conditions of the ordinance adopted by the City
Council governing the particular Planned Development—Commercial
District. Specific uses may include only those uses designated as
permitted, accessory or conditional uses in the "C-1", "C-2" and "C-3"
districts or other uses of a commercial nature, but excluding residential
uses.
C. Planned Development—Industrial. Permitted land uses shall be
established in the conditions of the ordinance adopted by the City
Council governing the particular Planned Development—Industrial
District. Specific uses may include those uses designated as permitted,
accessory or conditional uses in the "I-1" or "I-2" industrial districts, but
excluding residential uses.
D. Planned Development—Riverfront. Permitted land uses shall be
established in the conditions of the ordinance adopted by the City
Council governing the particular Planned Development—Riverfront
District. Permitted uses in the "PD-RF" district are as follows:
1. Art galleries, museums or libraries.
2. Cafes, coffee shops and delicatessens.
420. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
Section
400.820
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.830
100:965
3. Commercial or not-for-profit recreation facilities (public and semipublic)
where not more than fifty percent (50%) of the lot (exclusive
of parking, access drives, setbacks and required yards) is
comprised of a building and no permanent or temporary structure
or equipment used in the operation of the use is higher than fortyfive
(45) feet. Such facilities include:
a. Gymnasiums and health/fitness clubs.
b. Golf driving ranges.
c. Batting cages.
d. Sports parks providing indoor and/or outdoor facilities for
baseball, softball, soccer, volleyball, etc.
e. Miniature golf courses.
f. Bowling alleys.
g. Archery ranges, provided that such a range is approved by the
Chief of Police.
h. Roller or ice skating rinks.
i. Indoor or outdoor swimming pools.
j. Movie theaters not including drive-in or outdoor facilities.
k. Bars, restaurants, snack bars and other eating and drinking
facilities which are accessory to the foregoing uses and do not
comprise more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total
building or land area devoted to the primary use.
4. Excursion boats including those providing restaurant, bar or other
entertainment facilities, excluding gaming operations; provided
that the development contains a sufficient amount of riverfront
land to provide any necessary and/or proposed landside support
facilities and parking equivalent to that which would be required if
the entire facility were located on land and, provided that the
amount of contiguous river frontage of the development is
equivalent to at least three (3) times the length of the floating
structure accommodating the use.
5. Floating casinos and gaming establishments in the form of
excursion gambling boats and continuously docked excursion
gambling boats as permitted by the State Statutes, provided that
the development contains a sufficient amount of riverfront land to
provide any necessary and/or proposed landside support facilities
and parking equivalent to that which would be required if the
facility were located on land; and provided that the amount of
contiguous river frontage of the development is equivalent to at
Section
400.830
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.830
100:966
least three (3) times the total length of the floating structure(s) or
excursion riverboats accommodating the use, whichever is greater.
6. Floating restaurants, floating bars and floating entertainment
facilities, excluding gaming operations; provided that the
development contains a sufficient amount of riverfront land to
provide any necessary and/or proposed landside support facilities
and parking equivalent to that which would be required if the
entire facility were located on land; and provided that the amount
of contiguous river frontage of the development is equivalent to at
least twice the length of the floating structure accommodating the
use.
7. Governmental offices and professional offices exemplified by, but
not limited to, those of lawyers, doctors, architects and engineers.
8. Heliports.
9. Marinas and piers.
10. Personal and business service establishments such as:
a. Banks and savings and loan associations.
b. Barbershops and beauty shops (including makeup and tanning
salons).
c. Custom dressmaking or tailoring shops.
d. Travel bureaus/offices.
e. Entertainment ticket offices.
f. Hotel, motels, inns and bed and breakfast establishments.
g. Insurance services.
h. Financial services other than banks.
i. Day care facilities.
11. Performing arts theaters.
12. Public parks and open spaces.
13. Retail stores and offices.
14. Convention centers and public meeting and exhibition facilities
(freestanding or associated with hotels).
15. Restaurants without drive-thru or drive-in operations and where
fifty percent (50%) or more of the sales are food.
a. Distilleries for the production of alcoholic beverages which are
accessory to a restaurant permitted use: provided that the
alcoholic beverages produced are for consumption on the
Section
400.830
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.830
100:967
Section 400.840. Minimum Planned Development Site Size. [R.O.
2009 §156.179; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998]
Except as otherwise provided for herein, the minimum site size for any
Planned Development Districts shall be five (5) acres.
Section 400.850. Density and Dimensional Regulations and
Performance Standards. [R.O. 2009 §156.180; CC 1981 §30-163;
Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No.
premises only and not for sale at retail in the original package,
and the distillery operator possesses all required, Federal,
State and local licenses.
16. Single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, apartment buildings,
residential condominiums, town houses, row houses and other
types of multiple-family dwellings. The density shall not exceed
eighteen (18.0) dwelling units per acre (DU/A).
E. Planned Development—Mixed Use. Permitted land uses shall be
established in the conditions of the ordinance adopted by the City
Council governing the particular Planned Development — Mixed Use
District. Specific uses may include those uses designated as permitted,
accessory or conditional uses in the districts specified below:
"PD-MU" District
Established In Uses Permitted by the Following Districts
"A-1" "A-1", "R-1C", "R-1E", "R-2", "R-3A", "C-1", "C-2",
"C-3", "I-1"
"R-1C", "R-1D",
"R-1E"
"R-1C", "R-1D", "R-1E", "R-2", "R-3A", "C-1",
"C-2"
"R-2" "R-1C", "R-1D", "R-1E", "R-2", "R-3A", "O-I",
"C-1", "C-2"
"R-3A" "R-1C", "R-1D", "R-1E", "R-2", "R-3A", "O-I",
"C-1", "C-2"
"O-I" "R-1C", "R-1D", "R-1E", "R-2", "R-3A", "C-1",
"C-2", "I-1", except "C-3" uses
"C-1" "R-1C", "R-1D", "R-1E", "R-2", "R-3A", "C-1",
"C-2", "I-1", except "C-3" uses
"C-2" "R-1C", "R-1D", "R-1E", "R-2", "R-3A", "C-1",
"C-2", "I-1", except "C-3" uses
"C-3" "R-1C", "R-1D", "R-1E", "R-2", "R-3A", "C-1",
"C-2", "I-1", except "C-3" uses
"I-1" "R-1C", "R-1D", "R-1E", "R-2", "R-3A", "C-1",
"C-2", "C-3", "I-1"
"I-2" "C-1", "C-2", "C-3", "I-1"
Section
400.830
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.850
100:968
99-53, 2-4-1999; Ord. No. 99-205, 6-3-1999; Ord. No. 01-156,
7-19-2001]
A. General Standards. The approved development plan shall provide for
such exceptions from the regulations associated with traditional zoning
districts as may be necessary or desirable to achieve the objectives of
the proposed planned development. No Planned Development District
shall be allowed which would result in:
1. Inadequate or unsafe vehicular access to the development;
2. An undue burden on public parks, recreation areas, schools, fire
and police protection and other public facilities which serve or are
proposed to serve the planned development;
3. Substantial detriment to the surrounding area; or
4. Otherwise create substantial adverse impacts on the public health,
safety and welfare.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to clearly establish that the
above are avoided or mitigated to a level that is acceptable to the City.
C. In addition to the above requirements, all planned developments shall
be subject to architectural review in accordance with the provisions of
Section 400.965 and Sections 400.1180 et seq., except where standards
have been modified in the ordinance approving a planned development
as determined by the City Council upon recommendation of the
Planning and Zoning Commission. [Ord. No. 14-036 §1, 2-18-2014]
D. Other Codes. All requirements of other applicable ordinances of the
City (e.g., building codes) shall be met.
E. Planned Development—Residential.
1. Density.
a. The density of residential development shall be based upon the
density limits of the existing residential district(s).
b. The density limits indicated in the district regulations may be
exceeded on portions of the site within a "PD-R" district as long
as the total site density limit is not exceeded. This is referred to
as "density transfer".
c. The total site density may be exceeded up to a limit, upon
conclusion of the City Council that the density bonus provisions
contained in Subsection (E)(3) below have been satisfied. This
is referred to as "density bonus".
2. Calculation of density.
a. The computation of density shall be based on dwelling units
per net acre for the entire site.
Section
400.850
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.850
100:969
b. To compute the number of dwelling units per net acre, fifteen
percent (15%) of the gross acreage of the parcel shall be
deducted and the net acreage divided by the lowest minimum
lot size of the existing residential district. The following
provides an example of density calculation for a "PD-R"
development established on a twenty (20) acre tract in a
"R-1D" district:
(1) 20 acres x 43,560 square foot per acre = 871,200 square
feet.
(2) 871,200 square feet - (871,200 x 0.15) = 740,520 square
feet.
(3) 740,520/9,000 square feet minimum lot size = 82 dwelling
units.
c. In situations where a proposed "PD-R" district overlaps two (2)
or more residential districts, density shall be calculated
separately for the portions of the "PD-R" district in each of the
existing residential districts.
d. In situations where the existing district is non-residential in
nature, then density shall be calculated using four (4) dwelling
units per net acre.
3. Density bonus. The City Council may approve an increase in density
within a "PD-R" district, up to a maximum of twenty percent (20%),
which shall be based on the guidelines listed below. The density
bonuses shall be treated as additives and not compounded.
Maximum
Percentage
Increase Design Element
10% If a minimum of an additional five percent
(5%) of the net development area is devoted
to common open space (above the minimum
requirement) and improved with public
pedestrian ways, bike paths, park land,
swimming pools, tennis courts, community
centers, club buildings, etc. Additional
common open space that is to be landscaped
qualifies under this design element
consideration.
5% If creative site designs and building
groupings are used, which take advantage of
natural terrain and resolve existing on-site
and off-site water runoff and erosion
problems. The provision of storm drainage
retention as a site amenity is encouraged.
Variations in building design are permissible.
Section
400.850
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.850
100:970
Maximum
Percentage
Increase Design Element
5% If creative use of landscape materials are
used and the provision of more extensive
landscaping than would otherwise be
required under the landscaping
requirements found elsewhere in this Code.
If density bonuses are requested under this Section,
the applicant shall document all site amenities or
improvements for the City's review and consideration.
4. Development phasing. If the sequence of construction of various
portions of the development is to occur in stages, then the open
space and/or recreational facilities shall be developed or legally
provided for on a final plat, in reasonable proportion to the number
of dwelling units intended to be developed during any given stage
of construction as approved on a final plat by the City Council.
Furthermore, at no time during the construction of the project shall
the number of constructed dwelling units per acre of developed
land exceed the overall density per net acre established by the
approved "PD-R" district.
5. Non-residential development. Non-residential uses permitted in the
"PD-R" district shall be subject to all requirements for lot area,
width, height, yards and setbacks prescribed in the district in
which they are first permitted.
6. Common open space requirements.
a. Common open space shall comprise at least fifteen percent
(15%) of the gross area of the residential development or be of
a size equivalent to one (1) acre for each one hundred (100)
persons of expected population of the development, whichever
is greater. For purposes of this Subsection, the expected
population shall be determined by multiplying the total number
of dwelling units times two and one-half (2.5) persons per
dwelling unit.
b. The amount of required common open space may be reduced
by an amount equal to twice the total area of private balconies
or patios which are accessible to individual dwelling units and
consist of at least sixty (60) square feet of outdoor area and
have at least a horizontal dimension of six (6) or more feet. In
no case shall the area devoted to common open space be less
than ten percent (10%) of the gross site area.
c. Common open space shall be used for recreational, park or
environmental amenity purposes for the collective enjoyment
of the occupants of the development.
Section
400.850
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.850
100:971
d. In addition to the above open space requirements, the
following regulates the use of this common open space in
terms of physical surface characteristics, size, location and
physical improvements therein.
(1) Of the required common open space, up to one-half (½) of
it may be covered by water, flood plain, storm water
detention/retention facilities or left in a natural state
which does not violate the nuisance provisions of the Code.
(2) Each parcel of open space shall not be less than six
thousand (6,000) square feet in area nor less than thirty
(30) feet in its smallest dimension. At least fifty percent
(50%) of the common open space shall be contiguous or
connected with a minimum thirty (30) foot wide strip of
dedicated open space with a paved pedestrian/bicycle path
of at least six (6) feet in width.
(3) To the extent practicable, common open spaces shall be
distributed equitably throughout the development in
relation to the dwelling units which such common open
space is intended to serve. The open space shall not be
relegated to only isolated areas of unusable land, but shall
be highly accessible (physically and/or visually) to the
majority of the residents of the development.
e. Where common open space is to be provided in a subdivided
residential development, the use, operation and maintenance
of areas for common open space, common ground and common
buildings shall be guaranteed by the establishment of a trust
indenture providing for such by a subdivision association or
trustees. Said indenture shall be approved by the City Attorney
prior to recording the indenture simultaneously with the
recording of the final plat. Alternatively, such open space may
be conveyed to a public entity which will agree to maintain the
common open space and facilities, subject to City Council
approval.
7. Perimeter buffer requirements.
a. Where a "PD-R" development proposes residential
development along the perimeter of the site, which is higher in
density than that of an adjacent residential district, there shall
be a minimum thirty (30) foot wide buffer area. The buffer area
shall be kept free of buildings, structures or parking areas and
shall be permanent and landscaped with trees and shrubs or
preserved with natural features, so that the higher-density
residential development is visually obscured from abutting
lower density residential properties. A minimum of one (1) tree
shall be planted per thirty (30) lineal feet or fraction thereof for
any frontage along the adjacent residential district. Required
Section
400.850
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.850
100:972
trees shall be at least two and one-half (2½) inch caliper.
Trees existing within any required buffer area at the time
of installation and which are larger than two and one-half
(2½) inch caliper shall be preserved and will count toward the
minimum landscaping requirements. Newly planted species
shall be hardy for the specified area.
b. Where a "PD-R" development abuts a commercial or industrial
use or district, there shall be a minimum thirty (30) foot wide
buffer area. This buffer area shall be permanent and
landscaped with trees and shrubs and/or otherwise provided
with screening (i.e., sight-proof fencing) so as to effectively
screen the commercial or industrial use from the "PD-R"
development. A minimum of one (1) tree shall be planted per
thirty (30) lineal feet or fraction thereof for any frontage along
the adjacent commercial or industrial use or district. Required
trees shall be at least two and one-half (2½) inch caliper. Trees
existing within any required buffer area at the time of
installation and which are larger than two and one-half (2½)
inch caliper shall be preserved and will count toward the
minimum landscaping requirements. Newly planted species
shall be hardy for the specified area.
c. All landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy, neat and
weed-free growing condition.
F. Planned Development—Commercial, Industrial Or Mixed Use.
1. Site coverage. The maximum site coverage by uses permitted in the
"PD-C", "PD-I" or "PD-MU" districts shall be seventy percent (70%),
except as otherwise provided for in Subsection (F)(2) below.
2. Site coverage bonus. The City Council may approve an increase in
maximum site coverage from seventy percent (70%) up to ninety
percent (90%). In order to qualify for this bonus, the development
must demonstrate compliance with four (4) or more of the following
performance criteria:
a. Incorporate storm drainage retention facilities as a site
amenity.
b. Install storm drainage detention facilities underground.
c. Resolution or mitigation of existing off-site storm drainage
problems (e.g., drainage channel stabilization or provision of
on-site storm water detention that accommodates significant
off-site storm water run-off).
d. Increasing parking lot landscaping by fifty percent (50%) more
than otherwise required.
Section
400.850
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.850
100:973
e. Submitting for approval developments on tracts that are ten
(10) or more acres in size.
f. Design of principal access to the development tract at an
approved location that allows for shared access by an adjacent
property.
g. Construction of separate-grade pedestrian/bicycle paths.
h. Providing for sufficiently screened loading and unloading areas
that are located in side or rear yards.
i. Any other performance criteria that further the goals,
objectives and policies of adopted plans of the City and that, in
the opinion of the City Council, warrant the approval of site
coverage bonuses.
3. Where a "PD-C", "PD-I" or the non-residential portions of a "PDMU"
district abuts a residential area or is located across a public
street or alley from a residential area, there shall be a minimum
twenty-five (25) foot wide buffer strip between any non-residential
use and the adjacent residential area. The buffer area shall be kept
free of buildings, structures or parking areas and shall be
landscaped with trees and shrubs. A minimum of one (1) tree shall
be planted per thirty (30) lineal feet or fraction thereof for any
frontage along a residential zoning district. Required trees shall be
at least two and one-half (2½) inch caliper. Trees existing within
any required buffer strip at the time of installation and which are
larger than two and one half (2½) inch caliper shall be preserved
and will count toward the minimum landscaping requirements.
Newly planted species shall be hardy for the specified area. Within
the buffer strip, except where the buffer strip adjoins a public
street, there shall be provided either:
a. A continuous visual screen having a minimum height of six (6)
feet and consisting of a compact evergreen hedge or other
dense evergreen plantings; or
b. An ornamental masonry wall or wood fence at least six (6) feet
in height above grade, in which case one (1) shrub shall be
planted in the greenbelt per ten (10) lineal feet or fraction
thereof. Required shrubs shall be a minimum of eighteen (18)
inches in height at time of initial planting. Shrubs may be
clustered rather than evenly spaced.
All landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy growing
condition and be orderly in appearance. Any walls or fences
that are installed shall be maintained in a neat and orderly
appearance.
G. Planned Development—Riverfront.
Section
400.850
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.850
100:974
Section 400.860. Other Development Regulations For "PD"
Districts. [R.O. 2009 §156.181; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No.
01-156, 7-19-2001; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010; Ord. No. 14-036
§2, 2-18-2014]
Section 400.870. Pre-Application. [R.O. 2009 §156.182; Ord. No.
98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
1. Design standards.
a. Minimum lot width. One hundred fifty (150) feet; except where
the development will include waterside gaming
establishments, floating casinos or excursion riverboats, the
width shall be not less than three (3) times the total length of
the floating structure(s) or excursion riverboats
accommodating the use, whichever is greater.
b. Maximum site coverage. Fifty percent (50%), except that site
coverage may be increased in accordance with the site
coverage bonus provisions established in Section
400.850(F)(2).
2. Building standards. Buildings shall be subject to provisions of the
City's adopted Building Code.
A. Nothing contained in this Article shall be interpreted as a waiver of the
following regulations:
1. Article II. District Regulations, Division 2. "SD" Superimposed
Districts, Section 400.300 et seq; and
2. Chapter 410, Flood Damage Prevention.
B. In addition, the following regulations remain in effect, except where
standards have been modified in the ordinance approving a planned
development as determined by the City Council upon recommendation
of the Planning and Zoning Commission:
1. Article III. Other Use Regulations and Design Standards, Section
400.400 et seq.;
2. Article IV. Tree Preservation, Sections 400.630 and 400.640;
3. Article V. Off-Street Parking and Loading, Section 400.660 et seq.;
4. Article X. Architectural Review, Section 400.965; and
5. Article XVI. Sign Regulations, Section 400.1370 et seq.
A. Pre-Application Meeting. Prior to petitioning for a rezoning to one (1) of
the Planned Development Districts, the prospective applicant shall
schedule a pre-application meeting with the Director of Community
Development. The Director of Community Development may request
Section
400.850
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.870
100:975
Section 400.880. Preliminary Development Plan. [R.O. 2009
§156.183; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 10-244 §1,
11-18-2010]
that other City representatives attend this meeting. At this meeting,
the prospective applicant shall provide general information on the
proposed development including site location, existing site conditions
and a sketch plan of the proposed planned development. The Director
of Community Development shall report to the applicant the staff's
evaluation of the sketch plan with respect to its compliance with the
intent of the planned development regulations.
1. The pre-application meeting is a required, but informal, procedure
intended to benefit the prospective applicant by allowing for an
exchange of ideas and information and to provide an opportunity to
review the requirements of the "PD" district regulations with the
prospective applicant. No formal approval from the Director of
Community Development or other City staff is required prior to
proceeding with the preliminary development plan submittal.
2. The pre-application meeting and sketch plan submittal
requirements specified in paragraph (3) below shall not apply to
amendments to an approved "PD" district.
3. Contents of sketch plan. The information that shall be included
with the sketch plan are itemized in Section 405.270 of Chapter
405 "Subdivision Regulations" as applicable. In addition to
information required by that Section, the following information
shall be included as well:
a. Conceptual building footprints for all proposed structures,
except single-family and two-family dwellings proposed on
subdivided lots;
b. Circulation plan including circulation drives and parking areas;
c. Conceptual landscaping plan, open space/common areas and
buffer areas between the proposed development and adjacent
properties.
A. Preliminary Development Plan Submittal Requirements. The
preliminary development plan submitted shall include the information
required in Section 405.280, Chapter 405 "Subdivision Regulations" as
applicable. In addition, the following shall be included, as applicable:
1. Gross and net acreage (exclusive of streets) of tract;
2. Preliminary building footprints of all proposed structures, except
single-family detached and two-family dwellings proposed on
subdivided lots. (It is recognized that the placement and size of
structures may vary based on specific needs of future tenants.);
Section
400.870
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.880
100:976
3. Internal traffic circulation drives and parking areas, except
driveways associated with single-family and two-family dwellings
proposed on subdivided lots;
4. Maximum number of residential dwelling units allowed per the
existing zoning district or districts;
5. Number and type of residential dwelling units proposed;
6. Number of off-street parking spaces required and proposed;
7. Gross floor area of principal buildings and structures. Nonresidential
uses shall be identified by use type;
8. Building setbacks from property lines and between buildings where
more than one (1) building is located on a lot;
9. The proposed location and use of open spaces including common
ground, recreational areas, plazas and buffer areas;
10. Landscaping plan including information on the location of tree
planting by type (i.e., deciduous/coniferous trees and ornamental
trees), shrub masses and ground covers (i.e., grassed areas, ivies,
etc.). Landscaping within parking areas, in accordance with the
requirements of Sections 400.700(J) et seq., shall also be included;
11. The following additional requirements shall apply to the
preliminary development plan for all "PD-RF" developments which
include gaming facilities:
a. Depiction on the development plan of the location, length,
width and size of boats, barges or other vessels. Also indicate
the general location of piers, containment areas and the like;
b. The total number of employees contemplated; the number of
visitors expected daily, monthly, yearly; and hours of operation;
c. A traffic impact analysis which shall include, but not be limited
to, the following:
(1) Expected access routes to and from the project, both onsite
and off-site; width of roads and expected traffic
volumes, peak hours and days and lane movements;
(2) Road improvements and traffic controls necessary to
accommodate the projected traffic volumes and turning
movements;
d. Expected infrastructure improvements such as water, natural
gas, electricity, drainage and sanitary sewer collection (e.g.,
location of improvements, size of improvements, etc.);
e. Provisions for security, fire protection and emergency services;
Section
400.880
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.880
100:977
f. Evidence of ownership, lease or control of the site for all lands
included within the developer's proposal, necessary for the full
and complete implementation of the proposed development;
g. Proposed location, type, power output and the like of any and
all lighting to include streets, parking, signs, buildings,
structures and riverboats;
h. Evidence of receipt of, or application for, watercraft operation,
mooring or land use permits as may be required by the State of
Missouri and its agencies, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Environmental Protection
Agency, U.S. Coast Guard or other State or Federal agencies
whose approval may also be required.
No occupancy permit or operating license shall be issued for
the development until completed evidence that the developer
holds the permits required under paragraph (h) above for that
portion of the development.
12. The applicant may be required to provide such additional
clarification and/or information on the preliminary development
plan as determined by the Director of Community Development
and/or the Planning and Zoning Commission.
B. Preliminary Development Plan Review Procedure.
1. Preliminary subdivision plat approval. The preliminary
development plan shall also be considered the preliminary plat for
a planned development district. Preliminary plats associated with a
planned development shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter
405.
2. Submission by applicant. After the pre-application review meeting,
the applicant shall submit five (5) copies of the preliminary
development plan and other information required by Sections
400.880(A) et seq. to the Director of Community Development.
3. Staff review.
a. Completeness of submittal. Upon receipt of the application for
rezoning to a "PD" district and the associated preliminary
development plan and other applicable documents, the
Director of Community Development shall review the
documents to determine completeness. If the Director
determines that the submittal is incomplete, then the applicant
shall be notified of the deficiencies. The Director may delay the
processing of the preliminary development plan until such time
as all required information has been provided.
b. Distribution. As soon as practical after determination that the
preliminary development plan submittal is complete, the
Section
400.880
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.880
100:978
Director of Community Development shall distribute copies of
the preliminary development plan to the Director of Public
Works, Fire Chief and other City staff as appropriate.
c. Staff review. The Director of Community Development shall
review the preliminary development plan and solicit comments
from other City staff with respect to meeting the requirements
of this Chapter, Chapter 405 "Subdivision Regulations" and
other applicable City regulations and with respect to good site
planning, both within the tract to be developed and in relation
to the surrounding area. The Director, with the input of other
City staff, shall identify any deficiencies and site planning
issues. The staff findings shall be submitted to the Planning
and Zoning Commission.
4. Resubmission of preliminary development plan. The applicant shall
resubmit twenty (20) copies of the revised preliminary
development plan incorporating any changes resulting from staff
review. Copies of the revised preliminary development plan shall be
forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
5. Public hearing before Planning and Zoning Commission. The
Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
rezoning request for a "PD" district designation and associated
preliminary development plan in accordance with the provisions of
Sections 400.1010 et seq. "Amendments and Modifications" of this
Chapter.
6. Planning and Zoning Commission recommendation. The Planning
and Zoning Commission shall forward its recommendation to the
City Council. The recommendation shall address site planning
considerations and compatibility with adjoining areas. A
recommendation of approval shall include recommended
conditions, as appropriate, to be included in the ordinance
establishing the "PD" district. Such conditions shall include, as
applicable, but not be limited to:
a. Permitted uses;
b. "PD-R", "PD-MU" districts. The number of lots or dwelling units
authorized and the maximum floor area authorized for any nonresidential
use permitted;
c. "PD-C", "PD-I" and "PD-RF" districts. The maximum floor area
authorized for each building within the development;
d. Building and structure height limitations;
e. Minimum setback requirements;
f. Minimum acreage and function of common open space, if
applicable;
Section
400.880
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.880
100:979
g. Compliance with off-street parking and loading requirements;
h. Compliance with sign regulations.
7. Additional copies of preliminary development plan. The applicant
shall submit fifteen (15) copies of the preliminary development plan
which shall incorporate any changes resulting from Planning and
Zoning Commission review. Copies of the preliminary development
plan shall be forwarded to the City Council.
8. Public hearing before City Council. The City Council shall hold a
public hearing on the rezoning request for a "PD" district
designation and associated preliminary development plan in
accordance with the provisions of Sections 400.1010 et seq.
"Amendments and Modifications".
9. City Council action. If the preliminary development plan is
approved by the City Council, it shall adopt an ordinance
establishing the appropriate "PD" district. The ordinance shall
include reference to an approved preliminary development plan
citing all conditions imposed on the development plan.
10. Before approval of a development plan, the City Council shall
require a contract with safeguards approved by the City Counselor
securing construction of public improvements and guaranteeing
completion of the development plan, or designated section thereof,
in a period to be specified by the Commission, but which period
shall not exceed five (5) years unless extended by recommendation
of the Commission for due cause shown and approved by the City
Council. The contract shall provide a performance bond covering
one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost of all public
improvements.
C. Effect Of Approval Of Preliminary Development Plan And Period Of
Validity.
1. All conditions imposed as a part of any planned development shall
run with the land and shall not lapse or be waived as a result of a
subsequent change in ownership of any or all of said area.
2. Approval of the preliminary development plan by the City Council
constitutes an authorization to proceed with the preparation of the
final plat. No building permits shall be issued until a final plat has
been approved in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 405
"Subdivision Regulations".
3. Approval of the preliminary development plan shall be valid for a
period of two (2) years from the date of City Council approval. If a
final plat for all or a portion of the preliminary development plan
has not been filed within the two (2) year period, then a
resubmission of the preliminary development plan shall be
required if the applicant intends to pursue final plat approval. The
Section
400.880
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.880
100:980
Section 400.900. Amendments To "PD" Ordinance or Development
Plan. [R.O. 2009 §156.185; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No.
10-195 §1, 9-22-2010; Ord. No. 10-206 §1, 9-29-2010; Ord. No.
10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
City Council may grant up to a one (1) year extension from the date
that the period of initial validity expired. The Council may reject
such resubmission of the same development plan in light of new
facts and circumstances relating to the development plan.
A. Amendments To "PD" Ordinance.
1. Amendment request. The property owner or authorized
representative shall submit a written request to amend the
conditions of the ordinance establishing the "PD" district and
approving the preliminary development plan to the Director of
Community Development for review.
2. Staff review. The Director shall evaluate the request for consistency
with the nature and content of the development plan that was
subject of the ordinance approving such plan. The Director shall
report to the Planning and Zoning Commission as to whether or not
the request is consistent with the nature and content of the
development plan approved by the City Council.
3. Planning and Zoning Commission review. The Commission shall
review the request and report of the Director and then forward a
recommendation to the City Council.
a. A recommendation for approval may include conditions to be
included in the amended ordinance.
b. If the Commission finds that the requested amendment is not
consistent with the nature and content of the preliminary
development plan that was subject of the ordinance approving
such plan, it shall forward its recommendation to the City
Council and, if deemed necessary, forward a recommendation
to the Council for the purpose of holding new public hearings
on the matter in accordance with the provisions of Sections
400.1010 et seq. "Amendments and Modifications".
4. City Council action. The Council may pass an ordinance amending
the ordinance establishing the subject "PD" district. If deemed
necessary by the Council, it may order that public hearings be held
on the matter in accordance with the provisions of Sections
400.1010 through 400.1050, "Amendments and Modifications", if
the applicant wishes to proceed with obtaining approval of such
amendment.
B. Modifications To Development Plan.
Section
400.880
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.900
100:981
1. Amendment request. The property owner or authorized
representative shall submit an amended development plan to the
Director of Community Development for review.
2. Amendments requiring administrative approval (minor
amendments).
a. If the Director determines that the amended plan is not in
conflict with the preliminary development plan approved by
the City Council, meets the conditions of the "PD" ordinance,
and none of the items in paragraph (2)(b) exist as a result of
the proposed amendment, the Director may approve said
amended plan as a minor amendment to the preliminary
development plan without further public hearings. Said plan
shall be retained on file in the Department of Community
Development.
b. The existence of any of the following items shall cause a
proposed amendment to be a major amendment:
(1) Any increase in the coverage of structures of greater than
ten percent (10%) above the approved preliminary
development plan;
(2) Any increase in the number of dwelling units on the
approved preliminary development plan;
(3) Changes in traffic circulation patterns resulting from the
realignment of streets or alleys;
(4) Any reduction in required open space or building setbacks
from perimeter property lines as shown on the approved
preliminary development plan;
(5) Any reduction of required off-street parking or loading
spaces;
(6) Any reduction in required pavement widths;
(7) Any change in the land uses shown on the preliminary
development plan, including a change from attached
single-family dwelling units to detached single-family
dwelling units or vice versa; or
(8) Any change requiring a resubdivision plat.
c. Any changes to the subdivision of property shall be subjected
to the requirements of Chapter 405.
3. Amendments requiring Council approval (major amendments).
a. If the Director of Community Development determines that the
amended plan is in conflict with the preliminary development
plan approved by the City Council, does not meet the
Section
400.900
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.900
100:982
Section 400.910. Failure To Initiate Construction After
Development Plan Approval. [R.O. 2009 §156.186; Ord. No. 98-209,
5-15-1998]
conditions of the "PD" ordinance, or causes any of the changes
listed in paragraph (2)(b), the Director shall forward the
proposed amended plan to the City Council. The proposed
amended plan shall require a public hearing before the City
Council. Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed to all
property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the
boundaries of the property proposed to be amended and signs
containing notice of the public hearing shall be posted on each
street frontage of the property. The letters shall be mailed and
the signs shall be posted at least fifteen (15) days before the
date of the public hearing. The City Council shall have the
authority to approve or deny the proposed amended plan. If the
proposed amended plan is denied by the City Council, it may
not be resubmitted for one (1) year from the date of the denial.
A. No approval of a development plan shall be valid for a period longer
than five (5) years from the date of its initial approval unless within
such period a building permit is obtained and construction of a
development's foundation is commenced.
B. The City Council may grant up to an additional two (2) year extension
upon written request, if the application submitted is substantially the
same as the initially approved application. At such time as the period of
validity of an approved development plan lapses, the development plan
and all uses, terms and conditions thereof may be declared null and
void and the City Council may initiate actions to rezone the site to its
original or other appropriate zoning district in accordance with the
procedures and requirements of Sections 400.1010 through 400.1050
"Amendments and Modifications".
Section
400.900
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.910
100:983

Article VIII
Green Point Rating System
Section 400.920. "GPRS" Green Point Rating System. [R.O. 2009
§156.190; Ord. No. 09-227, 12-10-2009]
Section 400.930. Pre-Application. [R.O. 2009 §156.191; Ord. No.
09-227, 12-10-2009]
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Green Point Rating System (hereinafter
"GPRS") is to provide development incentives for building innovation
and sustainable practices.
B. Applicable Zoning Districts. The "GPRS" shall only be applicable to
projects in the following zoning districts: "O-I", "C-l", "C-2", "C-3", "I-l",
"I-2", "PD-C", "PD-I", "PD-MU" and "PD-RF".
C. Green Point Rating System Guide. A Green Point Rating System Guide
(hereinafter "GPRSG") shall be established to provide point values for
specific elements of a project which contribute to the overall
sustainability of the development. The "GPRSG" shall be approved by
the Council.
D. Tier System. There is hereby established a tier system of point values as
set forth in the "GPRSG". Each developer utilizing the "GPRS" shall
accumulate green points. The number of green points accumulated for
a project will determine the project tier. The tier structure for
incentives is as follows:
1. Tier 1: 50 to 74 points;
2. Tier 2: 75 to 100 points;
3. Tier 3: More than 100 points.
A. Pre-Application Meeting. Prior to submittal of an application to
participate in the Green Point Rating System program, the prospective
applicant shall attend a pre-application meeting with the Director of
Community Development or his/her designee. At this meeting, the
prospective applicant shall provide general information on the
proposed development including site location, existing site conditions, a
sketch plan of the proposed development and list of building
enhancements. Thereafter, the Director of Community Development
will report to the applicant the department's evaluation of the sketch
plan and enhancements list with respect to its compliance with the
"GPRS". The purpose of the pre-application meeting and department
report is to assist the applicant in the preparation of a development
plan.
1. The pre-application meeting is a required informal procedure
intended to benefit the prospective applicant by allowing for an
exchange of ideas and information and to provide an opportunity to
Section
400.920
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.930
100:985
Section 400.940. Development Plan. [R.O. 2009 §156.192; Ord. No.
09-227, 12-10-2009]
review the requirements of the "GPRS" with the prospective
applicant. No formal approval from the Director of Community
Development or other City staff is required prior to proceeding with
the "GPRS" plan submittal.
2. Contents of sketch plan. The information that shall be included is as
follows:
a. Conceptual building footprints for all proposed structures;
b. Circulation plan including circulation drives and parking areas;
and
c. Conceptual landscaping plan, open space, common areas and
buffer areas between the proposed development and adjacent
properties.
A. Development Plan Submittal Requirements. The development plan
submitted shall include the following information:
1. Gross and net acreage (exclusive of streets) of tract;
2. Building footprints of all proposed structures;
3. Internal traffic circulation drives and parking areas;
4. Number of off-street parking spaces required and proposed;
5. Gross floor area of principal buildings and structures (nonresidential
uses shall be identified by use type);
6. Building setbacks from property lines and between buildings where
more than one (1) building is located on a lot;
7. Proposed location and use of open spaces including common
ground, recreational areas, plazas and buffer areas;
8. Landscaping plan including information on the location of tree
planting by type (i.e., deciduous/coniferous trees and ornamental
trees), shrub masses and ground covers (i.e., grassed areas, ivies,
etc.), including landscaping within parking areas, in accordance
with the requirements of Sections 400.700(J) et seq.;
9. Completed "GPRSG" worksheet that includes all points to be
obtained and incentives sought for the project signed by the
property owner and sealed by a professional architect currently
licensed to perform work in State of Missouri; and
10. Applicant may be required to provide additional clarification or
information on the development plan as determined by the Director
Section
400.930
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.940
100:986
of Community Development or the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
B. Development Plan Review Procedure.
1. Submission by applicant. After the pre-application review meeting,
the applicant shall submit four (4) copies of the development plan
and other information required by Section 400.940(A) to the
Director of Community Development.
2. Staff review.
a. Completeness of submittal. Upon receipt of the development
plan and other applicable documents, the Director of
Community Development shall review the documents to
determine completeness. If the Director determines that the
submittal is incomplete, then the applicant shall be notified of
the deficiencies. The Director may delay the processing of the
development plan until such time as all required information
has been provided.
b. Distribution. As soon as practical after determination that the
development plan submittal is complete, the Director of
Community Development shall distribute copies of the
development plan to the City Engineer, Fire Chief, Building
Code Official and other City staff as appropriate.
c. Staff review. The Director of Community Development shall
review the development plan and solicit comments from other
City staff with respect to meeting the requirements of this
Chapter, Chapter 405, Subdivision Regulations and other
applicable ordinances and with respect to good site planning,
both within the tract to be developed and in relation to the
surrounding area. The Director, with the input of other City
staff, shall identify any deficiencies, site planning or building
code issues. The staff findings shall be submitted to the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
3. Resubmission of development plan. The applicant shall resubmit
twenty (20) copies of the revised development plan incorporating
any changes resulting from staff review to the Department of
Community Development. Copies of the revised development plan
shall be forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
4. Planning and Zoning Commission action. The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall review the development plan and approve, deny
or approve with modifications the plan.
C. Effect Of Approval Of Development Plan And Period Of Validity.
Section
400.940
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.940
100:987
Section 400.950. Amendments To Development Plan. [R.O. 2009
§156.193; Ord. No. 09-227, 12-20-2009]
1. All conditions of a "GPRS" development shall run with the land and
shall not lapse as a result of a subsequent change in ownership of
the property within the development area.
2. No building permits shall be issued until a development plan has
been approved in accordance with the provisions of Section
400.940.
3. No approval of a development plan shall be valid for a period longer
than eighteen (18) months from the date of its initial approval
unless within such period a building permit is obtained and
construction of a development's foundation is commenced. The
Planning and Zoning Commission may grant up to an additional one
(1) year extension upon written request, if the application
submitted is substantially the same as the initially approved
application. At such time as the period of validity of an approved
development plan lapses, the development plan and all uses, terms
and conditions thereof are null and void.
A. Amendment Request. The property owner or authorized representative
shall submit an amended development plan to the Director of
Community Development for review. A development plan submitted as a
follow up to an approved development plan, which deviates in any
manner from the approved development plan, shall be considered an
amendment and be subject to the provisions herein.
B. Administrative Approval (Minor Amendments). The Director shall
evaluate the request for consistency with the approved development
plan.
1. If the Director determines that the amended plan is nonsubstantive
and is not in conflict with the approved development
plan approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the
Director may approve said amended plan without further
proceedings.
2. If the Director determines that the amended plan is substantially
different than the approved development plan approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission, the Director shall forward the
proposed amended plan to the Planning and Zoning Commission
for its review and recommendation.
3. No administrative approval authorized by Subsection (B)(1) above
shall cause any of the following:
a. Substantial change in the character of the development;
b. Substantial increase in the coverage of structures;
Section
400.940
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.950
100:988
c. Substantial increase in traffic volumes or substantial changes
in traffic circulation patterns;
d. Substantial increase in the demand for public utilities or other
public services;
e. Reduction in required open space or building setbacks from
perimeter property lines;
f. Reduction of required off-street parking or loading spaces; or
g. Reduction in required pavement widths.
Section
400.950
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.950
100:989

Article IX
Site Plans
Section 400.960. Form and Content. [R.O. 2009 §156.232; CC 1981
§30-205; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord.
No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
A. Site plans shall be clearly drawn to scale as specified below and shall
show the following:
1. The title of the project and the name of the engineer, architect,
designer or landscape architect, developer and property owner.
2. The north arrow, scale and date.
3. Existing zoning and zoning district boundaries.
4. The boundaries of the property involved, County or municipal
boundaries, the location of all existing easements, property lines,
existing streets, sidewalks, right-of-way lines, buildings,
waterways, major tree masses and other existing physical features
in or adjoining the project.
5. Topography of the project area with contour intervals of two (2)
feet or less shall be required if the lot area exceeds one (1) acre.
6. The location and sizes of sanitary and storm sewers, water mains,
culverts, fire hydrants, electric and telephone lines and street
lights and other underground structures, existing and planned.
7. Proposed changes in zoning, if any.
8. The location and character of construction of proposed streets,
rights-of-way, sidewalks, alleys, driveways, curb cuts, entrances
and exits, loading areas, (including numbers of parking and loading
spaces), outdoor lighting systems, storm drainage and sanitary
facilities.
9. The location of lots, setback lines and easements and proposed
reservations for parks, parkways, playgrounds, school sites and
open spaces.
10. A tabulation of the total number of acres or square feet in the
project, gross or net as required in the district regulations and the
percentage thereof proposed to be devoted to the several dwelling
types, commercial uses, other non-residential uses, off-street
parking, streets, parks, schools and other reservations.
11. A tabulation of the total number of dwelling units of various types
in the project and the overall project density in dwelling units per
acre, gross or net as required by district regulations.
Section
400.960
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.960
100:991
12. Location, height and material of all fences, walls, screen planting
and landscaping used for protective screening.
13. Location and approximate height of all buildings and structures,
accessory and main.
14. Location of all open space or parcels of land intended to be
dedicated for public use or reserved for the use of property owners,
with the purpose indicated.
15. Any other pertinent information as requested by the Director of
Community Development.
Section
400.960
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.960
100:992
Article X
Architectural Review
Section 400.965. Architectural and Design Standards.421 [Ord. No.
10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
A. Purpose. The purpose of these architectural and design standards is to
ensure the highest quality and most aesthetically pleasing development
in all areas of the City. Redevelopment and new development in the City
reflects on the image of St. Charles and it is crucial that new structures
and rehabilitation or additions to old structures adhere to a higher
standard to reflect positively on the City's progressive attitude toward
its future. These standards are not intended to restrict imagination or
variety, but rather to assist in focusing on a design which results in an
architectural style that creates a signature appearance that is distinctly
St. Charles.
B. Architectural And Design Standards. These architectural and design
standards shall apply to all new structures (as structure is defined in
the building code), reconstruction of structures, rehabilitation of
structures and expansion of structures in all zoning districts, except: (1)
single-family and two-family residential structures; (2) all structures
legally existing or for which building permits have been legally
approved on or prior to December 1, 2003; and (3) structures which
have previously been approved pursuant to Section 400.980(I) where
said approval authorized the use of specific building materials.
Architectural and design standards shall be defined as follows:
1. All structures shall have exterior finished walls composed of one
hundred percent (100%) masonry on all sides of the structure and
shall be designed so as to match or complement existing buildings
in the vicinity. "Masonry", as used here, shall be defined as exposed
face brick or natural building stone which is used as a facing
component which is applied over exterior wall back-up
construction. Face brick shall be prismatic units in a variety of
sizes, colors and shapes. Brick shall be manufactured from clay,
shale or similar naturally occurring earthy substances and subject
to firing in a kiln. Natural building stone shall include stone that is
sawed, cut, split or otherwise finished or shaped having a minimum
thickness of one (1) inch. Natural building stone shall include
granite, limestone, marble, slate, soapstone, sandstone or other
natural stones of similar characteristics and physical properties.
Molded, cast or otherwise artificially aggregated units composed of
fragments of natural stone (excluding concrete masonry units) may
be used with the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission
or, if applicable, the HLPARB. Masonry shall not be painted. Clear
sealers and non-pigmented stains may be used. All colors shall be
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission or, if applicable,
421. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
Section
400.965
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.965
100:993
the HLPARB. Other non-masonry exterior finish materials shall be
considered as accent materials and shall be limited to a maximum
area of twenty-five percent (25%) of all exterior wall surfaces
excluding windows and doors.
"GPRS" Bonus:
All tiers. Projects may utilize up to seventy-five percent (75%)
recycled building materials. Recycled materials to be utilized shall
be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission or, if
applicable, the HLPARB.
2. Rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened by increased
parapet height or other means architecturally consistent and
harmonious with the proposed structure so as to not be visible from
a point six (6) feet above the elevation of the property line on which
the structure is located and from a point four (4) feet above the
elevation of any public right-of-way.
"GPRS" Bonus:
All tiers. Solar panels are excluded from the rooftop mechanical
equipment screening requirement. Solar panel design and
placement shall be approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission or, if applicable, HLPARB.
3. All exterior lighting shall be consistent with the architectural
concept. Fixtures, standards and all exposed accessories shall be
harmonious with the structure's design. All exterior lighting
including wall pack lighting shall be shielded to direct light straight
down.
4. All exterior solid waste containers and container racks or stands
shall be screened from public view by an enclosure which meets
the following standards:
a. Multi-family residential buildings. All exterior solid waste
containers and container racks or stands for a multiple-family
dwelling shall be screened from public view by an enclosure
which shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in height. Enclosures
shall have a concrete floor, solid gates, and shall otherwise be
constructed of masonry, wood or fencing with sight-proof
treatment. In no case shall slatted, chainlink fencing be used
for such purpose.
b. Commercial/institutional/industrial buildings. All refuse and
waste removal storage areas shall be screened with minimum
six (6) foot high solid screen walls of masonry construction to
complement the primary structure. Enclosures shall have a
concrete floor, gates shall be composed of metal or solid vinyl
in a complementary color to the masonry and in no case shall
slatted, chainlink fencing be used for such purpose. The
Section
400.965
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.965
100:994
Planning and Zoning Commission may consider alternative
materials if the primary building on the property has a ground
floor area less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
c. SMPD, HDD, FPD, LMPD and CPD. All exterior solid waste
containers and container racks or stands shall be screened
from public view by an enclosure which shall be a minimum of
five (5) feet in height. Enclosures shall have a concrete floor,
solid gates, and shall otherwise be constructed of masonry,
weather-resistant wood or fencing with sight-proof treatment.
In no case shall slatted, chainlink fencing be used for such
purpose.
d. A fence permit is required for all trash enclosures.
5. Fencing used to screen areas from view of adjacent properties shall
be a minimum of six (6) feet high and shall be composed of wood or
solid vinyl as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission or,
if applicable, the HLPARB. In no instance, shall slatted, chainlink
fence be used for such purpose.
6. All landscaping areas shall be provided with underground
irrigation. Native drought-resistant plant species and alternative
irrigation systems found in the "GPRSG" may be considered in lieu
of traditional underground irrigation systems.
7. The Planning and Zoning Commission or, if applicable, the HLPARB
may consider the alternative materials to those listed in Subsection
(B) if the applicant demonstrates that any of the following factors
are present:
a. The proposed structure is greater than listed in the following
table; or [Ord. No. 19-013, 1-15-2019]
Building Code
Use Group
Covered
Structure
Footprint Area In
Square Feet
Height And/Or
Stories
Assembly "A-1",
"A-2", "A-3", "A-4"
11,500 50 feet and/or 2
stories
Business "B" 18,000 50 feet and/or 3
stories
Educational "E" 18,500 50 feet and/or 1
story
Factory Group "F" 14,000 50 feet and/or 2
stories
High Hazard Group
"H"
7,500 50 feet and/or 1
story
Section
400.965
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.965
100:995
Building Code
Use Group
Covered
Structure
Footprint Area In
Square Feet
Height And/Or
Stories
Institutional "I-1" 10,500 50 feet and/or 3
stories
Institutional "I-2" 9,500 50 feet and/or 1
story
Institutional "I-3" 7,500 50 feet and/or 2
stories
Institutional "I-4" 18,500 50 feet and/or 1
story
Mercantile "M" 14,000 50 feet and/or 3
stories
Residential "R-1",
"R-2", "R-4"
12,000 50 feet and/or 3
stories
Storage Group "S" 14,000 50 feet and/or 3
stories
Utility and
Miscellaneous
Group "U"
9,000 50 feet and/or 2
stories
b. The existing surrounding development is of a nature that the
application of the architectural and design standards will not
further the aesthetic qualities of the area; or
c. The proposed structural change is an expansion or
rehabilitation of an existing structure and application of the
architectural and design standards will not further the
aesthetic qualities of the structure or the area; or
d. Screening of rooftop mechanical equipment will not further the
architectural quality of the structure or improve the aesthetics
of the structure; or
e. Landscape irrigation is of such a scale and scope that it will not
be practically feasible to irrigate the entire site or landscaping
is already established without irrigation and is proposed to
remain.
8. (Reserved)422
422. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection (B)(8), regarding exceptions to the required use of
materials in Subsection (B), was repealed 1-15-2019 by Ord. No. 19-013.
Section
400.965
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.965
100:996
Article XI
Planning And Zoning Commission
Section 400.970. Membership — Appointment — Compensation —
Terms — Vacancies — Removal — Rules — Meetings — Quorum —
Officers — Minutes and Records. [R.O. 2009 §156.246; CC 1981
§30-218; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 95-183, 7-20-1995; Ord.
No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 99-53, 2-4-1999; Ord. No. 99-205,
6-3-1999; Ord. No. 03-52, 3-6-2003; Ord. No. 04-38, 2-13-2004; Ord.
No. 04-109, 5-28-2004; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
A. Membership—Appointment—Compensation. The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall consist of ten (10) members who shall include the
Mayor, if the Mayor chooses to be a member, a member of the City
Council selected by the Council, if the Council chooses to have a
member serve on the Commission, and eight (8) citizens appointed by
the Mayor and approved by the City Council. All citizen members of the
Commission shall be residents and qualified, registered voters of the
City and shall serve without compensation.
B. Terms. The term of each of the citizen members shall be for four (4)
years except that the terms of the citizen members first appointed shall
be for varying periods so that succeeding terms will be staggered.
C. Vacancies. When a vacancy occurs on the Commission, the Mayor, with
the approval of the Council, shall appoint a new member to fill the
unexpired term.
D. Removal. Any member may be removed during the appointment period
by the City Council upon written charges and after a public hearing;
provided that any member who ceases to meet the qualifications of the
Commission shall immediately forfeit his/her membership.
E. Rules. The Commission shall adopt rules of procedure in accordance
with the provisions of this Chapter.
F. Meetings. Regular meetings of the Commission will be held on the
fourth (4th) Monday of each month, at a place designated by the
Chairperson. In the event of conflict with holidays or other events, the
Chairperson may change the day of the meeting. Special meetings of
the Commission may be called by the Chairperson; provided all
members of the Commission are sent written notification three (3) days
prior to the meeting. All meetings of the Commission, or portions of
meetings at which official action is taken, shall be open to the general
public.
G. Quorum. A quorum shall consist of five (5) of the membership of the
Commission. A concurring vote of a majority of those members present
shall be required to pass any motion. [Ord. No. 14-246 §2,
11-18-2014]
Section
400.970
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.970
100:997
Section 400.980. Powers and Duties. [R.O. 2009 §156.247; CC 1981
§30-219; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord.
No. 01-262, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 03-52, 3-6-2003; Ord. No. 04-176,
8-4-2004; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
H. Officers. The Commission shall elect a Chairperson, a Vice Chairperson
and a Secretary from among the citizen members. These officers shall
serve one-year terms.
I. Minutes And Records. The Secretary shall keep the minutes and
records of the Commission with the assistance of the staff of the
Department of Community Development.
J. Appointment Of An Alternate Member. The City Council may select one
(1) of its members to be an alternate member of the Commission. The
alternate member may vote in the absence of the regular member
selected by the City Council.
A. The Commission shall make and adopt a City Comprehensive Plan for
the physical development of the municipality. The City plan, with the
accompanying maps, plats, charts and descriptive and explanatory
matter, shall show the Commission's recommendations for the physical
development and uses of land and may include, among other things, the
general location, character and extent of streets and other public ways,
grounds, places and spaces; the general location and extent of public
utilities and terminals, whether publicly or privately owned, the
acceptance, widening, removal, extension, relocation, narrowing,
vacation, abandonment or change of use of any of the foregoing; the
general character, extent and layout of the replanning of blighted
districts and slum areas.
B. The Commission may prepare a land use plan for the regulation of the
height, area, bulk, location and use of private, non-profit and public
structures and premises and of population density.
C. The Commission shall recommend and the City Council may by
ordinance adopt regulations governing the subdivision of land within its
jurisdiction.
D. The Commission may make reports and recommendations relating to
the plan and development of the municipality to public officials and
agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional and
other organizations and citizens. It may recommend to the executive or
legislative officials of the municipality programs for public
improvements and the financing thereof.
E. All public officials shall, upon request, furnish to the Commission,
within a reasonable time, all available information it requires for its
work. The Commission, its members and employees, in the performance
of its functions, may enter upon any land to make examinations and
Section
400.970
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.980
100:998
surveys. In general, the Commission shall have the power necessary to
enable it to perform its functions and promote municipal planning.
F. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hear and decide upon the
location, extent and character of streets or other public facilities or
public utilities, whether publicly or privately owned, which have been
included in the recommendations and proposals of the Comprehensive
Plan or portions thereof.
G. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hear and decide upon the
vacation or abandonment of any street or other public facility.
H. The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend appointment of
staff to the Mayor, for approval by the City Council, necessary for its
work and may contract with City planners and other professional
persons for the services that it requires. The expenditures of the
Commission, exclusive of grants and gifts, shall be within the amounts
appropriated for the purpose by the City Council.
I. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review applications for
construction of new structures and substantial improvements outside
the historic districts and extended historic districts utilizing the criteria
for appearance set forth in the Zoning Ordinance and shall issue or
deny site plan approval for such construction. All development within
the City of St. Charles outside of the historic and extended historic
districts shall be required to receive site plan approval from the
Planning and Zoning Commission prior to the issuance of a building
permit, with the exception of single-family homes, mobile homes or
multi-family structures containing four (4) or less dwelling units. The
site plan review shall utilize the criteria for appearance set forth in the
Zoning Ordinance.
J. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review and make a
recommendation to the City Council on all applications for conditional
uses utilizing the following:
1. Standards. The purpose of this Section is to guide and assist the
Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council in its decision
making process in relation to conditional uses. These uses, because
of their nature, require the consideration and exercise of planning
judgment on location and site plan. As a result, a conditional use
shall be evaluated based on the specific standards of this Section
and based on the following standards:
a. How the proposed conditional use (the use in general) is in
harmony with the purposes, goals, objectives, policies and
standards of the Comprehensive Plan and any other plan,
program or ordinance adopted or under consideration
pursuant to official notice by the City.
b. How the proposed conditional use (in its proposed location) is
in harmony with the purposes, goals, objectives, policies and
Section
400.980
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.980
100:999
standards of the Comprehensive Plan and any other plan,
program or ordinance adopted or under consideration
pursuant to official notice by the City.
c. Whether the proposed conditional use, in its proposed location
and as depicted on the required site plan, results in a
substantial or undue adverse impact on the adjacent property,
the character of the neighborhood, environmental factors,
traffic factors, parking, public improvements, public property
or rights-of-way or other matters affecting the public health,
safety or general welfare, either as they now exist or as they
may in the future be developed as a result of the
implementation of the provisions and policies of the Zoning
Ordinance, Comprehensive Plan or any other plan, program or
ordinance adopted or under consideration pursuant to official
notice by the City.
d. Whether the proposed conditional use maintains the desired
consistency of land uses, land use intensities and land use
impacts as related to the environs of the subject property as
directed by the Comprehensive Plan.
e. Whether the proposed conditional use is located in an area that
will be adequately served by, and will not impose an undue
burden on, any of the improvements, facilities, utilities or
services provided by public agencies serving the subject
property.
f. Whether the potential public benefits of the proposed
conditional use outweigh the potential adverse impacts of the
proposed conditional use as identified above, after taking into
consideration any proposal by the petitioner and any
requirements recommended by the petitioner and/or City staff
to ameliorate such impacts.
2. In approving the conditional use, the Planning and Zoning
Commission may recommend and the City Council may impose
conditions or safeguards as are deemed necessary to protect the
surrounding properties such as, but not limited to, the following:
limitations of size, method or times of operation of the facility and
extent of time which such use may occupy the property.
3. The conditional use applies to the subject property and not to the
individual who applied. Consequently, a conditional use is
transferable to any future owner of subject property unless
otherwise specified, but cannot be transferred by the applicant to a
different site.
4. A conditional use shall continue for an indefinite period of time
unless otherwise specified.
Section
400.980
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.990
100:1000
Section 400.990. Applications. [R.O. 2009 §156.248; CC 1981
§30-220; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord.
No. 01-111, 6-8-2001; Ord. No. 01-262, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 03-52,
3-6-2003; Ord. No. 04-2, 1-7-2004; Ord. No. 04-176, 8-4-2004; Ord.
No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010; Ord. No. 12-126 §1, 7-25-2012; Ord. No.
12-188 §1, 10-18-2012]
A. All applications shall be addressed to the Planning and Zoning
Commission and submitted to the Department of Community
Development by the deadline date for the requested meeting per the
schedule annually approved by the Commission.
B. Provisions as to applications to amend, supplement, change or modify
the number, shape, area or boundaries of the districts or the regulations
herein established are contained in Sections 400.1010 et seq.
C. Applications for approving the vacation or abandonment of any street,
right-of-way, sidewalk, storm water structure or other public facility
shall show all plans, detailed drawings, elevations, specifications and
other information necessary to determine the appropriateness of the
features to be upon.
D. Applications for site plan approval and permits for construction of
structures outside the historic districts and extended historic districts
shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission using the
architectural and design standards set forth in Section 400.965.
Applications for certificates of appropriateness and permits for
construction of structures in the extended historic district and not
subject to the specific requirements of an historic district shall be
reviewed by the Historic Landmark Preservation and Architectural
Review Board (HLPARB) using the architectural and design standards
set forth in Section 400.965.
1. Each application shall be submitted with all plans, elevations,
detail drawings and specifications. The application shall be in the
form and contain such additional information as may be prescribed
by regulation by the Commission. The Department of Community
Development shall review the application and determine that the
application contains sufficient data to adequately describe the
situation to the Planning and Zoning Commission. If the data is not
adequate, the Department of Community Development shall notify
the applicant of the additional required information. Only
applications that are completed shall be forwarded to the Planning
and Zoning Commission.
2. If the application complies with the criteria prescribed by this
Article and is accordingly approved by the Commission, then the
Department of Community Development shall issue a site plan
approval. If the application does not comply with the criteria, then
the Commission shall disapprove the application and within five (5)
Section
400.990
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.990
100:1001
days after the disapproval shall specify in writing the facts
supporting the disapproval.
3. Validity of approval. Site plan approval shall be valid for a period of
one (1) year after the date of approval and thereafter shall become
null and void unless construction or use is substantially underway
during such one (1) year period or unless an extension of time, not
exceeding one (1) year, is approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission for good reasons shown before the expiration of such
one (1) year period.
E. Applications for a conditional use shall be reviewed and recommended
by the Planning and Zoning Commission for action by the City Council.
Such application may be filed by a property owner, owner undercontract,
tenant, tenant under-contract, or a representative of any of
the aforementioned; provided, a filing by a tenant under-contract or
owner under-contract or their representative shall be authorized by the
property owner or property owner's representative. Such application
shall show the location and intended use of the site and any other
material pertinent to the application. When the request involves
physical improvements to the property, an application for a certificate
of appropriateness or site plan approval shall also be required.
1. The Department of Community Development shall review the
application and determine that the application contains sufficient
data to adequately describe the situation to the Planning and
Zoning Commission. If the data is not adequate, the Department of
Community Development shall notify the applicant of the additional
required information. Only applications that are completed shall be
forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
2. Public hearing and notification. The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall hold a public hearing on applications for
conditional uses. Notice of public hearings before the Board shall
be given by publishing the date, time, place and nature of the
hearing at least fifteen (15) days before the date of the hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City. The notice shall
contain the time and place within the City where information
relative to the application may be examined. In addition, the
Department of Community Development shall erect a sign
containing the notice on the property at least fifteen (15) days prior
to the hearing and shall notify the applicant and the property
owners of record within three hundred (300) feet of the boundaries
of the subject property, in writing, of the hearing at least fifteen
(15) days prior to the hearing. In the event an application is tabled
by the Commission, it shall be the developer's responsibility to
provide written notification to the Department of Community
Development at least fifteen (15) days prior to the next regularly
scheduled Commission meeting of their intent to have the item
removed from the table. The developer shall also be responsible for
providing written notification to all property owners within three
Section
400.990
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.990
100:1002
hundred (300) feet of the subject property of their intent to request
their application be taken off the table and acted upon by the
Commission at least fifteen (15) days prior to such meeting. Should
the developer wish an application to be tabled that has been
advertised for public hearing, the developer must provide written
notification to the Department of Community Development at least
four (4) working days prior to the scheduled meeting to ensure the
public can be made aware of the request.
3. Amendment procedure. The procedure for amendment of a
conditional use already approved, or a request for a change of
conditions attached to an approval, shall be the same as for a new
application, except where the Department of Community
Development determines the change to be minor, relative to the
original approval, it shall transmit the same to the Planning and
Zoning Commission, with the original record, without requiring
that a new application be filed.
4. Validity of approval. Approval of a conditional use shall be valid for
a period of one (1) year after the date of approval and thereafter
shall become null and void unless construction or use is
substantially underway during such one (1) year period or unless
an extension of time, not exceeding one (1) year, is approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission for good reasons shown before
the expiration of such one (1) year period.
5. Existing conditional uses. Any conditional use listed in these
regulations, which is legally existing at the effective date of the
regulations of this Article, shall be considered a non-conforming
use, unless it has qualified as provided above and has been
approved as a conditional use by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
6. Revocation of permits.
a. Building permits issued under a conditional use approval may
be revoked by the Department of Community Development for
failure to comply with the conditions of approval or applicable
regulations.
b. A conditional use approval may be revoked by the Department
of Community Development upon finding that the conditions of
approval have been violated and endanger the public health
and safety. Such revocation shall suspend all activity on the site
associated with the conditional use. A revocation order may be
appealed to the Planning and Zoning Commission under the
same process as a new application but all activity which may
endanger public health and safety shall cease until the appeal
is considered.
c. A conditional use approval may be recommended for
revocation by the Department of Community Development
Section
400.990
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.990
100:1003
Section 400.1000. Appeals. [R.O. 2009 §156.249; CC 1981 §30-221;
Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No.
01-262, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 04-176, 8-4-2004; Ord. No. 10-244 §1,
11-18-2010]
upon finding that the conditions of approval have been
violated. Such revocation shall suspend all activity on the site
associated with the conditional use unless an appeal is filed to
the Planning and Zoning Commission. An appeal shall stay any
action until it is considered and a final decision rendered by
the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council.
7. Only the City Council shall have authority to grant a conditional
use.
F. All applications shall be promptly considered by the Planning and
Zoning Commission who shall render a decision on an application
within sixty (60) days from the date first considered. For purposes of
this Section, the term "first considered" shall mean that the application
request appears on the Planning and Zoning Commission agenda and is
discussed by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The application
shall be deemed approved if the Planning and Zoning Commission fails
to render a decision within the sixty-day period, unless said time period
is extended by mutual agreement, in writing, of the Planning and
Zoning Commission and the applicant.
G. No conditional use application to the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall be allowed on the same piece of property concerning substantially
the same request prior to the expiration of one (1) year from a ruling of
the Commission. Notwithstanding the foregoing, upon the written
consent of the Councilmember in whose ward the property is located,
the one (1) year period may be reduced to sixty (60) days.
A. In case of disapproval of the items in Section 400.990, the Commission
shall communicate its reasons to the City Council. The City Council may
overrule the disapproval by a vote of not less than two-thirds (2/3) of its
entire membership.
B. The applicant for a site plan approval under Sections 400.980(I) and
400.990(D) may appeal the Commission decision to the City Council by
filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) days. The
City Council shall hold a hearing on the matter within sixty (60) days of
the date of the filing of the notice of appeal with the City Clerk. The
Council shall hear testimony from the applicant or any other interested
person and shall either approve or disapprove the application by
majority vote of the members voting thereon. In approving or
disapproving the application the Council shall apply the prescribed
criteria specified in Sections 400.990(D) and 400.965 in making its
decision and shall make findings of fact in support thereof. The vote by
the Council for approving or disapproving the application must be taken
at the next meeting or within three (3) weeks, whichever occurs first, of
Section
400.990
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1000
100:1004
the date of the hearing thereon otherwise the appeal shall be deemed
upheld. Appeals of the decision of the City Council may be taken in
accordance with Chapter 536, RSMo.
Section
400.1000
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1000
100:1005

Article XII
Amendments And Modifications
Section 400.1010. Authorization — Initiation — Applications. [R.O.
2009 §156.250; CC 1981 §30-249; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord.
No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 04-224, 9-10-2004; Ord. No. 10-244
§1, 11-18-2010]
The City Council may, from time to time, amend, supplement, change or
modify by ordinance the number, shape, area or boundaries of the districts
or the regulations herein established. Any such amendment may be initiated
by vote of the City Council, by motion of the Planning and Zoning
Commission, or by application of a property owner or his/her
representative. All applications for change or amendment to the district
boundaries shall be submitted to the Department of Community
Development, who shall notify the City Council and forward such
application to the Planning and Zoning Commission for filing of legal notice
and review. All applications to supplement, change or modify the
regulations contained herein shall require a public hearing and action
before the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council.
Section 400.1020. Hearings and Notice — Action On Request. [R.O.
2009 §156.251; CC 1981 §30-250; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord.
No. 95-156, 6-7-1995; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 04-224,
9-10-2004; Ord. No. 04-248, 11-5-2004]
A. Notice of public hearings on the change or amendment to the district
boundaries before the Commission and before the City Council shall be
given by publishing the date, time, place and nature of the hearing at
least fifteen (15) days before the date of the hearing in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City. The notice shall contain the time and
place within the City where the text, maps, plans, ordinances,
amendments or changes may be examined. In addition, the Department
of Community Development shall erect a sign containing the notice on
the property at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing and shall
notify the applicant and the adjoining property owners, in writing, of
the hearing at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing.
B. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
change or amendment to the district boundaries before submitting its
report to the City Council. The failure of the Commission to act within
ninety (90) days after the date of official submission to it shall be
deemed approval by the Commission.
1. The Department of Community Development shall review the
application and determine that the application contains sufficient
data to adequately describe the situation to the Planning and
Zoning Commission. If the data is not adequate, the Department of
Community Development shall notify the applicant of the additional
Section
400.1010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1020
100:1007
Section 400.1030. Modification of Request. [R.O. 2009 §156.252; CC
1981 §30-251; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 98-209,
5-15-1998]
During the City Council's public hearing, the application may be changed
or modified. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall be notified of all
changes or modifications. Following the close of the public hearing, the City
Council shall not change or alter the application in any way.
Section 400.1040. Reconsideration. [R.O. 2009 §156.253; CC 1981
§30-252; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998]
Whenever an application requesting an amendment, supplement or change
has been voted upon by the City Council, such application or one
substantially similar, shall not be reconsidered sooner than one (1) year
after the previous ruling.
Section 400.1050. Protests Against Application. [R.O. 2009
§156.254; CC 1981 §30-254; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No.
95-168, 6-22-1995; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 18-258,
11-20-2018]
required information. Only applications that are completed shall be
forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
2. Public hearing and notification. The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall hold a public hearing on applications for change
or amendment to the district boundaries. The Department of
Community Development shall notify the applicant and the
property owners of record within three hundred (300) feet of the
boundaries of the subject property, in writing, of the hearing at
least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. In the event an
application is tabled by the Commission, it shall be the developer's
responsibility to provide written notification to the Department of
Community Development at least fifteen (15) days prior to the next
regularly scheduled Commission meeting of their intent to have the
item removed from the table. The developer shall also be
responsible for providing written notification to all property owners
within three hundred (300) feet of the subject property of their
intent to request their application be taken off the table and acted
upon by the Commission at least fifteen (15) days prior to such
meeting. Should the developer wish an application to be tabled that
has been advertised for public hearing, the developer must provide
written notification to the Department of Community Development
at least four (4) working days prior to the scheduled meeting to
ensure the public can be made aware of the request.
A. A protest against an amendment, change, modification or repeal shall
be comprised of a petition, duly signed and acknowledged by the
owners of thirty percent (30%) or more, either of the land, exclusive of
Section
400.1020
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1050
100:1008
streets and alleys, included in such proposed change or within an
area determined by lines drawn parallel to and one hundred eightyfive
(185) feet from the boundaries of the district proposed to be
changed. A protest petition shall be in substantially the form of the
sample protest petition found on the City's website or on file in the
Department of Community Development. A completed protest petition
and all collected signatures shall be submitted to the Department of
Community Development no later than 5:00 P.M. on the Wednesday
prior to the date of the City Council meeting at which the application
remonstrated against is scheduled to be decided by the Council for
validation as set forth in Subsection (B), below. Where the protest
petition and signatures have been validated by the Department of
Community Development and the thirty-percent threshold has been
met, the proposed amendment shall not be passed except by the
favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all the members of the City Council.
B. Validation Of Protest Petition Signatures. Upon receipt of the protest
petition and signatures, the Department of Community Development
shall validate the signatures submitted with the protest petition to
confirm that it has been duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of
thirty percent (30%) or more, either of the land, exclusive of streets and
alleys, included in such proposed change or within an area determined
by lines drawn parallel to and one hundred eighty-five (185) feet from
the boundaries of the district proposed to be changed and that the twothirds
vote requirement shall apply. The manner in which real property
is titled on the deed recorded with the St. Charles County Recorder of
Deeds determines all signatures required before an address listed on
the protest petition will be counted toward the thirty-percent
calculation as follows:
1. Deed Indicates Ownership By Married Couple: If both husband and
wife's names are on the deed, both husband and wife must sign the
protest petition. Both signatures must be notarized.
2. Deed Indicates Ownership By Married Couple, One (1) Spouse Now
Deceased: If both husband and wife's names are on the deed, but
one (1) spouse is now deceased, the surviving spouse must sign the
protest petition and submit a copy of the death certificate of the
deceased. The signature of the surviving spouse must be notarized.
3. Deed Indicates Ownership By Two (2) Or More Unmarried Persons:
If two (2) or more unmarried persons are on the deed, each person
whose name appears on the deed must sign the protest petition,
and all signatures must be notarized.
4. Deed Indicates Ownership By Trust: If the deed indicates that the
real property is owned by a trust, the trustee must sign the protest
petition on behalf of the trust and indicate that he/she signed the
document in his/her capacity as trustee. The trustee's signature
must be notarized.
Section
400.1050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1050
100:1009
5. Deed Indicates Ownership By Business Entity (Including
Homeowner Association): If the deed indicates that the real
property is owned by a business entity, the business entity must be
in good standing with the Missouri Secretary of State. The
person(s) signing the protest petition on behalf of the entity must
indicate that he/she signed the document in his/her capacity as a
director, officer, member or partner, and that he/she has the
authority to act on behalf of the entity. All signatures must be
notarized.
Section
400.1050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1050
100:1010
Article XIII
Board Of Adjustment
Section 400.1060. Created. [R.O. 2009 §156.260; CC 1981 §30-233;
Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998]
The Board of Adjustment is created with the powers and duties as set forth
in this Article.
Section 400.1070. Board of Adjustment — Appointment — Term —
Vacancies — Organization.
The City Council shall provide for the appointment of a Board of
Adjustment, and in the regulations and restrictions adopted pursuant to the
authority of Sections 89.010 to 89.140, RSMo., may provide that the Board
of Adjustment may determine and vary their application in harmony with
their general purpose and intent and in accordance with general or specific
rules therein contained. The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five (5)
members, who shall be residents of the City except as provided in Section
305.410, RSMo. The membership of the first (1st) Board appointed shall
serve respectively, one (1) for one (1) year, one (1) for two (2) years, one (1)
for three (3) years, one (1) for four (4) years, and one (1) for five (5) years.
Thereafter members shall be appointed for terms of five (5) years each.
Three (3) alternate members may be appointed to serve in the absence of
or the disqualification of the regular members. All members and alternates
shall be removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written
charges and after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired
term of any member whose term becomes vacant. The Board shall elect its
own Chairperson who shall serve for one (1) year. The Board shall adopt
rules in accordance with the provisions of any ordinance adopted pursuant
to Sections 89.010 to 89.140, RSMo. Meetings of the Board shall be held
at the call of the Chairperson and at such other times as the Board may
determine. Such Chairperson, or in his/her absence the Acting Chairperson,
may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings
of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes
of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon question, or, if
absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its
examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately
filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public record. All testimony,
objections thereto and rulings thereon, shall be taken down by a reporter
employed by the Board for that purpose.
Section 400.1080. Board of Adjustment — Powers.
A. The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers:
1. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any
order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an
administrative official in the enforcement of Sections
Section
400.1060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1080
100:1011
Section 400.1090. Appeals and Variances. [R.O. 2009 §156.263; CC
1981 §30-236; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 92-317,
12-23-1992; Ord. No. 95-155, 6-7-1995; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998;
Ord. No. 04-176, 8-4-2004]
89.010—89.140, RSMo., or of any ordinance adopted pursuant to
such Sections;
2. To hear and decide all matters referred to it or upon which it is
required to pass under such ordinance;
3. In passing upon appeals, where there are practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardship in the way of carrying out the strict letter of
such ordinance, to vary or modify the application of any of the
regulations or provisions of such ordinance relating to the
construction or alteration of buildings or structures or the use of
land so that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed, public
safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done, provided
that, in any City with a population of three hundred fifty thousand
(350,000) or more inhabitants which is located in more than one (1)
County, the Board of Adjustment shall not have the power to vary or
modify any ordinance relating to the use of land.
4. In exercising the above-mentioned powers such Board may, in
conformity with the provisions of Sections 89.010—89.140, RSMo.,
reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may
make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought
to be made and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer
from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of four (4)
members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision, or determination of any such administrative
official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon
which it is required to pass under any such ordinance or to effect
any variation in such ordinance except as provided in Section
305.410, RSMo.
A. Applications for appeals and variances to this Chapter shall be
processed in the following manner:
1. All appeals and variances shall be taken within sixty (60) days from
the date of the action which is appealed.
2. The application for an appeal or variance shall be addressed to the
Board of Adjustment and submitted to the Department of
Community Development.
3. An application shall be filed with the Board of Adjustment for
review. Such application shall show the location and intended use
of the site and any other material pertinent to the application.
Section
400.1080
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1090
100:1012
4. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed, unless the Department of Community Development
certifies to the Board of Adjustment that, by reason of facts in the
record, a stay would cause imminent peril to life and property, in
which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
court order.
5. The Department of Community Development shall review the
application and determine that the application contains sufficient
data to adequately describe the situation to the Board of
Adjustment. If the data is not adequate, the Department of
Community Development shall return the application to the
applicant for additional information. Applications that are
completed shall be forwarded to the Board of Adjustment.
B. Unless otherwise specified at the time a variance is granted, the
variance applies to the subject property and not to the individual who
applied. Consequently, the variance is transferable to any future owner
of subject property, but cannot be transferred by the applicant to a
different site.
C. A variance shall continue for an indefinite period of time unless
specified by the Board.
D. The procedure for amendment of a variance already approved, or a
request for a change of conditions attached to an approval, shall be the
same as for a new application, except where the Department of
Community Development determines the change to be minor, relative to
the original approval, it shall transmit the same to the Board, with the
original record, without requiring that a new application be filed.
E. The Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing on applications for
appeals and variances to this Chapter.
1. Notice of public hearings before the Board shall be given by
publishing the date, time, place and nature of the hearing at least
fifteen (15) days before the date of the hearing in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City. The notice shall contain the time and
place within the City where the text, maps, plans, ordinances,
appeals or variances may be examined. In addition, the Department
of Community Development shall erect a sign containing the notice
on the property at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing and
shall notify the applicant and the property owners of record within
three hundred (300) feet of the boundaries of the subject property,
in writing, of the hearing at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
hearing. In the event an application is tabled by the Board, it shall
be the developer's responsibility to provide written notification to
the Department of Community Development at least fifteen (15)
days prior to the next regularly scheduled Board meeting of their
intent to have the item removed from the table. The developer shall
also be responsible for providing written notification to all property
Section
400.1090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1090
100:1013
owners within three hundred (300) feet of the subject property of
their intent to request their application be taken off the table and
acted upon by the Board at least fifteen (15) days prior to such
meeting. Should the developer wish an application to be tabled that
has been advertised for public hearing, the developer must provide
written notification to the Department of Community Development
at least four (4) working days prior to the scheduled meeting to
ensure the public can be made aware of the request.
2. Following the public hearing, a concurring vote of four (4) of the
members of the Board who are present and voting at a meeting
shall be necessary for the approval of any application for an appeal
or variance. [Ord. No. 14-220 §1, 10-21-2014]
F. In considering an application for an area variance, i.e., regulations
relative to height, density, setbacks and green space, the Board of
Adjustment is to determine whether strict application of the zoning
regulation would result in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship
for the applicant. The following factors are relevant to determining
whether strict application of the regulations would result in practical
difficulties or unnecessary hardship:
1. Size of the variance. The relationship of the requested variance to
the requirements of the applicable zoning regulations, i.e., a fivefoot
variance is substantial if the required setback is seven (7) feet;
it is not as substantial if the required setback is one hundred (100)
feet.
2. Effect on government services. The effect of the requested variance
on population, density and available government facilities such as
water, fire and police protection and sanitary services.
3. Effect on neighbors or neighborhood. The effect of the requested
variance on adjoining properties or on the character of the
neighborhood generally.
4. Alternatives to a variance. The existence of a feasible alternative to
the applicant's proposal or other means of alleviating the hardship.
5. Justice. The granting of the variance is a just action. The cause of
the difficulty — the hardship should be unique to the land rather
than to the applicant and should be related to the topography,
configuration of the lot or other characteristics of the land. The
applicant or economic conditions should not be the cause of the
difficulty.
G. The following policies will be considered by the Board of Adjustment
before ruling on a variance:
1. Financial disadvantages to the property owner shall not constitute
conclusive proof of unnecessary hardships within the purpose of
zoning.
Section
400.1090
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1090
100:1014
Section 400.1100. Repetitious Requests To The Board of
Adjustment.423 [R.O. 2009 §156.265; CC 1981 §30-236.1; Ord. No.
88-249, 12-22-1988; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 04-119,
6-29-2004; Ord. No. 04-176, 8-4-2004]
No appeal, request or application under the provisions of Sections 400.1060
through 400.1110 to the Board of Adjustment shall be allowed on the same
piece of property concerning the same provision of this Chapter and any
other zoning ordinance of the City prior to the expiration of one (1) year
from a ruling of the Board on any appeal, request or application to the
Board. Notwithstanding the foregoing, upon the written consent of the
Councilmember in whose ward the property is located, the one (1) year
period may be reduced to sixty (60) days.
Section 400.1110. Appeals From Decision of Board. [R.O. 2009
§156.266; CC 1981 §30-237; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No.
98-209, 5-15-1998]
An appeal of any action, decision, ruling, judgment or order of the Board
of Adjustment may be taken by any person or any taxpayer, officer,
department, board or official of the City to the Circuit Court of St.Charles
County.
Section 400.1120. through Section 400.1170. (Reserved)
2. The Board does not possess the power to grant a zoning variance
permitting the use of land or buildings that is not included as a use
in the district involved.
3. In granting a variance, the Board may attach thereto any conditions
and safeguards it deems necessary or desirable in furthering the
purposes of this Chapter. Violation of any of these conditions or
safeguards shall be deemed a violation of this Chapter.
4. The Board shall study the effect of such proposed buildings or use
upon the character of the neighborhood, traffic conditions, public
utilities and other matters pertaining to the general welfare.
423. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
Section
400.1090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1120
100:1015

Article XIV
Historic Landmarks Preservation And Architectural Review Board
Section 400.1180. Purpose. [R.O. 2009 §156.400; Ord. No. 96-2,
1-16-1996; Ord. No. 97-5, 1-2-1997; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998;
Ord. No. 98-466, 11-16-1998]
The purpose of this Article is to protect, enhance and perpetuate buildings,
structures, districts and sites of historical, cultural, architectural,
engineering or geographic significance. Further, protection of cultural
assets from demolition by neglect is an objective of this Article.
Section 400.1190. Creation — Membership — Rules — Meetings —
Officers — Minutes — Records — Etc. [R.O. 2009 §156.401; Ord. No.
96-2, 1-16-1996; Ord. No. 97-5, 1-2-1997; Ord. No. 98-209,
5-15-1998; Ord. No. 98-466, 11-16-1998; Ord. No. 04-38, 2-13-2004;
Ord. No. 04-73, 4-26-2004; Ord. No. 04-109, 5-28-2004]
A. Creation. The Historic Landmarks Preservation and Architectural
Review Board (HLPARB) is hereby created with the powers and duties
set forth in this Article.
B. Membership. The HLPARB shall consist of nine (9) members who shall
include one (1) City Councilmember, three (3) persons at large who
shall be selected for their knowledge of local history, historic
architecture or development and restoration of historic properties and
one (1) member from each of the following recognized neighborhood
review groups: South Main Preservation Society, Historic Downtown
Association, Historic Frenchtown Association, Midtown Community
Association and the Saint Charles Commons Neighborhood Association.
Members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City
Council, except for the Councilmember who shall serve as hereafter
provided. All members shall be residents and qualified, registered
voters of the City.
1. The City Council shall annually appoint a member of the Council to
serve a one (1) year term on the HLPARB. The City Council may
also select one (1) of its members to be an alternate member of the
HLPARB. The alternate member may vote in the absence of the
regular member selected by the City Council.
2. Each recognized neighborhood review group shall provide to the
Mayor a list of names of not less than two (2) individuals from the
membership of the specific recognized neighborhood review group
who shall be eligible for appointment to the HLPARB. The Mayor
shall make a selection for appointment to the HLPARB from the list
provided by the recognized neighborhood review group.
3. The Mayor shall appoint persons with a demonstrated interest in
historic preservation. To the extent available in the community, the
HLPARB shall include professional members representing such
Section
400.1180
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1190
100:1017
disciplines as historical architecture, preservation law, art history,
history, historic building rehabilitation or any fields related to
historic preservation.
C. Terms. The members shall hold office for a term of three (3) years or
until their successors are appointed and confirmed; provided that any
member who ceases to meet the qualifications of the Board shall
immediately forfeit his/her membership. The City Councilmember
appointed to the Board shall serve for a one (1) year term. Before the
end of each term, each recognized neighborhood review group shall
provide to the Mayor a list of names of not less than two (2) individuals
from the membership of the specific recognized neighborhood review
group who shall be eligible for appointment to the HLPARB. The Mayor
shall make a selection for appointment to the HLPARB from the list
provided by the recognized neighborhood review group.
D. Vacancies. When a vacancy occurs on the Board, including expired
terms, the Mayor shall, initiate action to fill the vacancy within sixty
(60) days of the vacancy occurring and, with approval of the City
Council, appoint a new member to fill the unexpired terms, following
the procedures provided for above. [Ord. No. 14-131 §1, 6-17-2014]
E. Meetings.
1. Regular meetings of the HLPARB will be held on the third (3rd)
Monday of each month at a place and time designated by the Board.
The Chairperson may change the date of any specific meeting upon
at least three (3) days' notice to the Board and upon three (3) days'
public notice. Special meetings of the HLPARB may be called by the
Chairperson; provided all members of the Board are sent written
notification at least three (3) days prior to the meeting. Recognized
neighborhood review groups and the City Council member whose
ward the project is located in shall be provided written notification
at least three (3) days in advance of all special meetings and any
change of the day of any specific meeting. Except as otherwise
provided by law, all meetings of the HLPARB shall be open to the
public pursuant to Chapter 610, RSMo.
2. A quorum of the HLPARB shall consist of at least five (5) members.
3. All decisions or actions of the HLPARB shall be made by a majority
vote of those members present at any meeting where a quorum
exists; except that in those cases where the applicant seeks
authorization to demolish a building or structure, the affirmative
vote of five (5) members of HLPARB is required. The Chairperson
shall be a voting member of the HLPARB. No member of the
HLPARB shall vote on any matter which may significantly affect the
property, income or business interest of that member. The
Chairperson, and in his/her absence the Acting Chairperson, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
Section
400.1190
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1190
100:1018
Section 400.1200. Powers and Duties. [R.O. 2009 §156.402; CC
1995 §156.401; Ord. No. 96-2, 1-16-1996; Ord. No. 97-5, 1-2-1997;
Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 98-466, 11-16-1998; Ord. No.
01-262, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
F. Officers. The Commission shall elect a Chairperson, a Vice Chairperson
and a Secretary from among the members. These officers shall serve
one (1) year terms.
G. Minutes And Records. The HLPARB shall keep minutes of its
proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question or if
absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact.
H. Compensation. The members shall serve without compensation, but
shall be reimbursed for expenses they incur while on Board business in
accordance with standard City policies concerning reimbursement.
A. The HLPARB shall have the following powers and duties:
1. To conduct an ongoing survey and research effort to identify
neighborhoods, areas, sites, structures and objects which have
historic, community, architectural or aesthetic importance, interest
or value. As part of any survey or research effort, the HLPARB shall
review and evaluate any prior surveys and studies by any unit of
government or private organization and compile appropriate
descriptions, facts and photographs;
2. To investigate and recommend to the Planning and Zoning
Commission and to the City Council the adoption of ordinances
designating properties or structures having special historic,
community or architectural value as "landmarks";
3. To promote, assist, investigate and recommend to the Planning and
Zoning Commission and to the City Council the adoption of
ordinances designating areas as having special historic, community
or architectural value as "historic districts";
4. To keep a register of all properties and structures which have been
designated as landmarks or historic districts including all
information required for each designation;
5. To confer recognition upon the owners of landmarks and property
or structures within historic districts by means of certificates,
plaques or markers; and to make recommendations for the design
and implementation of specific markings of the streets and routes
leading from one landmark or historic district to another;
6. To advise and assist owners of landmarks and property or
structures within historic districts on physical and financial aspects
of preservation, renovation, rehabilitation and reuse and on
procedures for inclusion on the National Register of Historic
Places;
Section
400.1190
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1200
100:1019
7. To nominate landmarks and historic districts to the National
Register of Historic Places and to review and comment on any
National Register nominations submitted to the HLPARB upon
request of the Mayor or City Council;
8. To inform and educate the citizens of St. Charles concerning the
historic and architectural heritage of the City by suggesting the
publication of appropriate maps, newsletters, brochures and
pamphlets and by holding programs and seminars;
9. To review applications for construction, alteration, removal or
demolition affecting proposed or designated landmarks or
structures within historic districts and to issue or deny certificates
of appropriateness and certificates of demolition or removal for
such actions; and to review applications for special demolition
permits and construction permits;
10. To develop specific design guidelines for the alteration,
construction or removal of landmarks or property and structures
within historic districts;
11. To review applications for construction of new industrial,
commercial, office and residential structures within the extended
historic districts, to develop specific design guidelines for such
construction and to issue or deny certificates of appropriateness
and permits for such construction;
12. To accept gifts and gratuities, other than any interest in real
property, on behalf of the City for study, acquisition, designation
and preservation of officially designated monuments and
landmarks. All such gifts and gratuities shall be set aside in a
special fund known as the Historical Landmarks Fund and shall be
distributed only upon approval of the Board and the City Council.
All such gifts and gratuities shall be used solely for purposes
incidental to and consistent with this Article;
13. To make recommendations to the City Council concerning the
application for and utilization of any Federal, State or private
grant, grant-in-aid, gift or bequest furthering the general purposes
of this Article;
14. To call upon available City staff members as well as other experts
for technical advice;
15. To appoint such citizen advisory committees, as may be required
from time to time, subject to City Council approval;
16. To periodically review Chapter 400 of the Code of Ordinances and
to recommend to the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City
Council any amendments appropriate for the protection and
continued use of landmarks or property and structures within
historic districts; and/or
Section
400.1200
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1200
100:1020
Section 400.1210. Nomination of Landmarks and Historic Districts.
[R.O. 2009 §156.403; Ord. No. 96-2, 1-16-1996; Ord. No. 96-289,
10-16-1996; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 98-466,
11-16-1998]
Section 400.1220. Interim Demolition Permits. [R.O. 2009
§156.404; CC 1995 §156.411; Ord. No. 96-2, 1-16-1996; Ord. No.
97-5, 1-2-1997; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 98-466,
11-16-1998]
No permit shall be issued by the Department of Community Development
for demolition or removal of a nominated landmark or of any property or
structure within a nominated historic district from the date of the meeting
of the HLPARB at which a nomination form is first presented until the final
disposition of the nomination by the City Council; unless such alteration,
removal or demolition is authorized by order of the Board of Appeals as
necessary for public health, welfare or safety.
17. To inform the Community Development Department of any
violations of the Code of Ordinances and recommend the issuance
of stop work orders when necessary.
A. General. Nominations of landmarks and historic districts shall be made
to the HLPARB on a form prepared by it and may be submitted by a
member of the HLPARB, the owner or owners of record of the
nominated property or structures or the City Council. Interested
citizens may request the HLPARB or City Council to nominate a
structure or property. The owner or owners of the nominated property
or structure shall be notified of the nomination in writing, as well as the
time and place of the HLPARB public hearing.
B. Properties less than fifty (50) years old shall be ineligible for
designation as an historic landmark or contributing structure in an
historic district, except in truly exceptional circumstances such as in
the case of properties of national significance.
C. Design Guidelines. A nomination for designation of a landmark or
historic district shall include proposed architectural design guidelines
for guidance in future conservation, restoration or rehabilitation.
Historic districts or individual landmarks shall have design guidelines
written specifically for that district or individual landmark.
1. Design guidelines for review of certificate of appropriateness
applications should, at a minimum, include the following
architectural criteria: building form, mass and scale; roofs;
architectural details; materials; street facades; doors and entries;
windows; balconies and galleries; porches; and site planning.
2. Design guidelines shall be drafted with the advice of the recognized
neighborhood review group of the nominated district.
Section
400.1200
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1230
100:1021
Section 400.1230. Review By The HLPARB. [R.O. 2009 §156.405; CC
1995 §§156.403—156.404; Ord. No. 96-2, 1-16-1996; Ord. No.
96-289, 10-16-1996; Ord. No. 97-5, 1-2-1997; Ord. No. 98-209,
5-15-1998; Ord. No. 98-466, 11-16-1998; Ord. No. 10-244 §1,
11-18-2010]
A. The owner or owners of the nominated property or structure shall be
notified of the nomination in writing and notified of the time and place
of any public hearing.
B. Criteria For Designation Of Nomination. The HLPARB shall consider the
following criteria in making a determination as to whether or not the
nominated landmark has historical and/or architectural significance:
1. Its character, interest or value as part of the development, heritage
or culture characteristics of the community, County, State or
country;
2. Its location as a site of a significant local, County, State or national
event;
3. Its identification with a person or persons who significantly
contributed to the development of the community, County, State or
country;
4. Its embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an architectural
style valuable for the study of a period, type, method of
construction or use of indigenous material;
5. Its identification as the work of a master builder, designer, architect
or landscape architect whose individual work has influenced the
development of the community, County, State or country;
6. Its embodiment of elements of design, detailing, materials or
craftsmanship which renders it architecturally significant;
7. Its embodiment of design elements that make it structurally or
architecturally innovative;
8. Its unique location or singular physical characteristics that make it
an established or familiar visual feature of the neighborhood,
community or City;
9. Its character as a particularly fine or unique example of a utilitarian
structure including, but not limited to, farmhouses; accessory
buildings such as summer kitchens, smokehouses or barns;
schools; churches; public buildings; institutional offices; or other
commercial structures with a high level of integrity or architectural
significance; and/or
10. The fact that it has yielded or may be likely to yield information
important in history.
Section
400.1230
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1230
100:1022
Section 400.1240. Review By Planning and Zoning Commission.
[R.O. 2009 §156.406; CC 1995 §§156.405—156.406; Ord. No. 96-2,
1-16-1996; Ord. No. 96-289, 10-16-1996; Ord. No. 98-209,
5-15-1998; Ord. No. 98-466, 11-16-1998]
Section 400.1250. Action By City Council. [R.O. 2009 §156.407; CC
1995 §§156.408, 156.410; Ord. No. 96-2, 1-16-1996; Ord. No. 97-5,
C. Determination And Report. The HLPARB shall, within thirty (30) days
from the meeting of the HLPARB when the completed nomination in
proper form is received by the HLPARB, adopt by resolution the Board's
findings as to whether or not the nominated landmark or historic
district meets the criteria for designation in Section 400.1230(B). The
report of the HLPARB shall be sent to the Planning and Zoning
Commission within fourteen (14) days following the vote on the
resolution and shall contain the following information:
1. A map showing the location of the nominated landmark or the
boundaries of the nominated historic district;
2. Explanation of the significance or lack of significance of the
nominated landmark or historic district as it relates to the criteria
for designation;
3. The types of alterations that should be reviewed for a certificate of
appropriateness and the types of removals and demolitions that
should be reviewed for a certificate of demolition or removal;
4. Proposed design guidelines for applying the criteria for review of
certificates of appropriateness to the nominated landmark or
historic district.
A. Public Hearing. Following receipt of the report of the HLPARB, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall schedule and hold a public
hearing as set out in Section 400.1020(B)(2) as to whether or not the
property shall receive the historic landmark designation through a
rezoning. Notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the meeting
and a copy of the completed nomination form shall be sent in writing to
the owner(s) of record and to the nominators. The meeting shall be
scheduled, held and conducted in the same manner as other meetings
to consider applications for Zoning District Map amendments or
ordinance amendments.
B. Recommendation. Within thirty (30) days following the close of the
meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Commission shall
make a recommendation to the City Council as to whether or not the
nominated landmark or historic district should receive a zoning
designation as an historic district or landmark. Such a recommendation
shall be made upon a motion and vote of the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
Section
400.1230
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1250
100:1023
1-2-1997; Ord. No. 97-312, 9-18-1997; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998;
Ord. No. 98-466, 11-16-1998]
Section 400.1260. Amendment and Recision of Designation. [R.O.
2009 §156.408; CC 1995 §156.412; Ord. No. 96-2, 1-16-1996; Ord.
No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 98-466, 11-16-1998]
Designation may be amended or rescinded upon petition to the HLPARB and
compliance with the same procedure and according to the same criteria set
forth herein for designation.
Section 400.1270. Certificates of Appropriateness. [R.O. 2009
§156.409; CC 1995 §§156.413(A), 156.414(A),(C), 156.416(A),
156.417(A); Ord. No. 96-2, 1-16-1996; Ord. No. 97-5, 1-2-1997; Ord.
No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 98-466, 11-16-1998; Ord. No.
01-262, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
A. The City Council shall, within thirty (30) days after receiving the report
of the HLPARB and recommendation from the Planning and Zoning
Commission, either reject the proposed designation or designate the
landmark or historic district by an ordinance. The City Council shall
hold a public hearing before enacting the ordinance and provide notice
and take testimony.
B. The designating ordinance shall prescribe the area to be designated as
an historic landmark and the types of construction, alteration,
demolition or removal to be reviewed for certificates of
appropriateness. The City Council shall also adopt any architectural
design guidelines to be used by the HLPARB in reviewing applications
for certificates of appropriateness.
C. Should the City Council designate the property as an historic landmark
or district, the City Clerk shall provide written notification of the action
of the City Council by regular mail to the nominator, the owner(s) of
record of the nominated landmark or of all property within a nominated
historic district. The notice shall include a copy of the designation
ordinance or resolution by the City Council. A copy of each designation
ordinance shall be sent to the HLPARB, the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the Director of Community Development.
D. Upon designation the official Zoning District Map of the City shall be
amended with a supplemental classification to indicate the landmark
property or historic district boundaries.
E. A determination by the City Council as to whether or not to designate a
property as a landmark or historic district shall be a final decision, as
that term is used in Section 536.150, RSMo.
A. Certificate Required.
Section
400.1250
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1270
100:1024
1. Upon designation as an historic landmark or district, a certificate of
appropriateness shall be issued by the HLPARB before any of the
following actions are undertaken:
a. Any exterior alteration of the property requiring a building or
demolition permit from the City;
b. Any exterior alteration of the property not requiring a permit
but affecting a significant exterior architectural feature or the
exterior architectural appearance as specified in the ordinance
designating the landmark or historic district.
B. Posting. Where an application has been received for the demolition or
removal of a structure, the Department of Community Development
shall post a placard in a visible place upon the property. Said placard
shall describe the pending application for demolition of the building or
structure and the date, time and place of the meeting wherein the
application shall be considered by the HLPARB.
C. Review. The HLPARB shall review a complete application for a
certificate of appropriateness within thirty (30) days of receipt by the
Department of Community Development, unless the applicant provides
a written request to table such application. Written notice of the
approval or denial of the application for a certificate of appropriateness
shall be provided to the applicant by the Department of Community
Development within seven (7) days following the determination.
D. Standards For Review.
1. In considering an application for a certificate of appropriateness,
the HLPARB shall be guided by the Secretary of the Interior
Standards for Rehabilitation, in addition to any design guidelines in
the ordinance:
a. A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in
a new use that requires minimal change to the defining
characteristics of the building and its site and environment.
b. The historic character of a property shall be retained and
preserved. The removal of historic materials or alteration of
features and spaces that characterize a property shall be
avoided.
c. Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its
time, place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of
historical development, such as adding conjectural features or
architectural elements from other buildings shall not be
undertaken.
d. Most properties change over time; those changes that have
acquired historic significance in their own right shall be
retained and preserved.
Section
400.1270
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1270
100:1025
e. Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or
examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property shall
be preserved.
f. Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than
replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires
replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature shall
match the old in design, color, texture, and other visual
qualities and where possible, materials. Replacement of
missing features shall be substantiated by documentary,
physical, or pictorial evidence.
g. Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that
cause damage to historic materials shall not be used. The
surface cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be
undertaken using the gentlest means possible.
h. Significant archeological resources affected by a project shall
be protected and preserved. If such resources must be
disturbed, mitigation measures shall be undertaken.
i. New additions, exterior alterations, or related new
construction shall not destroy historic materials that
characterize the property. The new work shall be differentiated
from the old and shall be compatible with the massing, size,
scale, and architectural features to protect the historic
integrity of the property and its environment.
j. New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall
be undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the future,
the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its
environment would be unimpaired.
2. New construction in extended historic districts. In considering an
application for a certificate of appropriateness, the HLPARB shall
be guided by the following general standards:
a. Guidelines already adopted for historic districts within the
extended historic district which the HLPARB deems are
applicable to the applicant's site and intended usage.
b. New construction complement the character, scale, building
materials, architectural style and overall aesthetics of the
majority of the buildings found in the extended district.
c. Such specific guidelines as may be adopted by HLPARB and
approved by Council by ordinance.
E. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of eighteen
(18) months. If the project is not completed within the eighteen (18)
month period according to the guidelines provided in the certificate of
appropriateness, the project shall be deemed in violation of this Article.
Section
400.1270
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1270
100:1026
Section 400.1280. Certificates of Demolition or Removal. [R.O.
2009 §156.410; CC 1995 §§156.413(B), 156.414(B),(C), 156.416(B),
156.417(B), 156.422; Ord. No. 96-2, 1-16-1996; Ord. No. 97-5,
1-2-1997; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 98-466, 11-16-1998;
Ord. No. 01-65, 4-18-2001; Ord. No. 01-237, 10-19-2001; Ord. No.
10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
Extensions may be granted for just cause. Each extension shall be for a
period of no longer than twelve (12) months.
F. A denial of certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by a
statement of the reasons for the denial. The HLPARB shall make
recommendations to the applicant concerning changes, if any, in the
proposed action which would cause the HLPARB to reconsider its denial
and shall confer with the applicant in an attempt to resolve as quickly as
possible the differences between the applicant and the HLPARB. The
applicant may resubmit an amended application or reapply for a
certificate of appropriateness that takes into consideration the
recommendations of the HLPARB.
A. Except as otherwise provided in Section 400.1280(B), no permit for the
demolition or removal of an historic landmark or any structure within
an historic district shall be issued by the Department of Community
Development until a certificate of demolition or removal has been
issued by the HLPARB. Application forms for certificates of demolition
or removal shall be prepared by the HLPARB.
B. In the case of structures less than fifty (50) years old located within an
historic district, applications for demolition or removal shall be issued a
demolition permit without a certificate of appropriateness, unless the
Director of Community Development determines that the property may
have extraordinary significance and refers the question to the HLPARB.
C. Notices. Where an application has been received for the demolition or
removal of a structure, the Department of Community Development
shall post a placard in a visible place upon the property at least seven
(7) days prior to the meeting. Said placard shall describe the pending
application for demolition of the building or structure and the date,
time and place of the meeting wherein the application shall be
considered by the HLPARB. In addition, the Councilmember of the ward
where the site of the proposed demolition is located shall receive a copy
of the application and accompanying documents. Posting of the placard
and notice to the Councilmember shall be mandatory and shall be a
condition precedent to HLPARB review of the application. If the placard
has not been posted or if the Councilmember has not been notified, then
the application shall be held over to the next meeting of the HLPARB.
D. The HLPARB shall review the application and either issue or deny the
certificate of demolition or removal within thirty (30) days of the
meeting when the HLPARB receives the application. Written notice of
the approval or denial of the application for a certificate of demolition
Section
400.1270
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1280
100:1027
or removal shall be provided the applicant within seven (7) days
following the determination and shall be accompanied by a certificate
of demolition or removal in the case of an approval.
E. Historical/Architectural Report. As part of any application for
demolition or removal, a report analyzing the historical and/or
architectural significance of the property shall be submitted for review
of the HLPARB. Submission of the report to the HLPARB shall be
mandatory and shall be a condition precedent to HLPARB review of the
application. The report shall address each of the ten (10) criteria for
historical/architectural significance provided in Section 400.1280(F).
The report shall be written by a professional architect, architectural
historian, historic preservation consultant, City planner, archaeologist
or art historian.
F. Standards For Review. In considering an application for a certificate of
demolition or removal, the HLPARB shall be guided by the following
criteria as general standards in determining if the structure is
historically significant, in addition to any design guidelines in the
ordinance designating the landmark or historic district:
1. Its character, interest or value as part of the development, heritage
or cultural characteristics of the community, County, State or
country;
2. Its location as a site of a significant local, County, State or national
event;
3. Its identification with a person or persons who significantly
contributed to the development of the community, County, State or
country;
4. Its embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an architectural
style valuable for the study of a period, type, method of
construction or use of indigenous material;
5. Its identification as the work of a master builder, designer, architect
or landscape architect whose individual work has influenced the
development of the community, County, State or country;
6. Its embodiment of elements of design, detailing, materials or
craftsmanship which renders it architecturally significant;
7. Its embodiment of design elements that make it structurally or
architecturally innovative;
8. Its unique location or singular physical characteristics that make it
an established or familiar visual feature of the neighborhood,
community or City;
9. Its character as a particularly fine or unique example of a utilitarian
structure including, but not limited to, farmhouses; accessory
buildings such as summer kitchens, smokehouses or barns;
Section
400.1280
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1280
100:1028
schools; churches; public buildings; institutional offices; or other
commercial structures with a high level of integrity or architectural
significance; and/or
10. The fact that it has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information
important in history.
G. Should the HLPARB determine that the structure is historically
significant, then the HLPARB shall proceed to consider whether the
preservation of the structure is technologically and economically
feasible. In determining whether the preservation of the structure is
technologically and economically feasible, the HLPARB shall consider
the following criteria:
1. A report from a registered professional engineer or architect with
experience in rehabilitation as to the structural soundness of any
structures on the property and their suitability for rehabilitation;
2. Estimated market value of the property in its current condition;
after completion of the proposed demolition or removal; after any
changes recommended by the HLPARB; and after renovation of the
existing property. The market value estimates must be prepared by
a licensed real estate appraiser;
3. A detailed cost estimate, broken down by category, of the cost to
rehabilitate or reuse the existing structure. Such estimate shall be
provided by a registered professional architect or engineer,
architectural conservator, developer, real estate consultant,
appraiser or licensed building contractor experienced in
rehabilitation;
4. Assessed value of the property according to the two (2) most recent
assessments;
5. Real estate taxes of the previous two (2) years;
6. Form of ownership or operation of the property, whether sole
proprietorship, for-profit or not-for-profit corporation, limited
partnership, joint venture or other;
7. Any other information which may be reasonably obtained which is
considered necessary by the HLPARB to make a determination as to
whether the property does yield or may yield a reasonable return to
the owners.
H. In addition to the foregoing information which the HLPARB may solicit
or require the applicant to provide, the applicant may provide the
following information with respect to any application for a certificate of
demolition or removal:
1. Amount paid for the property, the date of purchase and the party
from whom purchased including a description of the relationship, if
any, between the owner of record or applicant and the person from
Section
400.1280
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1280
100:1029
whom the property was purchased and any pertinent terms of
financing between the seller and buyer;
2. If the property is income-producing, the annual gross income from
the property for the previous two (2) years; itemized operating and
maintenance expenses for the previous two (2) years; and
depreciation deduction and annual cash flow before and after debt
service, if any, during the same period;
3. Remaining balance on any mortgage or other financing secured by
the property owner and annual debt service, if any, for the previous
two (2) years;
4. Appraisals obtained within the previous two (2) years by the owner
or applicant in connection with the purchase financing or
ownership of the property;
5. Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked and offers
received, if any, within the previous two (2) years;
6. Information regarding the applicant's relevant tax bracket.
I. In considering an application for a certificate of demolition or removal,
if the HLPARB finds that the structure is not historically significant,
then the HLPARB shall issue a certificate of demolition or removal. In
considering an application for a certificate of demolition or removal, if
the HLPARB finds that:
1. The structure is historically significant; and
2. It is not technologically or economically feasible to preserve the
structure,
then the HLPARB shall issue a certificate of demolition or
removal.
J. Written notice of the approval or denial of the application for a
certificate of demolition or removal shall be provided the applicant
within seven (7) days following the determination and shall be
accompanied by a certificate of demolition or removal in the case of an
approval. A denial of a certificate of demolition or removal shall be
accompanied by a statement of the reasons for the denial. The HLPARB
shall make recommendations to the applicant concerning changes, if
any, in the proposed action which would cause the HLPARB to
reconsider its denial and shall confer with the applicant in an attempt to
resolve as quickly as possible the differences between the applicant and
the HLPARB. The applicant may resubmit an amended application or
reapply for a certificate of demolition or removal that takes into
consideration the recommendation of the HLPARB.
K. A certificate of demolition or removal shall become void unless
demolition is commenced within one (1) year of the date of issuance.
Extensions may be granted for just cause.
Section
400.1280
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1280
100:1030
Section 400.1290. Repetitious Requests. [R.O. 2009 §156.411; Ord.
No. 98-466, 11-16-1998; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
No request or application to the HLPARB shall be considered for the same
parcel of property concerning the same request prior to the expiration of
one (1) year from the original ruling of the HLPARB, except in the case of a
structure subsequently designated a dangerous building or public nuisance
by the Director of Community Development.
Section 400.1300. Dangerous/Unsafe Buildings. [R.O. 2009
§156.412; CC 1995 §156.421(B); Ord. No. 96-2, 1-16-1996; Ord. No.
97-5, 1-2-1997; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 98-466,
11-16-1998; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
Should any historic landmark or structure in an historic district be declared
a dangerous/unsafe building and public nuisance under the provisions of
Sections 500.350 through 500.450 of this Code of Ordinances, the Director
of Community Development shall have the authority to take appropriate
emergency measures to vacate, repair or demolish such dangerous
buildings or structures without obtaining a certificate of appropriateness.
Section 400.1310. Appeals. [R.O. 2009 §156.413; CC 1995
§156.421(A); Ord. No. 96-2, 1-16-1996; Ord. No. 97-5, 1-2-1997;
Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 98-466, 11-16-1998; Ord. No.
10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
L. Pictorial Record. At the time of issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness for the demolition of structure or building under this
Article, the City shall take photographs of the structures or buildings to
be demolished. Such photographs shall be preserved as a pictorial
record of the demolished structure.
A. The applicant or an adjoining property owner may appeal a decision of
the Historic Landmarks Preservation and Architectural Review Board
to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within
ten (10) days of the date of the decision of the HLPARB.
B. The City Council shall conduct a hearing on the appeal within forty-five
(45) days of the date of the filing of the notice of appeal with the City
Clerk. The Council may hear testimony and receive evidence from the
applicant, adjoining property owners, the Community Development
Department, the HLPARB or any other interested person. In reviewing
the decision of the HLPARB, the Council shall apply the guidelines,
standards and criteria specified in this Article or incorporated therein
by reference. The HLPARB decision shall only be reversed by the
majority vote of the entire Council. The vote by the Council shall be
taken no later than the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Council
after the date of the completion of the hearing. The Council may issue
findings of fact to support its decision. [Ord. No. 14-131 §2,
6-17-2014]
Section
400.1280
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1310
100:1031
Section 400.1320. Recognized Neighborhood Review Groups. [R.O.
2009 §156.414; CC 1995 §§156.425—156.428; Ord. No. 96-2,
1-16-1996; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 98-466,
11-16-1998; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
C. Judicial review of the appeal may be taken in accordance with Chapter
536, RSMo., as amended. [Ord. No. 14-131 §2, 6-17-2014]
A. The following neighborhood associations and preservation groups shall
be designated as recognized neighborhood review groups:
1. South Main Preservation Society
2. Historic Downtown Association
3. Frenchtown Community Corporation
4. Midtown Community Association
5. St. Charles Commons Neighborhood Association
B. The aforementioned groups shall represent their respective historic
districts as recognized neighborhood review groups so long as they
comply with this Article. In the event of non-compliance, the group shall
have lost its status as a recognized neighborhood review group.
C. In order for a neighborhood association or preservation group to
maintain its status as a recognized neighborhood review group, the
neighborhood association or preservation group shall meet the
following requirements:
1. Any property owner or person living in this historic district may be
a member of the neighborhood association or preservation group.
2. The members of the recognized neighborhood review group shall
elect a coordinator who may be an officer or director of the
organization and who shall coordinate the activities of the group
relative to this Article.
3. The organizations shall not discriminate against any person
because of race, creed, color, age, sex, national origin, ancestry,
religion or political opinion or affiliation.
4. When meeting relative to a matter before the organization and
pursuant to this Article, the organization shall be responsible for
complying with the requirements of Chapter 610, RSMo. (1995),
the "Sunshine Law" of the State of Missouri.
5. A neighborhood association or preservation group shall be a
recognized neighborhood review group, if copies of the following
documents are placed on file with the City Clerk's Office: Articles of
Incorporation of the group, the most current annual registration
Section
400.1310
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1320
100:1032
filed with the Secretary of State of the State of Missouri and a
complete list of the officers.
D. Recognized neighborhood review groups shall have the following
powers and duties:
1. To review applications to the HLPARB for certificates of
appropriateness and certificates of demolition or removal and to
make recommendations to the HLPARB concerning such. Members
of the affected group may contact the applicant regarding
questions relative to applications before the HLPARB. Applicants
before the HLPARB shall be encouraged to contact the affected
historic district's recognized neighborhood review group and meet
with the group concerning the application before the HLPARB. A
copy of all agendas of the HLPARB will be made available to the
coordinators of all recognized review groups at least three (3) days
prior to the meeting of the HLPARB. In addition, copies of plans,
drawings and all other information required applicants shall be
supplied to recognized neighborhood review groups for those
matters which affect the group's historic district.
2. To recommend to the HLPARB any revisions in design guidelines
which have been adopted for the recognized neighborhood review
group's historic district.
Section
400.1320
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1320
100:1033

Article XV
Administration And Enforcement
Section 400.1330. Administration. [R.O. 2009 §156.500; CC 1981
§30-266; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 93-132, 6-11-1993; Ord.
No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
The Director of Community Development shall be responsible for
administering, maintaining, interpreting, revising and updating this
Chapter and the official Zoning District Map. Where it is alleged that there
is error in any order, requirement, decision, determination or interpretation
made by the Director of Community Development in the enforcement of the
provisions of this Chapter, an appeal may be made to the Mayor within sixty
(60) days from the date of the action which is appealed. The decision of the
Mayor shall be subject to appeal to the Board of Adjustment within sixty
(60) days from the date of decision of the Mayor which is appealed.
Section 400.1340. Enforcement. [R.O. 2009 §156.501; CC 1981
§30-267; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord.
No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
Section 400.1350. Certificates of Use and Occupancy. [R.O. 2009
§156.502; CC 1981 §30-268; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No.
98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord. No. 01-156, 7-19-2001; Ord. No. 10-244 §1,
11-18-2010]
A. It shall be the duty of the Department of Community Development to
enforce the provisions of this Chapter and to refuse to issue any permit
for any building or for the use of any premises which would violate any
of the provisions of this Chapter.
B. It shall also be the duty of all officers and employees of the City to assist
the Department of Community Development by reporting any seeming
violation in new construction, reconstruction or land uses.
A. Vacant land shall not be occupied or used, except for agricultural uses,
until a certificate of use and occupancy shall have been issued by the
Department of Community Development.
B. Premises and buildings hereafter erected or structurally altered shall
not be used, occupied or changed in use until a certificate of occupancy
shall have been issued by the Department of Community Development,
stating that the building or the proposed use of a building or the
premises comply with the building laws and the provisions of these
regulations.
C. Certificates of use and occupancy shall:
1. Not be issued until a fire inspection has been conducted and
approved by the City of St. Charles Fire Department.
Section
400.1330
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1350
100:1035
Section 400.1360. Building Permits. [R.O. 2009 §156.503; CC 1981
§30-269; Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord.
No. 09-227, 12-10-2009; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
2. Be issued within ten (10) days after the completion of the erection
or structural alteration of a building.
3. Not be issued until a finalized site plan has been approved, only
where site plan review is required by this Chapter; copies of such
finalized plan shall be kept on file in the Department of Community
Development.
4. Be kept on file in the office of the Department of Community
Development.
D. Temporary Certificate.
1. Pending the issuance of a regular certificate of occupancy, a
temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the
Department of Community Development for a period not exceeding
six (6) months during the completion of alterations or during partial
occupancy of a building pending its completion.
2. Such temporary certificate shall not be construed in any way as
altering the respective rights, duties or obligations of the owners or
of the City relating to the use or occupancy of the premises or any
other matter covered by this Chapter.
3. Such temporary certificate shall not be issued except under such
restrictions and provisions as will adequately insure the safety of
the occupants.
E. When weather conditions prevent installation of any required
greenbelt, parking lot landscaping or yard landscaping, the Department
of Community Development or designee may issue a certificate of
occupancy before installation of the said landscaping, but not before a
surety or cash escrow is posted for the benefit of the City. Failure to
install any required landscaping within six (6) months of issuance of the
certificate of occupancy shall constitute a default and the City shall be
entitled to proceed against the surety or cash escrow.
A. A building shall not be erected, constructed, altered, moved, converted,
extended or enlarged without the owner first having obtained a building
permit. Such permit shall require conformity with the provisions of this
Chapter. When issued, such permit shall be valid for the period of time
specified thereon. The Department of Community Development shall be
responsible for issuing the building permits.
B. Where a building permit for a structure has been issued in accordance
with law prior to the effective date of this Chapter (i.e., July 5, 1977)
and provided that construction is begun within six (6) months of the
date of the building permit and diligently prosecuted to completion,
Section
400.1350
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1360
100:1036
such structure may be completed in accordance with the approved
plans on the basis of which the building permit has been issued and
further, may, upon completion, be occupied under a certificate of
occupancy by the use for which originally designated, subject
thereafter to the provisions of Sections 400.750 et seq., Non-
Conforming Uses.
C. Where site plan review is required according to this Chapter, building
permits shall not be issued unless the site plan has been reviewed in
accordance with Sections 400.960 et seq. and/or other appropriate
Sections of this Chapter.
D. All applications for building permits for use, other than those described
in Subsection (C) of this Section, shall be accompanied by a drawing or
plot plan, as required by the Department of Community Development,
showing with dimensions, the lot lines, the location of existing
easements on the lot, the proposed buildings, the location of the
existing buildings on the lot and such other information as may be
necessary to provide for the enforcement of these regulations
including, if necessary, a boundary survey and a staking of the lot by a
registered land surveyor and complete construction plans. The
drawings shall contain suitable notations indicating the proposed use of
all land and buildings. A careful record of the original copy of such
applications and plats shall be kept in the office of the Department of
Community Development at all times and a duplicate copy shall be kept
at the building site at all times during construction. [Ord. No. 13-178
§1, 9-24-2013]
E. "GPRS" Bonus.
All tiers. Complete building permit applications shall receive an initial
review within five (5) business days of receipt.
Section
400.1360
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1360
100:1037

Article XVI
Sign Regulations
Section
400.1370
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1360
100:1039

DIVISION 1
General Sign Regulations
Section 400.1370. Purpose. [R.O. 2009 §156.610; Ord. No. 02-172,
7-10-2002; Ord. No. 10-142 §1, 7-8-2010]
These sign regulations are designed to encourage the effective and efficient
use of signs as a communications tool; to create a cityscape that is free
of overly distracting visual clutter and nuisance signage; and to enhance
traffic safety and protect the public health, safety and welfare by regulating
the location, type, size, height, number, design, construction, installation,
maintenance and removal of signs within the City of St. Charles.
Section 400.1380. Exempt Signs. [R.O. 2009 §156.620; Ord. No.
02-172, 7-10-2002; Ord. No. 02-276, 11-22-2002; Ord. No. 10-142
§2, 7-8-2010]
A. The following types of signs are exempted from all the provisions of this
Article, unless otherwise noted in this Section:
1. Public signs. Signs erected by, or on the order of, a public officer in
the performance of his/her public duty, such as safety signs, danger
signs and traffic signs.
2. Historical markers. Historical markers as recognized by local,
State or Federal authorities.
3. Signs located within any officially recognized historic district
including, but not limited to, the Historic Downtown District, the
South Main Preservation District and the Frenchtown Historic
District. Signs within these districts shall only be subject to the sign
regulations set forth in Divisions 1 "General Sign Regulations"; 6, 7
and 8 of this Article.
4. Institutional including church, non-commercial school and civic
organization signs. Requirements are as follows:
a. If such signs are part of a group sign structure, they shall only
be located within one-fourth (¼) mile of the City limits and
require approval of the City Council;
b. No sign permit is required except as noted above.
5. Signs for temporary public interest events such as neighborhood
garage sales, fund raisers, church fairs, carnivals, festivals,
concerts, parades or similar events, provided such signs: are not
placed more than thirty (30) days prior to the event; are removed
within five (5) days following the event; and are not located to
interfere with traffic safety or in rights-of-way without the approval
of the Public Works Department.
Section
400.1370
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1390
100:1041
Section 400.1390. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §156.630; Ord. No.
02-172, 7-10-2002; Ord. No. 08-191, 9-17-2008; Ord. No. 10-142 §3,
7-8-2010]
When used in this Article, the following terms have the following meanings
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ADVERTISING SIGN — A sign which includes advertising copy or graphics
relating to any service, product, person, business, place, activity or
organization in addition to simple identification.
AREA OF SIGN — The area of the largest single face of the sign within
a perimeter which forms the outside shape including any frame, forming
an integral part of the display, but excluding the necessary supports or
uprights on which the sign may be placed. If the sign consists of more than
one (1) section or module, all areas will be totaled.
BILLBOARD — Shall have the meaning set out in "OUTDOOR
ADVERTISING".
COMPLEXES/CENTERS — Any number of businesses greater than one
which share the same site using common points of ingress and egress and
common parking facilities.
DOUBLE-FACED SIGN — A sign with two (2) surfaces placed back-to-back
or V-shaped with the common angle not greater than ninety degrees (90°).
ELECTRONIC BILLBOARD — Any structure or portion thereof upon which
alphanumeric characters, graphics or symbols defined by a small number
of matrix elements using different combinations of light emitting diodes
(LED's), fiber optics, light bulbs or other illumination devices within the
display area including computer programmable, microprocessor controlled
electronic displays and projected images or messages with these
characteristics are utilized to advertise a person, thing, product or service
not located or sold on the lot upon which the electronic billboard is placed.
EXPLICIT SEXUAL ACTS — Depictions or descriptions, whether being
performed alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or
between humans and animals, of:
Sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal contact,
bestiality, direct physical stimulation of genitals, flagellation or torture
in the context of a sexual relationship or any of the following depicted
sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprolagnia,
coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty,
pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty, zoophilia; or
1.
Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence;
or
2.
The use of human or animal masturbation, sodomy, oral copulation,
coitus, ejaculation; or
3.
Fondling or touching of human genitals, pubic regions, buttock or
female breast; or
4.
Section
400.1390
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1390
100:1042
FASCIA SIGN — A sign which is permanently affixed to the horizontal piece
covering the joint between the top of a wall and the projecting eaves of the
roof.
FLAG-MOUNTED SIGN — A sign which projects from the roof or wall of a
building perpendicular to a wall surface.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign which is erected or mounted on its own
self-supporting permanent structure or base detached from any supporting
elements of building.
HLPARB — The Historic Landmarks Preservation and Architectural Review
Board of the City of Saint Charles, Missouri.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign that includes as copy only the name of the
business, place, organization, building or person it identifies.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign whose surface is lit, internally or externally,
and which identifies, advertises or attracts attention to a use or activity on
the premises.
ITEM OF INFORMATION — A word, initial or series of initials, logo,
abbreviation, number, telephone number, street address, business name,
symbol, graphic or geometric shape contained within a sign.
MULTI-TENANT SIGN — A sign that includes as copy only the names of
two (2) or more businesses, places, organizations, buildings or persons it
identifies.
Masochism, erotic or sexually-oriented torture, beating or the infliction
of pain; or
5.
Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other contact with an animal by a
human being; or
6.
7. Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation; or
Other acts of sexual arousal involving any physical contact with a
person's genitals, pubic hair, perineum, anus or anal region.
8.
Section
400.1390
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1390
100:1043
NON-CONFORMING SIGN — See Section 400.1820.
NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY — Material which depicts one (1) of the
following:
OBSCENE — Material which depicts or describes sexual conduct that is
objectionable or offensive to accepted standards of decency which the
average person, applying contemporary community standards, would find,
taken as a whole, appeals to prurient interests or material which depicts or
describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined by
applicable State laws and, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.
OFF-PREMISE/OFF-SITE SIGN — A sign which directs attention to a
business, product, commodity, service, entertainment or attraction sold,
offered or existing elsewhere than upon the same lot where such sign is
displayed. "Off-premise/off-site sign" shall include an outdoor advertising
sign (billboard) on which space is leased, rented or donated by the owner
thereof to others for the purpose of conveying a commercial or noncommercial
message.
ON-PREMISE/ON-SITE SIGN — A sign which directs attention to a
business, product, commodity, service, entertainment or attraction sold,
offered or existing upon the same lot where such sign is displayed.
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING — An outdoor sign, display, device, figure,
painting, drawing, message, plaque, poster, billboard, or other thing
designed, intended or used to advertise or inform, any part of the
advertising or information contents of which is visible from any point of the
traveled ways of the interstate or primary systems
PERSON — Any person or persons or entity including, but not limited
to, a corporation, limited liability corporation, partnership, unincorporated
association or joint venture.
PICTORIAL MATERIAL — Any material suggesting or conveying a visual
image and includes, but is not limited to, a photograph, painting or drawing.
Any pictorial matter is "obscene" if all of the following apply:
The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva,
anus, anal cleft or anal cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering;
1.
The showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering
of any part of the nipple;
2.
3. The showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state;
A mother in the act of nursing her baby shall not be included within this
definition, nor shall any child under the age of seven (7).
4.
The average person, applying contemporary community standards,
would find that it appeals to prurient interests when the publication or
material is considered as a whole; and
1.
Section
400.1390
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1390
100:1044
PORTABLE SIGN (SANDWICH SIGN) — Any sign which is not permanently
affixed to any structure on a site or permanently ground mounted.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any location not enclosed and within view of the public
or any location frequented by the public or where the public is present or
likely to be present. Public places include, but are not limited to, streets,
roadways, alleys, sidewalks, parks, beaches, yards, parking lots, boats,
barges, business and commercial establishments (whether for profit or
not-for-profit and whether open to the public at large or where entrance
is limited by a cover charge or membership requirement), bottle clubs,
hotels, motels, restaurants, nightclubs, country clubs, cabarets and meeting
facilities utilized by any religious, social, fraternal or similar organizations.
ROOF-MOUNTED SIGN — A sign which projects above the highest point of
the roof line, parapet or fascia of a building.
SEXUAL AROUSAL, GRATIFICATION OR AFFRONT — The purpose or
effect of statements, words, pictures or illustrations depicting explicit
sexual acts as defined in this Section.
SEXUAL BEHAVIOR — The patently offensive representation depiction or
description of any of the following:
SIGN — Any device providing identification, advertising or directional
information for a specific business, service, product, person, organization,
place or building for commercial purposes. "Sign" includes graphic devices
It depicts, describes or represents in a patently offensive manner sexual
behavior as defined in this Section; and
2.
It lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value when the
publication or material is considered as a whole.
3.
Ultimate sexual acts, actual or simulated, including vaginal intercourse
between a male and a female and anal intercourse, fellatio and
cunnilingus between persons regardless of gender; or
1.
Masturbation, excretory functions and lewd exhibition of the genitals;
or
2.
The actual or simulated infliction of pain by one individual upon another
or by an individual upon himself or herself for the purpose of sexual
gratification or release of either individual, as a result of flagellation,
beating, striking or touching of an erogenous zone including, without
limitation, the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region or, if such person is
a female, a breast.
3.
Section
400.1390
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1390
100:1045
such as logos and attention-attracting objects such as logo sculpture and
obtrusive colored fascia or architectural elements, banners, balloons,
streamers, strobe lights, flags, inflatable structures, projected picture signs,
holographic projection signs and other attention- attracting media and
devices.
SIGN PACKAGE — A detailed description including, but not limited to, type,
size, color and location of all signage.
SOFFIT SIGN — A sign which is suspended from the underside of a lintel,
arch or other overhead spanning member and is hung perpendicular to a
vertical wall surface.
WALL-MOUNTED SIGN — A sign which is permanently affixed to any
vertical portion of a building for which the sign is intended to identify or
advertise.
Section 400.1400. Sign Height Measurement. [R.O. 2009 §156.640;
Ord. No. 02-172, 7-10-2002]
Section 400.1410. Sign Area Measurement. [R.O. 2009 §156.650;
Ord. No. 02-172, 7-10-2002; Ord. No. 11-252 §1, 12-21-2011]
A. Sign height measurements are as follows:
1. Freestanding sign. Height shall be the distance from the top of the
sign structure to the top of curb or crown of roadway where no
curb exists. The height of any monument base or other structure
erected to support or ornament the sign shall be measured as part
of the sign height; and
2. Wall- or fascia-mounted signs. Height shall be the distance from the
top of the sign structure to the top of curb or crown of road where
no curb exists.
A. Sign area measurements are as follows:
Section
400.1390
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1410
100:1046
1. Sign area will include the areas of all permitted signs. The only
exceptions are directional signs assisting in the flow of traffic,
street addresses or signs necessary for safety (e.g., stop engine, no
smoking) that do not exceed two (2) square feet in area;
2. A sign having more than one (1) component, e.g., a service station
identification/price sign combination on a monument base,
mounted on the same surface, the sign area will be the area of the
smallest rectangle that encompasses the several components of the
sign;
3. Sign copy mounted or painted on a background panel or area
distinctively painted, textured or constructed as a background for
the sign copy, shall be measured as the area contained within the
outside dimensions of the background panel or surface;
4. Sign copy mounted as individual letters against a wall or fascia of a
building or other structure that has not been painted, textured or
otherwise altered to provide a distinctive background for the sign
copy, shall be measured as the area enclosed by the smallest single
rectangle that will enclose all sign copy. Graphics or logos
accompanying letters shall be measured separately and measured
as the area enclosed by the smallest single rectangle that will
enclose all sign graphics or logos;
5. Sign copy mounted or painted on an illuminated surface or
illuminated architectural element of a building, shall be measured
as the entire illuminated surface or illuminated architectural
element which contains sign copy; and
Section
400.1410
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1410
100:1047
Section 400.1420. Sign Illumination.424 [R.O. 2009 §156.660; Ord.
No. 02-172, 7-10-2002; Ord. No. 02-276, 11-22-2002]
6. Where there are a number of sign faces:
a. One face. Area of the single face only;
b. Two faces. If the interior angle between the two (2) faces is
forty-five degrees (45°) or less, the area will be the area of one
(1) face only; if the angle between the two (2) sign faces is
greater than forty-five degrees (45°), the sign area will be the
sum of the areas of the two (2) faces;
c. Three or more sides. The sign area will be the sum of the areas
of each of the faces; and
d. Spherical, free-form, sculptural, other non-planar signs. Sign
area will be the sum of the areas using only the four (4) vertical
sides of the smallest cube that will encompass the sign.
424. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
Section
400.1410
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1420
100:1048
Section 400.1430. Sign Maintenance.425 [R.O. 2009 §156.670; Ord.
No. 02-172, 7-10-2002; Ord. No. 02-276, 11-22-2002]
A. Signs may be illuminated as provided by this Article and specified by
approved sign criteria, if applicable, in accordance with the following
regulations:
1. Externally illuminated, building-mounted signage may be
illuminated by either ground-mounted lights or building-mounted
light bars. In either situation, the light source shall be totally
screened from view;
2. Externally illuminated, freestanding signage shall be illuminated by
ground-mounted lights with the light source being totally screened
from view;
3. Internally illuminated, freestanding and building-mounted signage
shall be lighted by light sources totally screened from view;
4. Flashing or intermittent forms of illumination are prohibited; and
5. All illuminated signs shall require a sign permit and shall comply
with all provisions of the electrical code.
A. Any signage that has been approved or that has been issued a permit
shall be maintained by the owner or person in possession of the
property on which the sign is located. Maintenance shall be such that
the signage continues to conform to the conditions imposed by the sign
permit and that the sign shall substantially conform to its original
condition without cracking, peeling or fading.
B. Any damaged sign or sign base shall be repaired within sixty (60) days.
C. Any metal portions of any sign shall be kept free of rust and rust stains.
D. Any internally illuminated sign cabinets or sign panels which have been
damaged shall remain unilluminated until repaired.
E. Any signage which has been damaged to such extent that it may pose a
hazard to passersby shall be repaired or removed immediately.
F. Legal non-conforming signage which has been damaged to the extent of
more than fifty percent (50%) of its reproduction value shall be
removed or altered so as to conform to the provisions of this Article.
G. Failure to comply with these sign maintenance requirements shall
constitute a violation of this Article.
425. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
Section
400.1420
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1430
100:1049

DIVISION 2
Specific Sign Regulations
Section 400.1440. General Regulations. [R.O. 2009 §156.701; Ord.
No. 02-172, 7-10-2002]
The signs listed in this Division 2 are permitted, subject to the criteria listed
under each sign and the other applicable Sections of this Article.
Section 400.1450. Address Signs. [R.O. 2009 §156.702; Ord. No.
02-172, 7-10-2002]
Section 400.1460. Awning Signs. [R.O. 2009 §156.703; Ord. No.
02-172, 7-10-2002; Ord. No. 05-101, 4-13-2005; Ord. No. 10-142 §4,
7-8-2010]
Section 400.1470. Banner Signs. [R.O. 2009 §156.704; Ord. No.
02-172, 7-10-2002; Ord. No. 02-276, 11-22-2002]
A. An "address sign" is a sign consisting of numerals and letters
identifying a property address. Requirements are as follows:
1. Letter and numeral height shall not exceed twelve (12) inches; and
2. No sign permit is required unless such sign is illuminated.
A. An "awning sign" is a sign which is printed, painted or affixed to an
awning. Requirements are as follows:
1. Sign copy including logo shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet or
fifty percent (50%) of awning face area, whichever is less;
2. Such sign shall only be displayed on the ground floor awnings; and
3. Flashing or intermittent illumination of awnings is prohibited.
A. A "banner sign" is a sign which is painted or otherwise permanently
affixed upon cloth or other flexible material and which is building
mounted only. Requirements are as follows (see also Section 400.1640
Sale, Lease or Rent Signs or Banners for additional banner
requirements):
1. A banner sign for which a permit is not required shall be limited to
an area of twenty-four (24) square feet;
2. All signs shall include wind cuts to reduce the tendency of the
banner to billow or sail;
3. The amount of time a banner may be displayed shall be limited to
seven (7) days and no one (1) business shall be allowed to display a
banner for more than twenty-eight (28) days per calendar year and
there shall not be more than one (1) banner per licensed business
on display at any one time;
Section
400.1440
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1470
100:1051
Section 400.1480. Street Banner Signs. [R.O. 2009 §156.705; Ord.
No. 08-95, 5-15-2008; Ord. No. 09-42, 3-6-2009; Ord. No. 09-76,
4-24-2009; Ord. No. 09-211, 12-3-2009]
4. Private sponsors of such signs may be identified by a trademark or
symbol which shall be secondary in order of placement and shall
comprise no more than one-tenth (1/10) of the banner face;
5. Temporary signage for "Going Out of Business" and "Grand
Opening" events is regulated under those respective Sections
separate from these requirements;
6. A sign permit is not required except under the following situations:
a. Through the approval of a sign permit, banners not meeting
the size and time limitations listed above may be approved
where it is demonstrated that the event or announcement
depicted on the banner will not have a detrimental impact on
the aesthetic qualities of the surrounding area and that it
meets one (1) of the following:
(1) It is of civic or community wide interest;
(2) It is necessary given the particular situation of a property
in terms of size and/or location;
(3) It is for a seasonal or annual event or sale that typically
engenders a time period longer than one (1) week;
(4) In no case shall a banner be approved for longer than one
hundred twenty (120) days per calendar year.
A. Street Banner Sign Defined. For purposes of this Section, a "street
banner sign" is a sign which is painted or otherwise permanently affixed
upon metal, cloth or other flexible material and which is vertically
mounted on or hung from a single street light standard in a public rightof-
way. A "street banner sign" is not a sign which is attached to public
facilities on opposite sides of a public street and extends over a public
street or sidewalk.
B. Permit Required. It is unlawful to erect or maintain a street banner sign
without a valid permit issued in compliance with this Section.
C. Permit—Who May Obtain. Permits for the erection or maintenance of
street banner signs may be obtained only by fraternal, charitable, civic
or veterans' organizations, the City of St. Charles, political subdivisions
of the State providing services within the municipal boundaries of the
City of St. Charles, a university, a hospital, a church or a historic
preservation district located within and recognized by the City of St.
Charles.
D. Permit Application And Approval Procedure.
Section
400.1470
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1480
100:1052
1. Applicants desiring to erect or maintain a street banner sign shall
make application to the Department of Community Development
not more than twelve (12) calendar months nor less than two (2)
calendar months in advance of the starting date requested for
display of the street banner sign. The application shall contain the
following information:
a. The name and local address of the organization seeking the
permit;
b. The dimensions of the street banner sign for which the permit
is sought, together with a color rendering of the words and
graphics to be displayed thereon;
c. A map showing the exact proposed locations where the street
banner signs will be hung;
d. The dates on which the street banner signs are sought to be
displayed;
e. A letter of approval from the Missouri Department of
Transportation where it has maintenance responsibility for the
right-of-way;
f. The name of the contractor who has been retained by the
applicant to create the proposed attachment mechanism or
connection device and hang the banner sign upon receipt of
approval; and
g. A copy of the contractor's plan detailing the proposed
attachment mechanism or connection device for review and
approval by the Department of Public Works.
2. The applicant must provide at the time of submitting an application
the following:
a. An executed maintenance and indemnification agreement on a
form provided by the City which sets forth the light standard
attachment device design; who will be responsible for the
installation, removal and maintenance of the attachment
device and street banner sign; and that the applicant is
responsible for any damage caused to the light standard by the
installation of the attachment device, support structure or
street banner sign; and
b. A certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company
authorized to do business in the State of Missouri which names
the City of St. Charles as an additional insured and provides
liability insurance in the minimum amounts as set forth in
Section 537.610, RSMo., as adjusted for inflation, arising out of
a single occurrence or for any one (1) person in a single
accident or occurrence for any personal injury or property
Section
400.1480
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1480
100:1053
damage resulting from the street banner sign, its attachment
device or support structure.
c. All applications for a permit to erect or maintain street banner
signs shall be presented to the Department of Community
Development at which time the Director of Community
Development shall make a determination if the requirements of
this Section have been satisfied and a recommendation for the
issuance of a permit. Thereafter, the application shall be
forwarded to the City Council for approval or denial as a
consent agenda item.
E. Permit Fee. The fee for a street banner sign permit shall be the nonrefundable
sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each calendar year which
must be paid to the City Finance Department before the permit will be
issued. Fees shall be waived when the City of St. Charles is the street
banner sign applicant.
F. Specifications.
1. A street banner sign shall not exceed three (3) feet in width and
seven (7) feet in length. A street banner sign must hang from the
light standard lengthwise and must be finished on both sides. The
bottom edge of a street banner sign must be at least twelve (12)
feet above a sidewalk or parkway, except in the "HDD" where the
bottom of a street banner sign must be at least eight (8) feet above
a sidewalk or parkway. The bottom edge of a street banner sign
must be at least sixteen (16) feet above street grade, except in the
"HDD" where the bottom of a street banner sign must be at least
eleven (11) feet six (6) inches above the street grade. No more than
one (1) street banner sign is allowed per light standard. Street
banner signs shall not be lit.
2. Street banner signs may promote the existence, identify the
location of or define the boundaries of the permittee. The street
banner sign may contain the permittee's name, logo, symbols,
renderings of mascots or phrases or slogans. Street banner signs
shall not promote or contain information regarding specific events,
advertising material including the permittee's address and phone
number. A street banner sign shall not contain any form of
commercial advertising, political or religious content, or
solicitation.
3. Street banner signs must be uniform in color, size and content and
the sign supports must be of uniform design and appearance.
Street banner signs may be installed on City light standards or
other light standards or utility poles with the owner's written
approval. Street banner signs shall not be located on or attached to
traffic signals, street signs, buildings, mailboxes, wires or posts or
be attached to two (2) or more light standards or utility poles so as
Section
400.1480
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1480
100:1054
Section 400.1490. Building-Mounted Signs. [R.O. 2009 §156.706;
Ord. No. 02-172, 7-10-2002; Ord. No. 10-142 §5, 7-8-2010]
to hang between them, nor shall street banner signs be hung across
a street.
4. A street banner sign must be installed so as not to block or
otherwise interfere with any traffic control device, traffic sign or
any public safety device. A street banner sign may not obstruct or
shield the light produced by the light standard on which it is
located.
5. The City's Department of Public Works shall have the right to
inspect the installation of all attachment mechanisms or connection
devices.
G. Maintenance Responsibility—Violations Thereof. Street banner signs
and their supports shall be maintained in good condition. Street banner
signs that exhibit any of the following conditions shall be deemed to be
in violation of this Division:
1. Any portion of the perimeter of the sign is frayed;
2. The sign fabric is ripped or torn or any stitching is loose;
3. The sign is faded to a degree that the original content of the sign
cannot be easily recognized by passing motorists or pedestrians;
4. The sign is partially disconnected from its support; or
5. Any metal portion of the sign, sign support or frame contains rust
or rust stains.
If a permittee is cited by the Code Enforcement Division of the
Department of Community Development for a violation of this
Division, the permittee shall repair the street banner sign to its
original condition or shall remove the sign within two (2) weeks
from the date of the citation. The City shall have the right to
remove any street banner sign that has been cited for a violation
and has not been repaired or removed within the time specified. If
the City removes a street banner sign, the entity that installed the
sign shall be liable for the cost of removal.
A. A "building-mounted sign" is one that is directly attached to the facade
or face of a building. Requirements are as follows:
1. Such sign shall be supported solely by the facade of the building;
2. Such sign may be flag-mounted in situations where the character of
the area may be preserved and enhanced by the use of such sign;
3. Such sign shall not protrude beyond any property line on which the
building itself is located;
Section
400.1480
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1490
100:1055
Section 400.1500. Changeable Copy/Marquee Signs. [R.O. 2009
§156.707; Ord. No. 02-172, 7-10-2002; Ord. No. 05-46, 1-28-2005;
Ord. No. 10-142 §6, 7-8-2010]
Section 400.1510. Construction Signs. [R.O. 2009 §156.709; Ord.
No. 02-172, 7-10-2002]
Section 400.1520. Directional Signs. [R.O. 2009 §156.710; Ord. No.
02-172, 7-10-2002; Ord. No. 02-276, 11-22-2002]
4. Such sign shall not exceed thirty (35) feet in height;
5. Sign area shall be regulated by the provisions of Division 3 of this
Article;
6. Including the business name, a maximum of eight (8) items of
information may be displayed on a building mounted sign; and
7. A sign permit is required.
A. A "changeable copy/marquee sign" is one which utilizes changeable
letters, text or copy. Any State licensed learning institution is
authorized to utilize changeable letters, text or copy without prior
approval of the City. However, all other such signs shall be for theaters
only. Changeable signs shall also comply with the following
requirements:
1. Such signs shall be subject to the requirements for buildingmounted
or freestanding signs; and
2. A sign permit is required.
A. A "construction sign" is one which identifies the parties included in an
"in-progress" construction project. Requirements are as follows:
1. Such signs shall only be displayed on the actual construction site;
2. Such sign shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height nor thirty-two
(32) square feet in area;
3. All such signs shall be removed prior to the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy for the site; and
4. No sign permit is required.
A. A "directional sign" is one which includes copy offering pertinent
directional information for the purpose of assisting in the flow of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Requirements are as follows:
Section
400.1490
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1520
100:1056
Section 400.1530. Directory Signs. [R.O. 2009 §156.711; Ord. No.
02-172, 7-10-2002; Ord. No. 10-142 §7, 7-8-2010]
Section 400.1540. On-Premise Electronic Message Signs. [R.O.
2009 §156.712; Ord. No. 02-172, 7-10-2002; Ord. No. 08-191,
9-17-2008; Ord. No. 10-142 §8, 7-8-2010]
1. Such signs shall not exceed three (3) feet in height if freestanding,
nor two (2) square feet in area;
2. Such signs shall not include identification or advertising copy;
3. Must be placed to avoid conflicts with vehicular traffic;
4. Such signs are permitted in all zoning districts; and
5. No sign permit is required unless such sign is illuminated or meets
the following:
a. Through the approval of a sign permit, directional signs not
meeting the size limitation listed above may be approved
where it is demonstrated that such signs will not have a
detrimental impact on the aesthetic qualities of the
surrounding area and that it is necessary given the particular
situation of a property in terms of size and/or location.
A. A "directory sign" is a wall-mounted sign that lists the name, use or
location within a building, building complex or multi-tenant
development. Requirements are as follows:
1. Such signs maybe utilized in all non-residential zoning districts;
2. Such signs shall not exceed six (6) feet in height nor six (6) square
feet in area;
3. Such signs shall not include any advertising copy; and
4. A sign permit is required.
A. An "on-premise electronic message sign" is a sign or portion thereof
with characters, letters or illustrations that can be electronically
changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the
sign and directs attention to a business, product, commodity, service,
entertainment or attraction sold, offered or existing upon the same lot
where such sign is displayed. Requirements are as follows:
1. Such signs shall be subject to the requirements for buildingmounted
or freestanding signs;
2. A sign permit shall be required for such signs to determine the
appropriateness of the proposed location of such sign and to set
standards for the operational characteristics, such as, but not
limited to, the ability to scroll messages, the time frames between
Section
400.1520
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1540
100:1057
Section 400.1550. Flags. [R.O. 2009 §156.713; Ord. No. 02-172,
7-10-2002; Ord. No. 10-142 §9, 7-8-2010]
Section 400.1560. Freestanding Identification Signs. [R.O. 2009
§156.714; Ord. No. 02-172, 7-10-2002; Ord. No. 05-101, 4-13-2005;
Ord. No. 10-244 §10, 11-18-2010]
messages and the safety impacts on the general public of such a
display. Such signs which display only the time and temperature
and are eight (8) or less square feet in area are not subject to
approval. Electronic message signs shall operate in accordance
with the following standards:
a. No portion of the message may flash, twirl, or scroll.
b. Each message shall have a minimum duration of eight (8)
seconds and shall be a static display.
c. The electronic message sign shall be designed and equipped to
freeze the device in one position, or shut off, if a malfunction
occurs.
d. All messages must relate to the business located on the subject
property.
e. The sign must be equipped with an automatic nighttime
dimmer.
3. (Reserved)426
A. This category applies to official flags for corporations and decorative
flags used for commercial purposes. Requirements are as follows:
1. Flagpole height is not limited;
2. No more than one (1) flag shall be flown on any one (1) site or
structure;
3. The maximum size of any flag shall not exceed fifteen (15) square
feet with no one (1) dimension to exceed six (6) feet in any
direction; and
4. A sign permit is required to display any corporate or decorative
commercial flag.
A. A "freestanding identification sign" is one which is erected or mounted
on its own self-supporting permanent structure or base detached from
any supporting elements of building. Requirements are as follows:
426. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection (A)(3), which provided that a sign permit was required,
was repealed 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-285.
Section
400.1540
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1560
100:1058
1. Such signs, including their supporting structures, shall not exceed
six (6) feet in height and such signs shall not exceed twenty-four
(24) square feet in area except in the following circumstances:
a. The property and the use in question justifies the additional
area and height to provide visibility from motorists on I-70,
Highway 94 south of I-70, Highway 364 or Highway 370. In
such cases, a freestanding sign shall be limited to a maximum
height of thirty (30) feet and maximum area of eighty (80)
square feet.
2. All such signs shall have monument-type bases of masonry
construction or materials which complement the primary structure
being identified or the prevailing character of the structures in the
area;
3. All such signs shall require a landscape area equal to four (4)
square feet for each square foot of sign area. This landscape area
shall be located around the base of the sign and shall be
surrounded by a six (6) inch high vertical concrete curb. Said
landscape area may be modified by the Director of Community
Development or his/her designee where it is found that due to preexisting
circumstances the provision of said landscape area will
cause an undue burden on the ability to effectively use the
property;
4. Such signs shall only identify the name of the business, the center/
complex or place for which the sign is intended;
5. Including the business name, a maximum of eight (8) items of
information may be displayed on a freestanding sign;
6. Address numerals shall be included on all freestanding sign
structures. The numerals shall be no smaller than four (4) inches in
height; and
7. A sign permit is required.
B. Pole signs are permitted as freestanding identification signs on a lot
that directly adjoins the right-of-way of the following streets and
highways: Interstate 70; Highway 370; Highway 364; Highway 94;
Zumbehl Road between Interstate 70 and Highway 94; New Town
Boulevard; Truman Boulevard; and West Clay Street. Pole signs shall be
permitted at these locations only under the following conditions: [Ord.
No. 15-178 §1, 8-11-2015]
1. The property must be zoned C-2 General Business District, C-3
Highway Business District, I-1 Light Industrial District or 1-2
Heavy Industrial District;
2. One (1) pole sign is permitted per lot;
3. The maximum height of a pole sign shall not exceed thirty (30) feet;
Section
400.1560
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1560
100:1059
Section 400.1570. Future Development Signs. [R.O. 2009 §156.715;
Ord. No. 02-172, 7-10-2002]
Section 400.1580. Going Out of Business Signs. [R.O. 2009
§156.716; Ord. No. 02-172, 7-10-2002; Ord. No. 02-276, 11-22-2002;
Ord. No. 10-142 §11, 7-8-2010]
4. The maximum area of a pole sign is one (1) square foot of signage
for every one (1) lineal foot of building frontage and under no
circumstances shall the area of a pole sign exceed one hundred fifty
(150) square feet;
5. Pole signs shall be permitted only when the ground level elevation
of the building is lower than the elevation of the adjoining roadway;
6. Pole signs shall not count toward the maximum square feet of
signage permitted under Section 400.1720, Legal, Non-residential
Uses; and
7. A sign permit is required.
A. A "future development sign" is one which announces the proposed
development of property, prior to the issuance of building permit.
Requirements are as follows:
1. Such signs shall include copy identifying the name(s) of the project
architect, developer and contractor;
2. Such signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area nor
eight (8) feet in height;
3. Such signs may be maintained for a period not to exceed twelve
(12) months prior to obtaining building permits for a development
and shall be removed prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy;
4. Such signs shall not be internally illuminated;
5. All such signs shall be located on the development site;
6. Only one (1) sign shall be displayed per street frontage; and
7. A sign permit is required.
A. A "going out of business sign" is a wall sign not greater than twentyfour
(24) square feet indicating that the business displaying the sign
will cease and be discontinued at a specific location. Requirements are
as follows:
1. All businesses shall be permitted to display going out of business
signs for an initial period of thirty (30) consecutive days which may
be renewed by City staff for an additional fifteen (15) consecutive
days upon request by the applicant. Additional time may be
Section
400.1560
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1580
100:1060
Section 400.1600. Lead-In Signs. [R.O. 2009 §156.719; Ord. No.
02-172, 7-10-2002]
Section 400.1610. Menu Boards. [R.O. 2009 §156.720; Ord. No.
02-172, 7-10-2002; Ord. No. 02-276, 11-22-2002; Ord. No. 10-142
§13, 7-8-2010; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
requested by the applicant through the approval of the Director of
Community Development subject to such request being filed prior
to expiration of any prior permits;
2. The business shall cease and be discontinued at that specific
location upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand or after
forty-five (45) days, whichever comes first, after the going out of
business signage is first displayed unless such additional time has
been granted by the Director of Community Development but in no
case shall such temporary signage be displayed beyond ninety (90)
days from the initial display;
3. Vehicle-mounted and portable signs and flashing lights are
prohibited from use as going out of business signs; and
4. A sign permit is required.
A. A "lead-in sign" is a temporary portable sign used to direct pedestrian
or vehicular traffic to a home (or residential unit) which is for sale or
rent. Requirements are as follows:
1. Such signs shall not exceed three (3) feet in height nor three (3)
square feet in area with no illumination;
2. No more than four (4) such signs shall be displayed for each home
for sale or rent;
3. Complexes, developments or subdivisions shall not display more
than four (4) such signs;
4. Such signs shall not be placed so as to create a traffic hazard, in a
traffic median, public sidewalk, bicycle path on City property or in
City right-of-way between the sidewalk and the curb; and
5. No sign permit is required.
A. A "menu board" is a permanently mounted sign advertising the bill of
fare for a restaurant, drive-in or drive-thru restaurant. Requirements
are as follows:
1. Menu boards shall not exceed six (6) feet in height nor thirty (30)
square feet in area;
2. Freestanding menu boards shall have a monument base of masonry
construction and shall have a landscape area at the base of the sign
equal to at least two (2) square feet for each square foot of sign
Section
400.1580
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1610
100:1061
Section 400.1620. Permanent Residential Subdivision Signs. [R.O.
2009 §156.721; Ord. No. 02-172, 7-10-2002; Ord. No. 10-142 §14,
7-8-2010]
Section 400.1630. Political Signs. [R.O. 2009 §156.722; Ord. No.
02-172, 7-10-2002; Ord. No. 06-191, 7-28-2006]
area. The landscape area may be modified by the Director of
Community Development or his/her designee where it is found that
due to pre-existing circumstances, the provision of the landscape
area will cause an undue burden on the ability to effectively use the
property;
3. Only one (1) such sign per drive-through lane is allowed and the
sign shall be located in a manner which provides the least impact
on adjacent or nearby land uses. Additionally, one (1) preview
board may be installed per drive through lane. Such preview board
shall not exceed six (6) feet in height nor twenty (20) square feet in
area;
4. The sign area for a menu board shall not be counted in the total
aggregate sign area for the business; and
5. A sign permit is required.
A. A "permanent residential subdivision sign" is a permanent sign used to
identify a recorded subdivision. Requirements are as follows:
1. Such signs shall not exceed five (5) feet in height nor twenty-four
(24) square feet in area. A twenty-four (24) square foot sign may be
displayed on either side of a street providing direct access to the
subdivision and serving as a major entry;
2. Such signs shall be wall mounted or freestanding and shall include
a landscape area equal to at least two (2) square feet for each
square foot of sign area; and
3. A sign permit is required.
A. A "political sign" is a temporary sign used to advertise the candidacy of
an individual, ballot proposition/issue or to encourage citizens to vote.
Requirements are as follows:
1. Such signs shall not be located on City property except as stated in
Subsection (4) or in City right-of-way;
2. Such signs shall be located so as to not create a traffic hazard; and
3. No sign permit is required.
4. Political signs may be located in Blanchette Park on election day
when Memorial Hall is being used as a polling place.
Section
400.1610
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1640
100:1062
Section 400.1640. Sale, Lease or Rent Signs or Banners. [R.O. 2009
§156.723; Ord. No. 02-172, 7-10-2002; Ord. No. 02-276, 11-22-2002;
Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
Section 400.1650. Service Station Signs. [R.O. 2009 §156.724; Ord.
No. 02-172, 7-10-2002; Ord. No. 05-101, 4-13-2005; Ord. No. 10-142
§15, 7-8-2010]
A. A "sale, lease or rent sign or banner" is a temporary sign used to
advertise the availability of non-residential real property. Note that
signs for residential real estate are covered by Section 400.1600, Lead
in Signs. Requirements are as follows:
1. Such signs shall not exceed forty-eight (48) square feet in area or
ten (10) feet in height and except for banners may be freestanding;
2. Such signs shall only be displayed on the property for which they
pertain. Only one (1) sign shall be displayed per street frontage;
3. Such signs shall not be illuminated; and
4. A sign permit is not required except under the following situation:
a. Through the approval of a sign permit, sale, lease or rent signs
or banners not meeting the size limitation listed above may be
approved where it is demonstrated that such signs will not
have a detrimental impact on the aesthetic qualities of the
surrounding area and that it is necessary given the particular
situation of a property in terms of size and/or location.
A. A "service station identification/price sign" is a permanently mounted,
two (2) component sign displaying business identification and the retail
cost of a gallon of gas/diesel on the premises of the service station.
Requirements are as follows:
1. One (1) such sign is allowed per street frontage;
2. Such sign shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area nor
six (6) feet in height except in the following circumstances:
a. The Director of Community Development or his/her designee
finds that the property and the use in question justifies the
additional area and height to provide visibility from motorists
on I-70, Highway 94 south of I-70, Highway 364 or Highway
370. In such cases, a freestanding sign shall be limited to a
maximum height of thirty (30) feet and maximum area of eighty
(80) square feet.
Section
400.1640
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1650
100:1063
Section 400.1670. Prohibited Signs. [R.O. 2009 §156.726; Ord. No.
02-172, 7-10-2002; Ord. No. 02-276, 11-22-2002; Ord. No. 07-162,
6-11-2007; Ord. No. 08-191, 9-17-2008]
3. The price component of the sign shall not exceed five (5) feet in
height, nor twelve (12) square feet in area except in the following
circumstances:
a. The Director of Community Development or his/her designee
finds that the property and the use in question justifies the
additional area and height to provide visibility from motorists
on I-70, Highway 94 south of I-70, Highway 364 or Highway
370. In such cases, a freestanding sign shall be limited to a
maximum height of thirty (30) feet and maximum area of eighty
(80) square feet.
4. The sign shall have a landscape area at the base of each sign equal
to at least four (4) square feet for each square foot of sign area
which shall be surrounded by a six (6) inch high concrete vertical
curb. The landscape area may be modified by the Director of
Community Development or his/her designee where it is found that
due to pre-existing circumstances, the provision of the landscape
area will cause an undue burden on the ability to effectively use the
property;
5. All such signs shall have monument-type bases of masonry
construction or materials which complement the primary structure
being identified or the prevailing character of the structures in the
area; and
6. A sign permit is required. Where such signs do not exceed six (6)
feet in height and twenty-four (24) square feet in area and meet all
design and landscape criteria, staff may administratively approve
the permit.
B. A "pump-topper sign" is a sign which is affixed to the top or sides of an
operable fuel dispensing pump. Requirements are as follows:
1. Such signs shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area;
2. Such signs shall only display instructional information or price
information and shall not include advertising copy pertaining to
any product, sale or promotion; and
3. No sign permit is required.
A. Signs that are not specifically authorized are expressly prohibited.
These prohibited signs include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Any non-public signs in public right-of-way or on public property,
except as otherwise provided and except approved banner signs
installed pursuant to the City's banner program guidelines. The
Section
400.1650
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1670
100:1064
City may install signs on its own property to identify public
buildings and uses and to provide necessary traffic control;
2. All roof-mounted signs;
3. Flag-mounted signs, except as otherwise provided;
4. All signs having intermittent or flashing illumination, animated or
moving parts or that emit sound, except as otherwise permitted
through the approval of a conditional use permit for an electronic
message board;
5. Freestanding changeable copy signs, except as otherwise provided;
6. All banners, pennants, streamers, balloons, flags, searchlights,
strobe lights, beacons, inflatable signs, perimeter window lighting,
except as otherwise provided; [Ord. No. 16-245 §1, 11-15-2016]
7. Service or bay-mounted sign banners or advertising;
8. Any sign imitating an official traffic control sign or device or any
sign or device obscuring such traffic control signs or devices;
9. All signs mounted on or applied to trees, utility poles, rocks or Cityowned
property, except as otherwise provided;
10. Any sign placed on private property without the property owner's
written approval;
11. Off-premise/off-site signs, except as permitted elsewhere in this
Article;
12. All portable signs, except as otherwise provided. Portable signs
shall include, but are not limited to, signs which are mounted,
attached or painted on trailers, boats or vehicles when used as
additional signage on or near the business premises. Business
vehicles displaying signage or advertising shall be parked in an
assigned parking space which is not immediately adjacent to a
street frontage;
13. Signs attached to, suspended from or painted on any vehicle which
is regularly parked on any street or private property when one (1)
of the purposes of so locating such vehicle is to display,
demonstrate and advertise or attract the attention of the public:
a. It is not a violation of this Section merely to have a common
logo or business sign attached to, suspended from or painted
on a company vehicle regularly engaged in the business of the
owner; and
b. When it is determined by appropriate authorities that a vehicle
is being regularly parked in a manner that violates this Article,
the City will issue a single notice of warning to the owner of the
vehicle, who will be provided an opportunity for an informal
Section
400.1670
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1670
100:1065
Section 400.1680. Window Signs. [R.O. 2009 §156.727; Ord. No.
02-172, 7-10-2002; Ord. No. 02-276, 11-22-2002]
Section 400.1690. Unauthorized Signs or Signs Erected in Violation
of This Article. [R.O. 2009 §156.728; Ord. No. 02-172, 7-10-2002;
Ord. No. 06-341, 12-14-2006]
hearing by representatives of the City consisting of the Mayor,
Director of Community Development and the Chairperson of
the HLPARB or their designated representatives prior to the
institution of formal application to the HLPARB and/or judicial
proceedings;
14. All painted plywood signs except as may be approved as temporary
signs;
15. Nudity and sexually explicit signs. No person shall design or allow
the display of the following on a billboard or sign in a public place:
a. Any material which exposes to public view any pictorial
material that is obscene;
b. Any material showing males or females in a state of nudity
where the purpose of the material is sexual arousal,
gratification or affront;
c. Any statements or words describing explicit sexual acts, sexual
organs or excrement where such statements or words have as
their purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront;
d. Any picture or illustration of a person's genitals, pubic hair,
perineum, anus or anal region where such picture or
illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal,
gratification or affront: or
e. Any picture or illustration depicting explicit sexual acts as
defined in this Section where such picture or illustration has as
its purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront;
and
16. Signs which are not expressly permitted by this Article.
A. A "window sign" is a sign or signage placed in windows so as to attract
the attention of persons outside of the building where the sign or
signage is placed. Requirements are as follows:
1. Window signage shall be limited to twenty-five percent (25%) of the
total window area on each face of the building in which it is placed;
2. Window signage shall not be placed above the ground floor of the
building; and
3. No sign permit is required.
Section
400.1670
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1690
100:1066
A. An "unauthorized sign" is one which is displayed in the City right-of-way
or on City property without City permission. Such signs may be
removed by City staff without notice. These signs may be disposed of, if
unclaimed within seven (7) days.
B. City staff shall give written notice for any sign otherwise erected or
maintained in violation of this Article. Upon failure to correct the
violation, City staff shall enforce this Article in accordance with Section
400.1860.
C. Subsection (A) shall not apply to a cross or flowers placed along the
right-of-way as a memorial, provided the memorial is temporary, does
not obstruct the line of vision and is not a nuisance.
Section
400.1690
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1690
100:1067

DIVISION 3
Signs Permitted For Commercial (Non-Residential) Uses
Section 400.1720. Legal, Non-Residential Uses. [R.O. 2009
§156.730; Ord. No. 02-172, 7-10-2002; Ord. No. 02-276, 11-22-2002;
Ord. No. 05-101, 4-13-2005; Ord. No. 10-142 §17, 7-8-2010; Ord. No.
14-221 §1, 10-21-2014]
A. Business signs for all legal, non-residential uses shall be in accordance
with the following:
1. The total aggregate area of one (1) face of all signs on the premises
pertaining to any one (1) business shall not exceed forty (40)
square feet. However, if the portion of the building adjacent to its
lot's street property line measures more than forty (40) feet, then
the total aggregate area of one (1) face of all such signs on the
premises may be increased in area at the rate of one (1) square foot
of sign area for each foot of building frontage in excess of forty (40)
linear feet; but the total aggregate area of one (1) face of all such
signs on the premises shall not exceed eighty (80) square feet for
each business. The total aggregate area of all signs on the premises
pertaining to any one business with a frontage exceeding one
hundred fifty (150) linear feet may be increased to one hundred
fifty (150) square feet. For corner buildings, only the main entrance
frontage shall be so measured.
2. For each property in the C-2 General Business, C-3 Highway
Business, I-1 Light Industrial and I-2 Heavy Industrial zoning
districts that adjoins the right-of-way of Interstate 70, Highway
370, Highway 364 or that portion of Highway 94 south of Interstate
70, the total aggregate area of all signs on the property may be
increased in accordance with the following: [Ord. No. 17-262,
11-21-2017]
a. Properties that adjoin the right-of-way for a distance of three
hundred (300) linear feet but less than five hundred (500)
linear feet: the total aggregate area of all signs on the property
may be increased to six percent (6%) of all building facades
visible from the right-of-way up to a maximum of three hundred
(300) square feet;
b. Properties that adjoin the right-of-way for a distance of five
hundred (500) or more linear feet; the total aggregate area of
all signs on the property may be increased to six percent (6%)
of all building facades visible from the right-of-way up to a
maximum of five hundred (500) square feet;
c. For the purposes of this Section, a building facade is a building
elevation which contains the front of the building as viewed
from the right-of-way or an elevation that is oriented to the
parking lot and contains the main entrance.
Section
400.1720
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1720
100:1069
Section 400.1725. Temporary Signage. [Ord. No. 10-142 §18,
7-8-2010; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
3. Freestanding identification signs shall not be counted as a portion
of the total aggregate sign area of the premises but shall be
restricted to the following:
a. One (1) freestanding identification for each street upon which
the lot has frontage; and
b. A sign permit is required.
4. When a site is developed as a complex/center as defined by this
Article, only one (1) freestanding identification sign per street
frontage of the entire site is permitted in accordance with the
following:
a. Such signs shall identify the center only and shall not be
counted in the total aggregate sign area for individual business
identification;
b. A freestanding sign identifying an individual business or
businesses and/or the center shall be counted as a portion of
the total aggregate sign area allowed for the business and in
no instance shall an individual business occupy less than eight
(8) square feet of the sign;
c. A sign permit is required.
5. All wall, soffit or fascia-mounted signs for individual businesses
shall be uniform in terms of colors, shapes and maximum vertical
dimension with all other such signs in the center or as otherwise
provided for by an approved sign package.
A. A temporary sign is a sign or attention-attracting object placed on a
property for a limited time. The following temporary sign types may be
permitted through approval of a sign permit:
1. Cold air balloons. Cold air balloons are permitted at a height not to
exceed thirty-two (32) feet. Each business is permitted four (4)
such advertising devices per calendar year for a period not to
exceed fourteen (14) days. Such aids may not be placed on the roof
of the building. A permit application shall be submitted and
approved prior to erection.
2. Searchlights. Searchlights may not interfere with the normal use of
adjacent property or cause interference to motor vehicle or
pedestrian traffic. Each business is permitted two (2) such
advertising devices per calendar year for a period not to exceed
seven (7) days each. Such devices may not be placed on the roof of
a building. Searchlights shall be required to submit a permit and
receive approval prior to use.
Section
400.1720
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1725
100:1070
3. Grand openings. New businesses or business under new ownership
or new name may use pennants and streamers only as a part of a
grand opening event for up to seven (7) days. Such pennants and
streamers must be in good condition, free from dirt or missing
pieces.
4. Approved developments.
a. General. Only one (1) construction, future use of site, or
subdivision promotion sign may be erected per roadway
frontage at any one time after first obtaining the required
zoning authorization and sign permit. At no time shall guy
wires or auxiliary support posts be used to anchor a temporary
development-related sign.
b. Banners, subdivision identification. Subdivision identification
banners are allowed in any zoning district with a sign permit.
Said banners shall not exceed thirty (30) inches by eighty-four
(84) inches in sign area and shall be erected, internal to a
subdivision, for a period not to exceed two (2) years.
c. Flags, subdivision promotion. Within developing subdivisions,
subdivision promotion flags are allowed without securing a
sign permit; however, a zoning authorization and building
permit is required prior to erecting a flagpole. Said flags shall
not be flown on poles exceeding sixteen (16) feet in height with
a flag length not to exceed two and one-half (2½) feet.
Subdivision promotion flags shall be internal to a subdivision
and not visible from beyond the limits of said subdivision.
d. Temporary construction signs. Construction signs which
identify the architects, engineers, contractors or other
individuals or firms involved with construction on a site may be
erected during the construction period. Each construction site
may have no more than one (1) such sign facing each roadway
on which the site has frontage. No construction sign shall
exceed thirty-two (32) feet in outline area, nor exceed ten (10)
feet in height above the average existing finished grade. The
signs shall be confined to the site of the construction and shall
be removed no later than fourteen (14) days after completion
of all construction on the site or after ninety (90) days of
suspension of work. The message on a construction sign shall
not include any advertisement of a product but may include
information announcing the character of the business
enterprise or the purpose for which the business is intended.
e. Temporary signs announcing future use of site.
(1) Signs announcing the future use of a site, by a use
permitted by the regulations of the particular zoning
district in which the lot or development is located, may be
erected immediately following the approval of said use but
Section
400.1725
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1725
100:1071
not more than six (6) months prior to construction or
development of the site. If after six (6) months
construction has not commenced, the sign(s) must be
removed. Signs announcing future use of site shall be
erected only on the lot or development in question and
shall be removed within fourteen (14) days after the
completion of construction of a building on the site in the
case of a previously undeveloped site, or the occupancy of
an existing building, or the beginning of the intended use
of the site where no building is to be constructed.
(2) Each site may have no more than one (1) such sign facing
each roadway on which the site has frontage. No such sign
shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in outline area per
facing, nor exceed ten (10) feet in height above the
average existing finished grade elevation of the sign or
elevation of the adjacent street, whichever is higher.
f. Subdivision direction signs.
(1) For the purpose of these regulations a subdivision
direction sign is a sign placed at some location outside the
limits of a residential subdivision intended to inform and
direct the general public to an approved or pending
development. Subdivision direction signs may not be
erected until a site plan or preliminary plat has been
approved for the subject development. The message upon
the sign shall be limited to the name of the subdivision, the
name of the developer, insignia, price range, a directional
arrow, and written directions.
(2) Signs may have one (1) face, a face on each side of the sign
board, or be V-shaped (not to exceed an interior angle of
sixty degrees (60°) and contain two (2) faces.
(3) Subdivision direction signs may be erected on properties
at any of the corners of intersecting streets, highways or
roads, subject to the following criteria:
(a) Location.
(i) Within the area bounded by the street right-ofway
lines, a line connecting two (2) points from
the street right-of-way lines one hundred thirty
(130) feet from the point of intersection of the
street right-of-way lines, but not including the
area within the sight distance triangle; or
(ii) Subdivision direction signs may be erected
beyond a point located not closer than one
hundred thirty (130) feet, but not farther than two
hundred thirty (230) feet from the point of
Section
400.1725
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1725
100:1072
intersection of the street right-of-way lines, as
measured along the right-of-way line.
(iii) In the case of non-symmetrical intersections, the
limits established for sign placement shall be
measured from the prolongation of the right-ofway
lines on the opposite side of the street.
(iv) No subdivision direction sign shall be erected
within the sight distance triangle or otherwise be
placed to obstruct vehicular sight distance.
(b) Subdivision direction signs shall be located no closer
to the street right-of-way line than permitted under
the requirements for structure setbacks of the
applicable zoning district.
(c) Guy wires shall not be utilized to anchor the sign.
(d) Subdivision direction signs shall not be located closer
than twenty (20) feet to any other sign.
(4) Not more than three (3) subdivision direction signs, each
authorizing the placement of a single subdivision direction
sign at a location, will be authorized for each development
at any given time. Each development is allowed not more
than three (3) sign locations concurrently. For the
purposes of this Section, multiple plats or phases of
contiguous development shall be considered a single
development without regard to ownership.
(5) All subdivision direction signs shall be removed within one
(1) year of the date the authorization was issued for said
sign.
(6) A limit of one (1) sign per development shall be allowed at
an intersection.
(7) A limit of three (3) subdivision direction signs shall be
allowed per intersection.
(8) Each sign face shall have a decorative border of a
minimum width of one and one-half (1½) inch.
(9) No single sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet or
be less than sixteen (16) square feet in outline area. The
total permitted sign area allocated for an individual
development shall not exceed ninety-six (96) square feet.
(10) A sign permit shall be obtained from the Department of
Community Development for the placement of all
subdivision direction signs. Applicant must provide a
Section
400.1725
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1725
100:1073
Section 400.1730. Regional Commercial Use Overlay. [R.O. 2009
§156.732; Ord. No. 02-172, 7-10-2002; Ord. No. 05-236, 9-16-2005;
Ord. No. 10-142 §19, 7-8-2010]
This special sign overlay district shall apply to certain uses which by their
very nature draw from a regional area and draw customers not familiar
with St. Charles and therefore necessitate special sign packages. Therefore,
business signs within the overlay district as approved by the City Council
are not subject to the standards of this Article. Sign criteria shall be
established by the City Council and shall be predicated upon the standards,
spirit and intent of this Article and shall be applied by the City Council in
making its determination under this Section with regard to an application
hereunder. New developments outside those already recognized by this
Article may request their signage be considered under this Section but such
designation shall be subject to approval by the City Council as set forth
above.
written consent authorizing the removal of said sign upon
permit expiration.
(11) Sign maintenance. The permittee of any approved
subdivision direction sign is required to maintain such
signage in a safe and satisfactory manner. A sign is
considered to be unsafe and in unsatisfactory condition if
the sign contains peeling paint, and/or the sign surface or
support structures is rotted, warped, damaged, faded, sun
baked or deteriorated. If the Department of Community
Development determines repair is needed and the owner
fails to repair said sign within thirty (30) days of receiving
notification of the disrepair, the City will remove such
signs at the permittee's expense.
Section
400.1725
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1730
100:1074
DIVISION 4
Billboards
Section 400.1740. General Provisions. [R.O. 2009 §156.740; Ord.
No. 08-191, 9-17-2008]
Section 400.1750. Permitted Districts. [R.O. 2009 §156.741; Ord.
No. 08-191, 9-17-2008; Ord. No. 11-01 §1, 1-6-2011]
Section 400.1760. Standards For Location and Spacing, Area and
Height. [R.O. 2009 §156.742; Ord. No. 08-191, 9-17-2008; Ord. No.
11-099 §1, 5-20-2011]
A. Billboards and electronic billboards shall comply with Missouri State
law and Federal law.
B. Non-Conforming Or Abandoned Billboards. Where a billboard structure
does not include advertising information other than for the use of the
billboard for a period of one hundred twenty (120) continuous calendar
days, the billboard structure shall be deemed in violation of this
Chapter and shall be removed.
A. Billboards and electronic billboards may be permitted in the following
districts as conditional uses if approved by the City Council following
recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission:
1. "I-1" and "I-2" zoning districts.
2. "PD-C," "PD-MU," "C-2" and "C-3" zoning districts. [Ord. No.
19-253, 11-19-2019]
A. Location And Spacing. Billboards shall only be located in a permitted
zoning district, along the highway and corridors specified herein and
shall meet the following location requirements:
1. Billboards shall only be allowed within six hundred sixty (660) feet
of the edge of the pavement of Interstate Highway 70 and Missouri
State Highways 94, 370 and 364.
2. No billboard shall be located within ten thousand (10,000) feet of
an existing billboard on either side of Interstate Highway 70 and
Missouri State Highways 94, 370 and 364 within the municipal
boundaries of the City. The ten thousand (10,000) foot distance
shall be measured along the nearest edge of the pavement at points
directly opposite the billboard along each side of the highway and
shall apply to billboards located on either side of the highway in
computing the distance between billboards.
3. No billboard shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of an
interchange or intersection on Interstate Highway 70 and Missouri
State Highways 94, 370 and 364; provided however, that such
billboard may be affixed to or located adjacent to a building at an
Section
400.1740
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1760
100:1075
interchange or intersection in a manner as not to cause any greater
obstruction of vision than caused by the building itself.
4. No portion of a billboard shall be located within two hundred fifty
(250) feet of any structure within any residential zoning district or
one hundred (100) feet of any structure used primarily as a
dwelling unit in any other zoning district.
5. No billboard shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of any
property or district listed on the National Register of Historic
Places, any National Historic Landmark or any location officially
designated by the City as a historic landmark or historic district.
6. No portion of a billboard shall be placed within a fifty (50) foot
radius of any point of a building.
7. No billboard shall be placed on rocks, trees or poles maintained by
a public utility.
8. All billboards shall be exempt from front, side and rear yard
building setbacks in the districts in which they are permitted;
however, the front yard setback from a road right-of-way shall be a
minimum of thirty (30) feet.
9. No billboard shall be located on the right-of-way of any road or on
any slope or drainage easement for such road.
B. Maximum Area.
1. The maximum area for any one (1) billboard shall be six hundred
seventy-two (672) square feet with a maximum height of twenty
(20) feet and a maximum length of fifty (50) feet, inclusive of
border, cutouts, extensions, projections and trim but excluding the
base, apron or supports and other structural members. The area
shall be measured by the smallest square, rectangle, triangle,
circle or combination thereof which will encompass the entire
billboard. Cutouts, extensions and projections shall not exceed
twenty-five percent (25%) of the area of sign.
2. The maximum area limitation shall apply to each side of a billboard
structure. Billboards may be placed back-to-back, double faced or
in V-type construction with not more than two (2) displays to each
facing, but such billboard structure shall be considered as one (1)
billboard.
C. Maximum Height. The maximum height to top of signage shall not
exceed forty-five (45) feet above the natural grade where the billboard
is installed or the grade level of the centerline of the highway to which
the sign is oriented, whichever is higher.
Section
400.1760
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1770
100:1076
Section 400.1770. Standards For Electronic Billboards. [R.O. 2009
§156.743; Ord. No. 08-191, 9-17-2008; Ord. No. 11-01 §2, 1-6-2011;
Ord. No. 11-223 §1, 11-4-2011]
A. Location And Spacing, Area And Height. Electronic billboards shall only
be permitted in "I-1," "I-2," "PD-C," "PD-MU," "C-2" and "C-3" zoning
districts along Interstate Highway 70 and Missouri State Highways 94,
370 and 364 and shall meet all requirements for location and spacing
found in Section 400.1760 Standards for Location and Spacing, Area,
and Height, except that: [Ord. No. 19-253, 11-19-2019]
1. No electronic billboard shall be erected, located or placed within
two thousand six hundred forty (2,640) feet of another electronic
billboard on either side of Interstate Highway 70 and Missouri
State Highways 94, 370 and 364. This distance shall be measured
along the nearest edge of the pavement at points directly opposite
the electronic billboard along each side of the highway, and shall
apply to electronic billboards located on either side of the highway
in computing the distance between electronic billboards.
2. No electronic billboard shall be located within two hundred fifty
(250) feet of an existing freestanding on-premise electronic
message sign.
B. Duration Of Message. The electronic billboard image or any portion
thereof shall have a minimum duration of at least ten (10) seconds and
shall be a static display. No portion of the image may flash, scroll, twirl,
change color, or in any manner imitate movement.
C. Transition Of Message. Where the electronic billboard image or any
portion thereof changes, the change sequence shall only be
accomplished by means of instantaneous re-pixelization.
D. Video Display Prohibited. No portion of any electronic billboard may
change its message or background in a manner or by a method of
display characterized by motion or pictorial imagery, or depict action or
a special effect to imitate movement, or the presentation of pictorials or
graphics displayed in a progression of frames that give the illusion of
motion or the illusion of moving objects, moving patterns or bands of
light or expanding or contracting shapes.
E. Brightness And Illumination.
1. Brightness. The electronic billboard sign shall not exceed a
maximum of five thousand (5,000) nits (candelas per square meter)
during daylight hours and a maximum illumination of five hundred
(500) nits (candelas per square meter) between sundown and
sunrise measured from the sign's face at maximum brightness.
2. Fluctuating or flashing illumination. No portion of any electronic
billboard may fluctuate in light intensity or use intermittent, strobe
or moving light or light that changes in intensity in sudden
Section
400.1770
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1770
100:1077
transitory bursts, streams, zooms, twinkles, sparkles or that in any
manner creates the illusion of movement.
3. Dimmer control. Electronic billboards shall be equipped with an
automatic dimmer control to produce a distinct illumination change
from a higher illumination level to a lower level for the time period
between sundown and sunrise.
F. Audio. Audio speakers are prohibited in association with an electronic
billboard.
G. Text Size Requirements. Every line of copy and graphics displayed on
an electronic billboard shall be at least twelve (12) inches in height on a
road with a speed limit of forty-five (45) miles per hour or greater and
fifty-four (54) miles per hour or less, and at least fifteen (15) inches in
height on a road with a speed limit of fifty-five (55) miles per hour or
greater.
H. Malfunction And Non-Compliance. Electronic billboards shall be
designed and equipped to freeze the device in one (1) position if a
malfunction occurs. The electronic billboards shall be equipped with a
means to immediately discontinue the display if it malfunctions, and the
sign owner shall immediately stop the dynamic display when notified by
the City that it is not complying with standards of this code.
I. Provision Of Community And Public Service Messaging. The owner of
an electronic billboard shall enter into an agreement with the City to
provide the City no less than five (5) hours (one thousand eight hundred
(1,800) ten (10) second spots) per month per electronic billboard in the
City for community and public service messages at such times as shall
be determined by the City.
J. I-70 Corridor Billboard Replacement. The owner of a billboard existing
on the effective date of this Division may, by application for and
approval of a conditional use permit, relocate the billboard structure for
the purpose of installing an electronic billboard; provided all of the
following conditions are satisfied:
1. The property upon which the billboard is located shall be directly
adjacent to Interstate 70 right-of-way;
2. All existing billboards and freestanding on-premise electronic
message signs and their supporting structures shall be
permanently removed from the property upon which the electronic
billboard is to be located prior to the issuance of a building permit
for the electronic billboard;
3. No freestanding on-premise electronic message signs or billboards
shall be located on the property upon which an electronic billboard
is located;
Section
400.1770
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1770
100:1078
4. The electronic billboard shall be located on the same property,
within the property boundaries existing upon the effective date of
this Division, and within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the existing
billboard being replaced;
5. The property upon which the electronic billboard is located shall
consist of a lot not less than five (5) acres;
6. The electronic billboard shall comply with all provisions of the sign
regulations Article, except for Section 400.1760(A)(2); and
7. The maximum number of sign faces or surfaces permitted on the
electronic billboard shall not exceed two (2).
K. I-70 Corridor Electronic Billboard Relocation. The owner of a billboard
which has received conditional use approval to replace a traditional,
static billboard face with an electronic billboard face and has never
installed the electronic billboard face may, by application for and
approval of a conditional use permit, transfer the right to install an
electronic billboard to a different location on a new billboard support
structure; provided all of the following conditions are satisfied:
1. The property upon which the originally approved billboard is
located and the property upon which the relocated billboard is
proposed shall be adjacent to Interstate 70 right-of-way between
the eastern limit of the City of St. Charles and the Interstate 70/
Highway 94 interchange;
2. All existing billboards and freestanding on-premise electronic
message signs and their supporting structures shall be
permanently removed from the property upon which the electronic
billboard is to be located prior to the issuance of a building permit
for the electronic billboard;
3. No additional billboard(s) or additional freestanding on-premise
electronic message sign(s) shall be located on the property after
the first (1st) electronic billboard permitted by this Section
400.1770(K) is so located;
4. The property upon which the electronic billboard is located shall
consist of a lot not less than three (3) acres;
5. The maximum sign area of the relocated billboard shall not exceed
the maximum sign area of the originally approved billboard and in
no case shall exceed six hundred seventy-two (672) square feet;
6. Upon approval of a conditional use permit for an I-70 corridor
electronic billboard relocation, the original conditional use
approval for an electronic billboard shall become null and void;
7. The new billboard structure and electronic billboard shall comply
with all provisions of the sign regulations Article, except for
Section
400.1770
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1770
100:1079
Section 400.1760(A)(2), Section 400.1760(A)(3), Section
400.1760(C) and Section 400.1770(A)(1); and
8. The maximum number of sign faces or surfaces permitted on a new
billboard structure shall not exceed two (2). If conditional use
approval to install only one (1) electronic billboard face is being
transferred, a new billboard structure may only support one (1)
electronic billboard face and one (1) additional face that is not
considered to be electronic.
9. The maximum height to top of signage for a new billboard structure
shall not exceed sixty-five (65) feet above the natural grade where
the billboard is installed or the grade level of the centerline of the
highway to which the sign is oriented, whichever is higher.
Section
400.1770
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1770
100:1080
DIVISION 5
Signs Permitted For Residential Uses in Any District
Section 400.1780. Single and Two-Family Dwellings and
Subdivisions. [R.O. 2009 §156.750; Ord. No. 02-172, 7-10-2002; Ord.
No. 10-142 §20, 7-8-2010]
Section 400.1790. Multi-Family Dwellings. [R.O. 2009 §156.752;
Ord. No. 02-172, 7-10-2002]
Section 400.1800. Mobile Home and Trailer Parks. [R.O. 2009
§156.754; Ord. No. 02-172, 7-10-2002]
A. For single- and two-family dwellings, an identification sign not
exceeding one (1) square foot in area is permitted giving the name only
of the land or building on which displayed or of the owner or lessee
thereof. No sign permit is required.
B. Permanent subdivision identification signs for recorded subdivisions
are permitted in accordance with the following:
1. Final location of such signs are to be approved by the City Council
if located within City right-of-way; and
2. A sign permit is required.
A. Signs for apartments and condominium uses are permitted as follows:
1. One (1) freestanding identification sign not exceeding ten (10) feet
in width, five (5) feet in height or twenty-four (24) square feet in
area is permitted. Such sign must be located at least five (5) feet
from any property line;
2. A wall-mounted sign not exceeding six (6) square feet in area is
permitted. The height of such sign shall not exceed ten (10) feet;
and
3. A sign permit is required.
A. Signs for mobile home and trailer parks are permitted as follows:
1. One (1) identification sign for each entrance to the park is
permitted;
2. One (1) freestanding identification sign not exceeding ten (10) feet
in width, five (5) feet in height or twenty-four (24) square feet in
area is permitted. Such sign must be located at least five (5) feet
from any property line; and
3. A sign permit is required.
Section
400.1780
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1800
100:1081

DIVISION 6
Obsolete Signs
Section 400.1810. Obsolete Signs. [R.O. 2009 §156.760; Ord. No.
02-172, 7-10-2002]
Any sign or sign support structure, whether existing on or erected/installed
after the effective date of this Article, which advertises or is intended to
support a sign for a business no longer being conducted or a product no
longer being offered for sale on or from the premises on which the sign is
located shall be removed by the property owner within thirty (30) days upon
cessation of such business or sale of such product by owner, agent, tenant or
person having the beneficial interest in the business, property or premises
on which such sign is located.
Section 400.1820. Non-Conforming Signs. [R.O. 2009 §156.762;
Ord. No. 02-172, 7-10-2002; Ord. No. 10-142 §21, 7-8-2010; Ord. No.
11-42 §1, 3-16-2011]
Any sign which lawfully exists at the time of enactment of this Article shall
be allowed to remain until such time as the sign is substantially altered or
changed or until such time as another sign is proposed in lieu of the existing
sign. Such sign shall be in conformance with all other provisions of this
Article.
Section
400.1810
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1820
100:1083

DIVISION 7
Sign Regulations For Superimposed Districts
Section 400.1830. Sign Regulations For "SMPD", "HDD", "FHD",
"LMPD" and "EHP" Superimposed Districts. [R.O. 2009 §156.765;
Ord. No. 02-172, 7-10-2002; Ord. No. 02-276, 11-22-2002; Ord. No.
10-142 §22, 7-8-2010; Ord. No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010; Ord. No.
11-100 §1, 5-20-2011]
A. "SMPD" South Main Preservation District. The purpose of this Section
is to allow adequate signage for pedestrian-oriented historic
commercial areas, yet at the same time exclude signage which would be
detrimental to property values and the character of the district.
1. General regulations.
a. No sign or graphic may be displayed without first obtaining a
certificate of appropriateness from the HLPARB.
b. No sign or graphic shall be permitted in the district unless the
sign relates to or advertises a business within the district.
c. Signs shall not obscure architectural details or features.
d. Any projecting sign displayed over a public walkway must be at
least eight (8) feet above the walkway.
2. Wall, projecting, window and awning signs.
a. Each building within the district shall be allowed one (1) wall
sign per business located within the building. Additionally,
buildings with rear entryways shall be allowed one (1)
additional wall sign on the rear wall of the building. The size of
any wall sign shall be no more than three-fourths (0.75) square
feet per lineal foot of the occupant's portion of building
frontage, provided that the aggregate size of all wall signs
combined shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet.
b. Wall signs shall not be located above second story windows.
c. Each building within the district shall be allowed one (1)
projecting sign for each frontage of a building; provided that
projecting signs shall not be allowed on any building wall
facing Main Street which already has a wall sign.
d. Projecting signs shall be allowed a maximum size of thirtyhundredths
(0.30) square feet per lineal foot of building
frontage, provided that the maximum size of the face of any
projecting sign shall not exceed five and one-half (5.5) square
feet.
e. Window signs are prohibited.
Section
400.1830
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1830
100:1085
f. Awning, canopy and umbrella signs are prohibited.
3. Multiple-occupant buildings and directory signs. Whenever there is
more than one (1) occupant in any building, it shall be the
responsibility of the building owner to allocate the permitted
signage. Directory signs are permitted where there is more than
one (1) occupant per building. Directory signs shall be excluded in
the calculation of the total amount of building signage permitted.
Maximum one hundred (100) square inches per tenant or four
hundred (400) square inches, whichever is less.
4. Freestanding signs. Freestanding signs other than pole signs are
prohibited. Pole signs shall be permitted under only one (1) of the
following circumstances:
a. Lots with a building having a front yard setback of at least
fifteen (15) feet from the right-of-way may erect one (1) pole
sign in a front yard.
b. Building walls with business entrances not facing Main Street
may be allowed to erect a pole sign along South Main Street,
however, if a pole sign exists on the property, the business shall
only be permitted to install a sign face on the existing pole.
c. Pole signs shall be allowed a maximum size of one-fourth (0.25)
square feet per lineal foot of building frontage, provided that
the maximum size of the face of any pole sign panel shall not
exceed five and one-half (5.5) square feet total for the entire
face.
5. Temporary signs. The following regulations shall control temporary
signs:
a. Banners. One (1) banner or grand opening sign per occupant is
permitted of no more than thirty-two (32) square feet. Permits
for banners and grand opening signs shall be valid for a
maximum of thirty (30) days. Each occupant shall be issued no
more than one (1) banner permit per calendar year. Banners
and grand opening signs require prior approval by the
HLPARB.
b. Handbills. One (1) handbill advertising special events may be
placed in one (1) window in a building. Handbills meeting this
requirement do not require approval by the HLPARB.
c. "Open" and "closed" signs. Open and closed signs shall not
exceed one (1) square foot in size and must be constructed of
natural material such as wood or of a material which simulates
a natural material. Fluorescent cardboard and brightly colored
"open" and "closed" signs shall be prohibited. Open and closed
signs meeting this requirement do not require prior approval
by the HLPARB.
Section
400.1830
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1830
100:1086
d. Menus. Restaurants shall be allowed to display a house menu
which shall be permanently affixed and shall not exceed
eighteen (18) inches by twelve (12) inches in size.
e. Real estate and builders signs. One (1) real estate, builder or
"for sale" sign will be permitted in the front and rear of each
building with a maximum size of sixteen (16) square feet per
sign. Signs may only be displayed for as long as the property is
for lease, sale or under construction. Real estate, builder and
"for sale" signs meeting these requirements do not require
approval from the HLPARB.
6. Signs on vehicles. Signs attached to, painted on or placed on a
vehicle (including a trailer) that is parked in the South Main
Preservation District shall be prohibited. This provision is not to be
construed as prohibiting the identification of a firm or its principal
products on vehicles operating during the normal course of
business or as prohibiting the parking of vehicles.
7. Lighting of signs. Lighting of signs shall be from an indirect source
and lights shall be hidden from direct view. Fluorescent lights are
prohibited.
8. Neon signs. Neon lights in any form including neon signs are
prohibited.
B. "HDD" Historic Downtown District.
1. General regulations.
a. No sign or graphic may be displayed without first obtaining a
certificate of appropriateness from the HLPARB.
b. No sign or graphic shall be permitted in the district unless the
sign relates to or advertises a business within the district.
c. Signs shall be compatible with the architecture of the building
and the Historic Downtown District.
2. Wall, projecting, window and awning signs.
a. Each building is permitted a maximum sum total of all wall,
projecting and window signage of one (1) square foot of
signage per each lineal foot of frontage of the building. Where
there are two (2) or more frontages, the average of frontages
shall be computed to determine the signage allotment under
this formula. One (1) additional sign is permitted on the rear of
each building with a maximum size of fifty percent (50%) of
that allowed on the front, provided that the area of the rear
elevation signage shall count towards the total sign area for
the building.
Section
400.1830
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1830
100:1087
b. Each building within the district is allowed one (1) projecting
sign per tenant. Projecting signs shall be included in the
calculation of the total amount of building signage permitted.
Projecting signs must clear a sidewalk or walkway at least
eight (8) feet.
c. Multiple-occupant buildings and directory signs. Whenever
there is more than one (1) occupant in any building, it shall be
the responsibility of the building owner to allocate the
permitted signage. Directory signs are permitted where there
is more than one (1) occupant per building. Directory signs
shall be excluded in the calculation of the total amount of
building signage permitted. Maximum one hundred (100)
square inches per tenant.
d. Each occupant within the district is allowed permanent
window signs with a maximum size of thirty-three percent
(33%) of the panes of glass of space which the tenant occupies.
Allowable window signage will include signs or graphics which
are painted, attached to, in proximity or within three (3) feet of
window area or part of a signage which is part of a window
area. The area of window signage shall be measured as the
area of the smallest possible rectangle encompassing all sign
elements including letters and graphics. Window signs shall be
included in the calculation of the total amount of building
signage permitted.
e. In addition to other wall, projecting and window signage, each
occupant serving food and beverages is entitled to display one
(1) menu of a maximum size of four hundred (400) square
inches which shall not be included in the calculation for total
allowable building signage. A minimum seventy-five percent
(75%) of menu sign shall be used for displaying menu items. To
be eligible for a menu sign, tenants must derive at least fifty
percent (50%) of its gross revenue from the sale of food.
f. Awning and canopy signs are permitted, the size of which shall
be calculated by its actual area and shall be included in the
calculation for total allowable building signage.
3. Freestanding and outdoor signs.
a. Freestanding signs. Freestanding signs are permitted within
the "HDD" only on properties which front on Second Street or
Third Street. One (1) freestanding sign not to exceed threefourths
(0.75) square feet per lineal foot of frontage of the
building for the first fifty (50) lineal feet and one-half (0.50)
square feet per lineal foot of frontage of the building for
footage in excess of fifty (50) lineal feet is permitted for each
shopping center, office center or combinations thereof. Where
there are two (2) or more frontages, the average of frontages
Section
400.1830
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1830
100:1088
shall be computed to determine the signage allotment under
this formula.
b. A-frame or sandwich board signs. Each occupant is entitled to
one (1) A-frame or sandwich board sign with a maximum size of
thirty (30) inches wide and forty-eight (48) inches in height per
side. A-frame or sandwich board signs shall be located no less
than twenty-five (25) feet apart from each other and may be
displayed only during hours of operation. A-frame or sandwich
board signs shall be excluded from the total allowable building
signage based on frontage.
4. Temporary signs.
a. Miscellaneous attention-getting devices. Banners and balloons
may be used by permit only. A maximum of one (1) banner of no
more than thirty-two (32) square feet shall be permitted per
property. Permits for banners shall be valid for a maximum of
thirty (30) days. Permits for balloons shall be valid for a
maximum of seven (7) days. Each occupant shall be issued no
more than three (3) balloon permits per calendar year and four
(4) banner permits per calendar year per occupant. Balloons
shall be flown no more than thirty-five (35) feet in height.
b. "Open" and "closed" signs. Open and closed signs shall not
exceed one (1) square foot in size and shall be displayed at or
near the entrance. Open and closed signs meeting this
requirement do not require approval by the HLPARB.
c. Real estate and builders signs. One (1) real estate builder or
"for sale" sign will be permitted in the front and rear of each
building with a maximum size of sixteen (16) square feet per
sign. Signs may only be displayed for as long as the property is
for lease, sale or under construction. Real estate, builder and
"for sale" signs do not require approval from the HLPARB so
long as these requirements are met.
d. Signs on vehicles. Signs attached to, painted on or placed on a
vehicle or trailer parked in Historic Downtown District shall be
prohibited. This provision is not to be construed as prohibiting
the identification of a firm or its principal products on vehicles
operating during the normal course of business or as
prohibiting the parking of vehicles.
5. Illumination of signs. Internal illumination of signs is prohibited.
Only a steady concealed source of light shall be permitted for signs
within the district.
6. Neon lights in any form, including neon signs, shall be prohibited
except that any retail, restaurant or beverage business may display
one (1) neon sign of not more than four (4) square feet in a first
(1st) floor window, provided that the sign advertises food,
Section
400.1830
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1830
100:1089
beverages, products or services provided on the premises and
does not incorporate the name or logo of the business itself. Neon
signs meeting these requirements do not require approval by the
HLPARB and shall not be subject to the regulations contained in
Section 400.1830(B)(2),(5),(7),(8) or (9).
7. Sign design. Signs shall utilize colors from the approved paint color
chart adopted by the HLPARB or shall use colors with proven
historical relevance that may be approved by the HLPARB.
8. Sign materials. Painted wood and metal are appropriate sign
materials. Plastic should only be used in limited amounts or when
disguised to look otherwise.
9. Letter size and styles should be compatible with the building.
10. Hanging devices. Projecting signs should be attached by use of
period appropriate devices. Modern-looking chains, hooks and
other visible devices should be avoided. A sign shall be installed in
a workmanlike manner and hide from view such fixtures as guy
wires, braces, angle irons, cables, nuts and bolts, brackets,
mounting plates, conductors, transformers, conduits, raceways and
similar fixtures.
C. "FHD" Frenchtown Historic District.
1. General regulations.
a. No sign or graphic may be displayed without first obtaining a
certificate of appropriateness from the HLPARB.
b. No sign or graphic shall be permitted in the district unless the
sign relates to or advertises a business within the district.
c. Signs shall be compatible with the architecture of the building
and the Frenchtown Historic District.
2. Wall, projecting, window and awning signs.
a. Each building is permitted a maximum sum total of all wall,
projecting and window signage of one (1) square foot of
signage per each lineal foot of frontage of the building. Where
there are two (2) or more frontages, the average of frontages
shall be computed to determine the signage allotment under
this formula. One (1) additional sign is permitted on the rear of
each building with a maximum of fifty percent (50%) of that
allowed on the front.
b. Each building within the district is allowed one projecting or
monument sign per tenant. Projecting and monument signs
shall be included in the calculation of the total amount of
building signage permitted. Projecting signs must clear a
sidewalk or walkway by at least eight (8) feet.
Section
400.1830
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1830
100:1090
c. Multiple-occupant buildings and directory signs. Wherever
there is more than one occupant in any building, it shall be the
responsibility of the building owner to allocate the permitted
signage. Directory signs are permitted where there is more
than one (1) occupant per building. Directory signs shall be
excluded in the calculation of the total amount of building
signage permitted. Maximum one hundred (100) square inches
per tenant.
d. Each occupant within the district is allowed permanent
window signage with a maximum size of fifty percent (50%) of
the panes of glass of space which the tenant occupies.
Allowable window signage will include signs or graphics which
are painted, attached to, in proximity or within three (3) feet of
the window area or part of a signage which is part of a window
area. The area of window signage shall be measured as the
area of the smallest possible rectangle encompassing all sign
elements including letters and graphics. Window signs shall be
included in the calculation of the total amount of building
signage permitted.
e. In addition to other wall, projecting and window signage, each
occupant serving food and beverages is entitled to display one
(1) menu of a maximum size of four hundred (400) square
inches which shall not be included in the calculation for total
allowable window signage. A minimum seventy-five percent
(75%) of menu sign shall be used for displaying menu items. To
be eligible for a menu sign, tenants must derive at least fifty
percent (50%) of its gross revenue from the sale of food.
f. Awning and canopy signs are permitted, the size of which shall
be calculated by its actual area and shall be included in the
calculation for total allowable building signage.
3. Freestanding and outdoor signs.
a. Freestanding signs. One (1) freestanding monument sign not
to exceed three-fourths (0.75) square feet per lineal foot of
frontage of the building for the first fifty (50) lineal feet and
one-half (0.50) square feet per lineal foot of frontage of the
building for footage in excess of fifty (50) lineal feet is
permitted for each shop, office center or combination thereof.
Where there are two (2) or more frontages, the average of
frontages shall be computed to determine the signage
allotment under this formula. The maximum height of a
freestanding sign shall be six (6) feet.
b. A-frame or sandwich board signs. Each occupant is entitled to
one (1) A-frame or sandwich board sign with a maximum size of
thirty (30) inches wide and forty-eight (48) inches in height per
side. A-frame or sandwich board signs shall be located no less
Section
400.1830
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1830
100:1091
than twenty-five (25) feet apart from each other and may be
displayed only during hours of operation. A-frame or sandwich
board signs shall be excluded from the total allowable building
signage based on frontage.
4. Temporary signs.
a. Miscellaneous attention-getting devices—banners. Banners
may be used by permit only. A maximum of one (1) banner of no
more than thirty-two (32) square feet shall be permitted per
property of less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of
retail or office space. Those businesses, companies or
institutions which occupy more than twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet of office or commercial space may have one (1)
banner of not more than ninety-six (96) square feet. Permits for
banners shall be valid for a maximum of thirty (30) days. Each
occupant shall be issued no more than four (4) banner permits
per calendar year. At the discretion of the Director of
Community Development, banners announcing awards,
honors, anniversaries, grand openings or other milestones may
be displayed for more than thirty (30) days, but no more than
ninety (90) days.
b. "Open" and "closed" signs. Open and closed signs shall not
exceed one (1) square foot in size and shall be displayed at or
near the entrance. Open and closed signs meeting this
requirement do not require approval by the HLPARB.
c. Real estate and builder signs. One (1) real estate, builder or
"for sale" sign will be permitted in the front and rear of each
building with a maximum size of sixteen (16) square feet per
sign. Signs may only be displayed for as long as the property is
for lease, sale or under construction. Real estate, builder and
"for sale" signs do not require approval from the HLPARB so
long as these requirements are met.
d. Signs on vehicles. Signs attached to, painted on or placed on a
vehicle or trailer parked in the Frenchtown Historic District
shall be prohibited. This provision is not intended to be
construed as prohibiting identification of a firm or its principal
products on vehicles operating during the normal course of
business or as prohibiting the parking of vehicles.
5. Illumination of signs. Internal illumination of signs is prohibited.
Only a steady, concealed source of light shall be permitted for signs
within the district.
6. Any retail, restaurant or beverage business may display one (1)
neon sign of not more than six (6) square feet in a first (1st) floor
window, provided the sign advertises food, beverage, products or
services provided on premise. Neon signs are further prohibited for
use as open signs or to advertise hours of operation.
Section
400.1830
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1830
100:1092
7. Sign design. Signs shall utilize colors from the approved paint color
chart adopted by the HLPARB or shall use colors with proven
historical relevance that may be approved by the HLPARB.
8. Sign materials. Painted wood and metal are appropriate sign
materials. Plastic should only be used in limited amounts or when
disguised to look otherwise.
9. Letter size and letter styles. Size and style should be compatible
with the building.
10. Hanging devices. Projecting signs should be attached by use of
period appropriate devices. Modern-looking chains, hooks and
other visible devices should be avoided. A sign shall be installed in
a workmanlike manner and hide from view such fixtures as guy
wires, braces, angle irons, cables, nuts and bolts, brackets,
mounting plates, conductors, transformers, conduits, raceways and
similar fixtures.
D. "EHP" Extended Historic Preservation District.
1. General regulations.
a. No sign or graphic may be displayed on a building constructed
before 1960 without first obtaining a Certificate of
Appropriateness from the HLPARB.
b. No sign or graphic shall be permitted in the district unless the
sign relates to or advertises a business within the district.
c. Signs shall be compatible with the architecture of the building
on which the sign will be located.
d. In reviewing applications for a Certificate of Appropriateness,
criteria provided in Divisions 1—8 of this Article shall be used.
E. "LMPD" Landmarks Preservation District.
1. General regulations.
a. No sign or graphic may be displayed without first obtaining a
Certificate of Appropriateness from the HLPARB.
b. No sign or graphic shall be permitted in the district unless the
sign relates to or advertises a business within the district.
c. Signs shall be compatible with the architecture of the building
on which the sign will be located.
d. In reviewing applications for a Certificate of Appropriateness
for building frontages located along Boone's Lick Road and
building frontages north of the 1100 Block of South Main
Street, the criteria provided in Section 400.1830(A) shall be
used.
Section
400.1830
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1830
100:1093
e. In reviewing applications for a Certificate of Appropriateness
for building frontages not located along Boone's Lick Road and
building frontages south of the 1000 Block of South Main
Street, the criteria provided in Divisions 1—6 and 8 of this
Article shall be used.
Section
400.1830
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1830
100:1094
DIVISION 8
Sign Permits, Fees and Procedures
Section 400.1840. Permits and Fees. [R.O. 2009 §156.770; Ord. No.
02-172, 7-10-2002; Ord. No. 10-142 §23, 7-8-2010; Ord. No. 10-244
§1, 11-18-2010]
Section 400.1850. Permit Procedures. [R.O. 2009 §156.772; Ord.
No. 02-172, 7-10-2002; Ord. No. 02-276, 11-22-2002; Ord. No.
05-236, 9-16-2005; Ord. No. 10-142 §24, 7-8-2010; Ord. No. 10-244
§1, 11-18-2010]
A. A sign permit shall be required in order to erect, install, relocate,
modify or change any sign within the City unless otherwise noted.
"Modify", as it is used herein, shall mean any change in or to an existing
sign, its face, copy, colors or supporting structures.
B. Failure to conform to the conditions of a sign permit, including any
conditions or stipulation attached thereto by the Department of
Community Development, HLPARB or any applicable board, shall
render such permit void.
C. Fees for sign permits shall be required and payable in such sums as the
City Council may from time to time establish by resolution.
D. Sign permits include electrical work. All electrical work must comply
with the Electrical Code.
A. All applications for sign permits shall be made in writing on a form
supplied by the City. Said application shall be submitted in accordance
with the following:
1. Three (3) sets of drawings, prepared to scale, of the proposed
signage shall be submitted to the Community Development
Department which shall include all of the following information:
a. The address of the site for the proposed signage, applicant's
name, name of business, business address, business telephone
number and contractor information;
b. The configuration of the proposed signage listing the height,
width, total square footage, method of attachment, method of
illumination, including details of the fixture and screening, and
colors and materials;
c. A site plan showing the proposed locations of signage;
d. Building elevations showing proposed location of signage; and
e. A detailed plan showing the size, quantity and type of
landscaping for freestanding signs.
2. General requirements.
Section
400.1840
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1850
100:1095
Section 400.1860. Administration. [R.O. 2009 §156.774; Ord. No.
02-172, 7-10-2002; Ord. No. 10-142 §25, 7-8-2010; Ord. No. 10-244
§1, 11-18-2010]
a. Every sign shall be designed as an integral architectural
element of the building and site to which it relates; and
b. The colors, materials and lighting of every sign shall be
harmonious with the building and site to which it relates.
3. Time limits on approval. The start of construction of any and all
signs requiring approval of a sign permit shall occur within one
hundred eighty (180) days of their approval by City staff, the
HLPARB or City Council and shall be placed and functioning within
two hundred forty (240) days of said approval. Failure to place the
sign(s) within this period shall automatically constitute a
revocation of the permit.
A. Enforcement. The Department of Community Development is hereby
authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this Article
and perform the functions outlined for City staff within this Article.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, the City may enter at
reasonable times any building, structure or premises in the City to
perform any duty imposed upon him/her by this Article.
B. Violations. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. The owner of any sign,
building or premises or part thereof, where anything in violation of this
Article shall be placed or shall exist, and any person who may have
knowingly assisted in the commission of any such violation shall be
guilty of a separate offense.
Section
400.1850
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1860
100:1096
Article XVII
Clothing Drop Boxes
Section 400.1870. Clothing Drop Boxes. [R.O. 2009 §156.820; Ord.
No. 07-212, 8-22-2007; Ord. No. 09-137, 7-23-2009]
A. Clothing drop boxes shall only be permitted in accordance with the
requirements and conditions of this Section.
1. Only exempt organizations pursuant to 26 USC Section 501 may
place upon its property or sponsor a clothing drop box.
2. A clothing drop box shall not exceed six (6) feet in height, four (4)
feet in width and four (4) feet in depth.
3. Clothing drop boxes shall be constructed of metal or wood and shall
be secured at all times except when being emptied by its owner or
sponsor.
4. Clothing drop boxes shall be located a minimum of twenty (20) feet
from any driveway curb cut and outside any sight distance triangle
as described in Section 400.540. A clothing drop box shall not be
located within any required street frontage buffer or landscape
buffer, front, side or rear yard setback or in front of the front
building line. A clothing drop box shall not encroach on any
minimum required parking spaces.
5. No more than one (1) clothing drop boxes shall be permitted on site
at any time.
6. Clothing drop boxes shall be emptied at least two (2) times per
week or as often as necessary to prevent the contents from
overflowing the box.
7. Any sign or label affixed to a clothing drop box shall pertain only to
the box or the sponsoring organization. The name, address and
telephone number of the owner shall be affixed to the box to enable
the ownership of the box to be readily ascertained.
8. No clothing drop box shall be permitted in the South Main
Preservation District, the Landmarks Preservation District, the
Historic Downtown District, the Frenchtown Neighborhood District
and the Commons Neighborhood District.
9. Site plan review. Any organization desiring to place or sponsor a
clothing drop box shall submit to the Community Development
Department:
a. A site plan which adequately and accurately describes the
location of the box which may consist of a "red-lined" portion of
a previously approved site plan or plat, and
Section
400.1870
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1870
100:1097
b. A letter from the person who owns or has the right to
possession of the property authorizing the use of the site as the
location of a box.
10. Clothing drop boxes owned or operated by a for profit entity shall
obtain and pay a business license fee pursuant to Chapter 605.
Section
400.1870
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1870
100:1098
Article XVIII
Violations And Penalties
Section 400.1880. Violations.427 [R.O. 2009 §156.998; CC 1981
§30-272 Ord. No. 77-31, 7-5-1977; Ord. No. 98-209, 5-15-1998; Ord.
No. 10-244 §1, 11-18-2010]
Section 400.1890. Penalty.
The owner or general agent of a building or premises where a violation
of any provision of said regulations has been committed or shall exist, or
the lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises where such
violation has been committed or shall exist, or the owner, general agent,
lessee, or tenant of any part of the building or premises in which such
violation has been committed or shall exist, or the general agent, architect,
builder, contractor, or any other person who commits, takes part or assists
in any such violation, or who maintains any building or premises in which
any such violation shall exist shall be guilty of an ordinance violation
punishable by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) and not more
than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each and every day that such
violation continues, or by imprisonment for ten (10) days for each and every
day such violation shall continue, or by both such fine and imprisonment
in the discretion of the court. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
A. In case any structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
repaired or converted in violation of this Chapter, the Department of
Community Development is authorized and directed to institute any
appropriate action to put an end to such violation.
B. In case any building, structure or land is used in violation of this
Chapter, the Department of Community Development is authorized and
directed to institute any appropriate action to put an end to such
violation.
C. The Director of Community Development or his/her designee shall have
the power to issue a summons for any violation of this Chapter.
D. Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this
Chapter or fail to comply herewith or with any of the requirements
hereof or who shall build or alter any structure in violation of any
detailed statement or plan submitted and approved hereunder shall be
subject to the penalty set forth in Section 400.1890. The owner of any
building or premises or part thereof, where anything in violation of this
Chapter shall exist or shall be placed, and any engineer, architect,
planner, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in
connection therewith who has willfully assisted in the commission of
any such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be penalized as provided in Section 400.1890.
427. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §400.1890.
Section
400.1880
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1890
100:1099
82.300, RSMo., for the second (2nd) and subsequent offenses involving the
same violation at the same building or premises, the punishment shall be
a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each and every day that such violation shall
continue, or by imprisonment for ten (10) days for each and every day
such violation shall continue, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the
discretion of the court.
Section
400.1890
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
400.1890
100:1100
Chapter 405
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
400.1890
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
400.1890
100:1101

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 405.010. Short Title. [R.O. 2009 §154.001; CC 1981 §25-1;
Ord. No. 3775, 8-7-1970]
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision
Ordinance of the City of St. Charles, Missouri".
Section 405.020. Interpretation and Purpose. [R.O. 2009 §154.002;
CC 1981 §25-2; Ord. No. 3775, 8-7-1970]
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall
be held to the minimum requirements adopted for the protection of the
public health, safety and welfare. To protect the public, among other
purposes, such provisions are intended to provide for permanently
wholesome community environment, adequate municipal services and safe
streets.
Section 405.030. Scope. [R.O. 2009 §154.003; CC 1981 §25-3; Ord.
No. 3775, 8-7-1970 ; Ord. No. 75-68, 11-19-1975; Ord. No. 90-6,
1-3-1990]
The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to any lot or lots forming
a part of a subdivision created and recorded prior to the effective date of
this Chapter, unless such lot or lots shall be resubdivided after the effective
date of this Chapter. Where this Chapter imposes a greater restriction upon
land than is imposed or required by existing provisions of law, ordinance,
contract or deed, the provisions of this Chapter shall control.
Section 405.040. Approving Authority. [R.O. 2009 §154.004; CC
1981 §25-4; Ord. No. 3775, 8-7-1970]
In accordance with Chapter 89, RSMo., and supplements thereto, a majority
of all members elected to the Council shall be the Approving Authority. The
provisions of this Chapter shall be administered by the City Engineer.
Section 405.050. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §154.005; CC 1981 §25-5;
Ord. No. 3775, 8-7-1970; Ord. No. 90-6, 1-3-1990; Ord. No. 09-179,
10-2-2009]
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivation shall have the meaning given herein. When not consistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words
in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory
and not merely directory.
CITY MAP — The map established by the Council showing the streets,
highways and parks theretofore laid out, adopted and established by law
and any amendments thereto adopted by the Council or additions thereto
Section
405.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.050
100:1103
resulting from the approval of subdivision plats by the Council and the
subsequent filing of such approved plats.
CITY ZONING MAP — A Comprehensive Plan prepared by the Planning and
Zoning Commission which indicates the locations for the various functional
classes of public works, places and structures and for the general physical
development of the City and includes any amendment to such plan or parts
thereof.
DEVELOPMENT — Any subdivision of land as herein defined or any
material change in the use or appearance of any parcel of land or the act of
building structures or installing site improvements.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Director of the Department of Public
Works of the City of St. Charles or his or her designee.[Ord. No. 13-178
§2, 9-24-2013]
FINAL PLAT — The final map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider's
plan or subdivision is presented to the City Council for approval and which,
if approved, will be submitted to the office of the County Recorder of Deeds
for recording.
LOT — A parcel or portion of land in a subdivision or plat of land, separated
from other parcels or portions by description as on a subdivision or record
of survey map or by metes and bounds for the purpose of sale or lease to, or
separate use of, another.
OWNER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary
interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain
proceedings to subdivide the same under this Chapter.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary map, drawing or chart indicating
the proposed layout and improvements of the subdivision.
STREETS AND ALLEYS — Street is a strip of land including the entire rightof-
way, intended primarily as a means of vehicular and pedestrian travel
which may also be used to provide space for sewers, public utilities and
sidewalks.
ALLEY: A minor way which is used primarily for vehicular service
access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a
street.
1.
ARTERIAL STREET: A fast or heavy traffic street of considerable
continuity and used primarily as a traffic artery for intercommunication
among large areas.
2.
COLLECTOR STREET: A street which carries traffic from minor streets
to arterial streets including the principal entrance streets of residential
development and streets for circulation within such a development.
3.
CUL-DE-SAC OR DEAD-END STREET: A minor street with only one (1)
outlet.
4.
Section
405.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
405.050
100:1104
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing proceedings under
this Chapter to effect a subdivision of land hereunder for itself or for
another.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or
parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development or,
if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land. A division of land
which may be ordered or approved by a court or effected by testamentary
or intestate provisions shall not be deemed a subdivision. The term includes
resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the
process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.
ZONING COMMISSION OR COMMISSION — The Planning and Zoning
Commission of the City.
Section 405.060. Compliance.428 [R.O. 2009 §154.006; CC 1981
§25-6; Ord. No. 3775, 8-7-1970]
No person shall subdivide any tract of land which is located within the City
except in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter.
Section 405.070. Requirements For Compliance.429 [R.O. 2009
§154.007; CC 1981 §25-7; Ord. No. 3775, 8-7-1970; Ord. No. 96-149,
5-22-1996]
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET: A minor street which is parallel and
adjacent to arterial streets and which provides access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.
5.
RESIDENTIAL STREET: A minor street primarily used for access to the
abutting properties.
6.
A. Recording Of Plat. No plat of any subdivision shall be entitled to record
in the office of the Recorder of Deeds or have any validity until it shall
have been approved in the manner prescribed herein. In the event any
such unapproved plat is recorded, it shall be considered invalid and the
City Council shall institute proceedings to have the plat stricken from
the records of the County.
B. Sale Of Land In Subdivision. No owner of any land located within a
subdivision shall transfer, sell, agree to sell or negotiate to sell any land
by reference to, exhibition of or by the use of a plan or plat of a
subdivision before such plan or plat has been approved and recorded in
the manner prescribed therein. The description of such lot or parcel by
metes and bounds in the instruments of transfer or other documents
used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the
transaction from the provisions of this Chapter.
428. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §405.320.
429. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §405.320.
Section
405.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.070
100:1105
Section 405.080. Enforcement. [R.O. 2009 §154.008; CC 1981
§25-93; Ord. No. 3775, 8-7-1970; Ord. No. 73-38, 6-20-1973]
It shall be the duty of the City Engineer or any assistant or inspector
working under his/her direction to enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
The City Engineer is hereby authorized and directed to institute any
appropriate accommodation or proceedings to prevent violations of this
Chapter.
C. Permits.
1. The Building Commissioner shall not issue building permits for any
structure on a lot in a subdivision for which a plat has not been
approved and recorded in the manner prescribed herein.
2. The Building Commissioner shall not issue a permit for the
installation of wells and septic tanks upon any lot in a subdivision
for which a plat has not been approved and recorded in the manner
prescribed herein.
Section
405.070
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
405.080
100:1106
ARTICLE II
Procedures For Approval of Plats
Section 405.090. Pre-Application Procedures. [R.O. 2009 §154.020;
CC 1981 §25-19; Ord. No. 3775, 8-7-1970]
Section 405.100. Approval of Preliminary Plat.430 [R.O. 2009
§154.021; CC 1981 §25-20; Ord. No. 3775, 8-7-1970; Ord. No.
87-109, 5-20-1987]
A. Previous to the filing of an application for approval of the preliminary
plat, the subdivider shall submit to the City Engineer plans and data as
specified in Sections 405.270 through 405.290. This step does not
require formal application, fee or filing of the plat with the City Council.
B. Within fifteen (15) days the City Engineer shall inform the subdivider
that the plans and data as submitted and modified do or do not meet the
objectives of these regulations. When the City Engineer finds the plans
and data do not meet the objectives of these regulations, he/she shall
express his/her reasons therefor.
A. Preparation. On reaching conclusions informally recommended in
Section 405.090 above regarding his/her general program and
objectives, the subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat
together with improvement plans and other supplementary material as
required in Sections 405.270 through 405.290 of this Chapter.
B. Filing—Fees. Twenty (20) preliminary plats and one (1) copy of a
vicinity sketch of any proposed subdivision shall be filed with the City
Clerk for the Council, at least ten (10) days prior to a regularly
scheduled Council meeting at which consideration is requested. The
subdivider shall pay the following filing fee for filing a preliminary
subdivision plat:
1. Single-family: $25.00 plus $2.00 per lot.
2. Multi-family: $50.00 plus $1.00 per unit.
3. Commercial: $50.00 plus $2.00 per acre.
C. Approval.
1. Official recommendations. The City Clerk shall, forthwith after the
filing of the preliminary plat, transmit copies of the plat for their
study and recommendations to the:
a. City Engineer;
b. City Clerk;
c. Building Commissioner;
430. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §405.320.
Section
405.090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.100
100:1107
Section 405.110. Display House Plat.431 [R.O. 2009 §154.022; CC
1981 §25-20; Ord. No. 87-123, 6-11-1987; Ord. No. 07-162,
6-11-2007]
d. Park Board;
e. Fire Chief;
f. Local postmaster;
g. Each City-owned utility; or
h. Such other official, body, company or agency as may be
directed by the Council.
2. Referral. The preliminary plat shall be referred by the Council to
the Zoning Commission for their study and written
recommendation.
3. Notice of action taken. The Council shall, within thirty (30) days
after receiving the written recommendation of the Zoning
Commission, determine whether the preliminary plat shall be
approved, with modifications or disapproved and shall give notice
to the subdivider in the following manner:
a. Approval of such preliminary plat shall be transmitted in
writing to the subdivider.
b. If approved with modifications or disapproved, the City Clerk
shall attach to two (2) copies of the plat a statement of the
reasons for such action and return one (1) to the subdivider.
c. In any case, a notation of the action taken and requisite
reasons therefor shall be entered in the records of the Council.
4. Effect of approval. Approval of the preliminary plat by the Council
shall not constitute final acceptance of the subdivision by the
Council.
5. Right of subdivider after approval. Preliminary approval shall
confer upon the subdivider the right for a two (2) year period from
the date of approval, that the terms and conditions under which the
preliminary approval was granted shall not be changed and that
the final plat will be accepted. The final plat shall be filed not later
than two (2) years after the date of approval of the preliminary plat,
otherwise it will be considered void unless an extension is
requested in writing by the subdivider and good cause granted by
Council.
A. The purpose of this Section is to provide a procedure whereby the
construction of a display house can begin prior to the recording of the
431. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §405.320.
Section
405.100
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
405.110
100:1108
final subdivision plat. A "display house" is a single-family house
constructed for the purpose of marketing or promoting the sale of
houses or lots in a subdivision.
B. After approval of a preliminary plat of a proposed subdivision by the
City Council, a display house plat may be filed for review and approval
by the Director of Community Development. A display house plat shall
not be filed later than one (1) year after approval of the preliminary
plat.
C. The display house plat shall contain no more than one (1) display house
for every ten (10) houses proposed, not to exceed ten (10) display
houses for the entire preliminary plat. The display house plat shall be
superimposed upon the preliminary plat and shall show the location of
each display house in relation to proposed lots and streets. A complete
outboundary survey of the display house plat shall be shown on the
display house plat. The script of the display house plat shall contain
terms and conditions as required by the Director of Community
Development including, but not limited to, the following provisions set
forth in Subsection (D).
D. The display house plat shall conform to the preliminary plat, this
Chapter, Chapter 400 Zoning Code and any other applicable ordinance
of the City and Statutes.
E. Application for a display house plat shall be filed on forms provided by
the Director. The Director may require submission of additional
information, material and documents necessary to determine
compliance with these regulations. The Director shall review the
application and may submit it for review and comment to other
agencies and departments as the Director deems necessary. The
Director shall, in writing, either approve, with or without conditions or
disapprove the application. If approved and after all conditions are met,
the Director shall sign and furnish a certificate of approval to the
applicant and shall record a copy with the Recorder of Deeds. In the
event the Director does not approve the request, he/she shall so inform
the applicant in writing. The applicant may appeal the decision to the
Mayor within ten (10) days after the disapproval is sent to the
applicant. If the Mayor disapproves the application, the applicant may
appeal to the City Council within ten (10) days after the disapproval.
F. No building permit shall be issued for a display house until the display
house plat has been approved by the Director of Community
Development. Prior to the issuance of the building permit for a display
house, the improvements required by Sections 405.230 through
405.250 which are needed for service to the display house shall be
constructed. In lieu of the completion of the improvements, a bond
executed by a surety company, based on an estimate by the City
Engineer, shall be furnished by the subdivider in an amount equal to a
percent of the cost of construction of the improvements, using the same
percentage as required in Section 405.220. The surety will be subject to
Section
405.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.110
100:1109
Section 405.120. Approval of Final Plat. [R.O. 2009 §154.023; CC
1981 §25-24; Ord. No. 3775, 8-7-1970; Ord. No. 00-38, 2-4-2000]
the condition that the improvements will be completed within twelve
(12) months after approval of the display house plat. The bond shall
also cover the same percentage of the cost to remove or demolish the
display houses in accordance with Subsection (K) below. As alternatives
to the surety bond, the subdivider may deposit a cashier's check with,
and payable to, the City Treasurer or may deposit the amounts required
above in an escrow account, the terms of which must be approved by
the City. Deposited amounts shall be refunded to the subdivider at the
time the final plat is approved, unless the subdivider is at that time in
violation of the time limits imposed by this Subsection or Subsection (K)
below.
G. The Director of Community Development's approval shall expire and
the building permits shall be null and void for all display houses upon
which construction has not begun within ninety (90) days after the
approval of the display house plat.
H. Neither the display houses nor any part of the proposed subdivision
may be sold or otherwise conveyed until each display house is on an
approved lot of record. Occupancy permits shall not be issued for
display houses until each display house is on an approved lot of record.
An "approved lot of record" is a lot shown on a final plat which has been
approved and recorded as required by this Chapter.
I. Nothing contained in this Section shall prohibit the sale or conveyance,
as a whole unit, of the entire tract of land described in the preliminary
plat, if otherwise permitted under this Code of Ordinances and any
other applicable ordinance of the City.
J. The display house plat shall become null and void:
1. If no construction has commenced upon any of the display houses
within ninety (90) days after the approval of the display house plat;
2. When a final plat is recorded which establishes that each display
house is on an approved lot of record; or
3. When the preliminary plat expires.
K. If a display house is not located upon a lot of record when the display
house plat becomes null and void, then the display house shall be
removed or demolished by the owner within sixty (60) days.
A. Scope. The final plat shall have incorporated all changes or
modifications required by the Council, otherwise it shall conform to the
preliminary plat and if desired by the subdivider it may constitute only
that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider
proposed to record and develop at that time; provided that such portion
conforms with all the requirements of this Chapter.
Section
405.110
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
405.120
100:1110
B. Filing Of Final Plat. After receiving notice of the action of the Council
approving the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall file with the City
Clerk for the Council twenty (20) copies of the final plat and four (4)
complete sets of the exhibits as required in Sections 405.270 through
405.290 at least ten (10) working days prior to the meeting at which it
is to be considered.
C. Approval.
1. Official recommendations.
a. Submitted to City Engineer. Four (4) complete sets of cross
sections, profiles, topographical maps and detailed
construction drawings shall be submitted to the City Engineer
by the City Clerk for his/her study and recommendation. The
City Engineer shall submit a written report to the Council of
his/her study and recommendations prior to consideration of
approval of the final plat.
b. Transmitted to other officials. The City Clerk shall, within
seven (7) days after the filing of the final plat, transmit copies
of the plat for their records, study and recommendation to the:
(1) Zoning Commission;
(2) City Engineer;
(3) City Clerk;
(4) Building Commissioner;
(5) Park Board;
(6) Fire Chief;
(7) Local postmaster;
(8) Each City-owned utility; or
(9) Such other official, body, company or agency as may be
directed by the Council.
c. Final tracing. After receiving a written report, if any, from each
City Official or agency of the City in Subsection (C)(1)(b)
above, the Council shall notify the subdivider of any required
changes so that the subdivider may correct the final tracing
and submit same for final approval. The final plat, in the form
of final tracing, shall then be resubmitted at least ten (10)
working days prior to the meeting at which the plat is to be
considered by the Council.
d. Notice of action taken. The Council shall act on the final plat
within thirty (30) days after filing, unless such time is extended
by the Council. The Council shall determine whether the final
Section
405.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.120
100:1111
Section 405.130. Adjustment of Plats. [R.O. 2009 §154.024; Ord.
No. 96-149, 5-22-1996]
plat shall be approved or disapproved and shall give notice to
the subdivider in the following manner:
(1) If approved, the plat shall have endorsed upon it the
approval of the City Council under the hand of the City
Clerk and the official Seal of the City.
(2) If disapproved, the City Clerk shall attach to the plat a
statement of the reasons for such action as recorded in the
minutes of the Council and return it to the subdivider.
(3) In any case, a notation of the action taken and the
requisite reasons therefor shall be entered in the records
of the Council.
e. Recording. The City Clerk shall cause the final plat to be filed
in the office of the Recorder of Deeds and the subdivider shall
pay the recording fees.
f. Prior to recording of the approved final plat, a digital media
copy of any record plat prepared using computer assistance
shall be submitted in a computer readable format approved by
the City Engineer to the Public Works Department. In addition,
the subdivider, at its expense, shall, immediately upon
recording, furnish the City Clerk with one (1) black or blue line
print of the final plat.
A. Revisions Of Plat After Approval. Except as permitted in this Section, no
changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made in any plat
of a subdivision after approval has been given by the Council and
endorsed in writing on the plat, unless the plat is first resubmitted to
the Council.
B. Easements And Mathematical Corrections. The Director of Public
Works shall have the authority to grant adjustments in location of
easements and to make mathematical corrections.
C. Boundary Adjustments And Other Revisions.
1. Purpose. The purpose of this Subsection is to allow adjustments to
be made to lot lines of platted lots or other lawful parcels for the
purpose of adjusting the sizes of building sites; however, it is not
intended that extensive replatting be accomplished by use of this
Subsection.
2. Criteria. Boundary adjustments must meet the following criteria:
a. No additional lot shall be created by any boundary adjustment.
Section
405.120
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
405.130
100:1112
b. A boundary adjustment plat shall contain no more than two (2)
commercial or industrially zoned lots or three (3) residentially
zoned lots.
c. Existing zoning shall not be affected by this procedure.
3. Procedure.
a. A boundary adjustment shall be accomplished by a plat
depicting the boundaries of the original lots and of the adjusted
lots.
b. The boundary adjustment plat shall be filed with the Director
of Community Development and the City Engineer for their
review. If found to be in compliance with this and any other
applicable Sections, the boundary adjustment plat shall have
endorsed upon it the approval of the Director of Community
Development and the City Engineer and shall be certified by
the City Clerk with the official Seal of the City. The boundary
adjustment plat shall then be forwarded to the office of the City
Clerk for recording.
c. The City Clerk shall cause the boundary adjustment plat to be
recorded in the office of the St. Charles County Recorder of
Deeds and the property owner shall pay any recording fees. A
copy of the recorded boundary adjustment plat shall be
returned to the Director of Community Development.
Section
405.130
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.130
100:1113

ARTICLE III
Design and Development Standards
Section 405.140. Conformity With City Zoning Map and City Map.432
[R.O. 2009 §154.035; CC 1981 §25-33; Ord. No. 3775, 8-7-1970]
The proposed subdivision shall conform to the City Zoning Map and City
map.
Section 405.150. Streets.433 [R.O. 2009 §154.036; CC 1981 §25-34;
Ord. No. 85-172, 10-8-1985; Ord. No. 87-242, 12-9-1987; Ord. No.
01-292, 12-21-2001]
A. The arrangements, character, extent, width, grade and location of all
streets shall conform to the City map, City Zoning Map and standard
specifications of the City and shall be considered in their relation to
existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public
convenience and safety and their appropriate relation to the proposed
uses of the land to be served by such streets. Where not shown on the
City map or City Zoning Map, the arrangement and other design
standards of streets shall conform to the provisions found herein.
B. Streets shall be related appropriately to the topography so as to
produce usable lots and streets of reasonable gradient as required
herein. Street grades shall conform as closely as possible to the original
topography. Combinations of steep grades and curves shall be avoided.
C. The proposed street layout shall be appropriate for the type of
development proposed and properly integrated with the street system
in the area adjoining the subdivision. The layout shall also conform to
the existing and proposed land uses and the most advantageous
development pattern for the surrounding area.
D. Major traffic generators such as industries, business districts, schools,
shopping centers with a density in excess of eighteen (18) units per
gross acre shall obtain primary access from streets classified as
collectors or arterials.
E. Residential streets shall be laid out to discourage the use of through
traffic, to permit efficient drainage and utility systems and to require
the minimum length of pavement necessary to provide convenient and
safe access to property. Curvilinear streets, cul-de-sacs and loop streets
shall be encouraged.
F. Proposed through streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the
tract to be subdivided, unless the Planning and Zoning Commission has
determined that such extension is not necessary or desirable for the
432. Cross Reference—As to zoning map, §§400.080—400.090.
433. Cross References—As to penalty, §405.320; as to construction and repair of streets,
§§505.200 et seq.; as to grades, §§505.500 et seq.
Section
405.140
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.150
100:1115
coordination of the layout of the subdivision with the existing layout or
the most advantageous future development of adjacent tracts.
G. Proposed streets shall be developed according to the Comprehensive
Plan as adopted by the City.
H. Hardship To Owners Of Adjoining Property Avoided. The street
arrangements shall not be such as to cause hardship to owners of
adjoining property in platting their own land and providing convenient
access to it.
I. In general, provisions should be made for through streets at intervals
not exceeding one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet.
J. Private streets shall not be approved nor shall public improvements be
approved for any private street.
K. Half-width streets shall be prohibited.
L. Every subdivision shall be served by an adequate system of publicly
dedicated streets as specified herein. All public streets within the
subdivision shall be located, platted and dedicated to the City in
accordance with the standards defined in this Chapter.
Right-of-Way Specifications—Residential
Street Type Arterials Collectors
Minor
Street
Minor Culde-
sac
Minimum
right-of-way
80' 56' 50' 50'
Maximum
grade at
centerline
6% 8% 8% 8%
Minimum
grade at
centerline
1% 1% 1% 1%
Minimum
street width
(back of curb
to back of
curb)
50' 36' 26' or 32' 26'
Minimum
site distance
at crest of
curve
300' 200' 150' 150'
Minimum
horizontal
radius of
centerline
600' 300' 100' 50'
Section
405.150
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
405.150
100:1116
Right-of-Way Specifications—Residential
Street Type Arterials Collectors
Minor
Street
Minor Culde-
sac
Minimum
horizontal
tangent
distance
between
reverse
curves
200' 100'
Sidewalks Both sides Both sides Both sides Both sides
except the
circular
position
**At direction of the Director of Public Works, the right-of-way width
requirement may be reduced if the allowable minimum street width is
less than thirty-two (32) feet.
M. Grade of up to ten percent (10%) may be allowed for collector, minor
streets and cul-de-sacs at the discretion of the Director of Public Works
where conformance with the eight percent (8%) requirement would
result in extensive cut and fill of the natural terrain or excavation into
rock.
N. Minor streets shall be at least twenty-six (26) feet wide, but the
Planning and Zoning Commission may require a minor street to be
thirty-two (32) feet wide if it finds that it is in the best interest of the
City for safety and traffic control purposes. Parking shall be allowed
only on one (1) side of a minor street.
O. If a minor street or minor cul-de-sac is to be constructed as a twenty-six
(26) foot wide pavement with parking on one (1) side, it is the
responsibility of the developer to indicate on the preliminary plat and
on the final plat the side of the street to be designated as no parking.
The developer shall install no parking signs in accordance with City
signage standards within twenty (20) days after the completion of the
street or portion thereof in accordance with the ordinance approving
the final plat. The developer shall maintain the no parking signs until
the street has been accepted by the City.
P. Cul-de-sacs shall have a maximum length of six hundred fifty (650) feet,
except where a loop water system is provided for maintaining water
pressure for fire protection acceptable to the Fire Chief, a cul-de-sac of
eight hundred fifty (850) feet may be provided.
Q. Cul-de-sac turnarounds shall be provided at the end of all permanent
dead-end streets. Cul-de-sac turnarounds shall have a right-of-way of
one hundred (100) feet and a pavement width diameter of eighty-four
(84) feet. At the option of the subdivider a circular island may be
Section
405.150
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.150
100:1117
provided in the cul-de-sac, provided the pavement has a minimum width
of twenty-six (26) feet from back of curb to back of curb and on-street
parking shall be prohibited in the area of the island.
R. In the case of temporary dead-end streets, which are stub streets and
designed to provide future connections with unsubdivided adjacent
areas, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall require a temporary
easement for a turnaround of the type discussed in Subsection (Q) of
this Section.
S. Non-perpendicular streets shall have a perpendicular approach at
intersections of at least one hundred (100) feet. No more than two (2)
streets shall intersect at any one (1) point.
T. Where collector or arterial streets intersect other collectors or arterial
streets, the curb radius at the intersection shall not be less than forty
(40) feet.
U. Minor street intersections shall have a curb radius of not less than
thirty-two (32) feet.
V. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five
(125) feet shall be avoided. Proposed new intersections with an existing
street shall, whenever appropriate and practicable, coincide with any
existing "T" intersection on the opposite side of the street.
W. Intersections shall be designed with grades as level as possible,
consistent with proper provisions for drainage. Approaches to
intersections shall have a grade not exceeding four percent (4%) for a
distance of not less than twenty (20) feet measured from the nearest
curb or gutter of the intersecting street.
X. Additional street paving in the form of turning lanes and/or right-of-way
may be required at intersections of collectors and arterials with other
collectors or arterials.
Y. Property line corners at street intersections shall be rounded with a
radius of at least twenty (20) feet.
Z. Developers are required to incorporate traffic calming measures such
as raised intersections, neighborhood traffic circles, chicanes,
neckdowns, center island narrowings and chokers as identified in the
informational report entitled "Traffic Calming State of the Practice" by
the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) or as directed by the
Director of Public Works.
1. Design speed for residential streets shall be twenty (20) miles per
hour.
2. Traffic calming measures or intersections shall be spaced a
minimum of four hundred (400) feet apart.
Section
405.150
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
405.150
100:1118
Section 405.160. Rights-Of-Way and Pavement Width For
Commercial Subdivision.434 [R.O. 2009 §154.037; CC 1981 §25-34.1;
Ord. No. 85-172, 10-8-1985; Ord. No. 07-188, 6-22-2007; Ord. No.
07-214, 8-23-2007]
3. Local streets should be discontinuous and generally should be
interrupted with jogs and offsets. Four-way intersections shall be
avoided.
4. Local streets should not exceed six hundred (600) to nine hundred
(900) feet in length. They may, however, extend to one-fourth (¼)
mile if the street is curved (one hundred (100) to two hundred (200)
feet radius) for an adequate length (minimum curve length equals
the curve radius) and the cut-through traffic potential is minimal.
A. Perimeter streets abutting a proposed commercial subdivision shall be
developed in accordance with the master street plan. Where an
internalized system of public streets or private service easements is
proposed for commercial subdivision, the following design standards
shall be observed:
Street Type
Minimum
Right-of-Way
Width
Minimum
Paving
Width Sidewalks
Commercial street 60' 36'—44' Both sides
Minor commercial
street (a cul-de-sac
not more than 300
feet long)
50' 36' Both sides
Industrial streets 50' 26'—36' None
Alley (when required) 20' 20' None
Commercial/industrial 28' 26' One side
Cul-de-sac turnaround
(industrial
subdivisions) diameter
134' 130' None
Note: Special street adaptation location as approved by the City
Council.
B. Commercial/industrial developments applying for special street
adaptation shall provide for minimum twenty-six (26) foot wide
pavement, a minimum of twenty-eight (28) foot right-of-way adjacent to
a minimum twenty (20) foot easement. Right-of-way and easement shall
be dedicated to the City.
434. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §405.320.
Section
405.150
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.160
100:1119
Section 405.170. Alleys.435 [R.O. 2009 §154.038; CC 1981 §25-35;
Ord. No. 3775, 8-7-1970; Ord. No. 85-137, 8-28-1985]
C. Developments involving commercial/industrial special street adaptation
shall require approval from the Planning and Zoning Commission and
City Council approval. This classification is different from the
commercial street and industrial street classification because
commercial/industrial special street adaptation will require a recorded
agreement between the developer and City containing notice of all
variances, maintenance agreements for maintenance of easements and/
or plan concept approval of the entire development.
D. Minimum right-of-way and pavement width shall be determined by the
City Engineer to assure adequacy based on projected function to assure
safety and proper traffic circulation, but shall not be less than
indicated.
E. Parking shall be prohibited on both sides of streets designated as
commercial, industrial and commercial/industrial, except as set forth in
subparagraph (1) below.
1. Street parking shall be permitted on the both sides of Wall Street
beginning at a point four hundred twenty-five (425) feet north of
the northern curb line of Forest Gate Drive northwardly to Plaza
Way Drive, except within fifteen (15) feet of any fire hydrant or
within three (3) feet of any driveway.
A. Residential Areas. Public alleys shall not be permitted in residential
areas. Private alleys may be established and permitted along the rear of
adjoining lots for common use by adjoining landowners for access in
multi-family zoned areas but the private alley must be paved to
specifications designated by the City Engineer and the instrument
creating the private alley must specifically require that the
maintenance of the private alley must be provided by adjoining
property owners and that instrument must be recorded in the office of
the Recorder of Deeds.
B. Commercial Districts. Alleys shall be provided in commercial districts
except that the Council may waive this requirement where other
definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as offstreet
loading, unloading and parking consistent with and adequate for
the use proposed.
C. Width. The right-of-way of an alley shall be not less than twenty (20)
feet.
D. Dead-End. Dead-end alleys shall not be permitted; except that the
Council may waive this requirement where a dead-end alley is
435. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §405.320.
Section
405.160
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
405.170
100:1120
Section 405.180. Easements. [R.O. 2009 §154.039; CC 1981 §25-36;
Ord. No. 3775, 8-7-1970]
Section 405.190. Blocks.436 [R.O. 2009 §154.040; CC 1981 §25-37;
Ord. No. 3775, 8-7-1970]
Section 405.200. Lots.437 [R.O. 2009 §154.041; CC 1981 §25-38; Ord.
No. 3775, 8-7-1970]
unavoidable and where adequate turnaround facilities have been
provided.
A. Easements Provided For Utilities. Easements with a right-of-way width
of not more than fifteen (15) feet adequate for installation and
maintenance of utility facilities shall be provided near the rear lot lines
and five (5) feet along certain side lot lines where necessary for utilities.
B. Easements For Drainage. Where a subdivision is traversed by a
watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided
a storm water easement or a drainage right-of-way conforming
substantially with the lines of such watercourse and such further width
or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose.
A. Factors Governing Dimensions. Block length and width or acreage
within bounding roads shall be such as to accommodate the size of lot
required in the area by Chapter 400 Zoning Code and to provide for
convenient access, circulation control and safety of street traffic.
B. Lengths. Block lengths shall not exceed one thousand five hundred
(1,500) feet or be less than two hundred (200) feet.
C. Arrangement. A block shall be so designed as to provide two (2) tiers of
lots.
D. Crosswalks. In blocks where public facilities may justify crosswalks,
pedestrian crosswalks may be required by the Council in locations
deemed necessary to public health, convenience and necessity. Such
crosswalks shall be six (6) feet wide and be straight from street to
street.
A. Dimensions. Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the
requirements of Chapter 400 Zoning Code, however, areas used for
open storm water drainage easements shall not be included in the
calculations of minimum lot dimensions of the area.
B. Location. All lots shall abut by their full frontage on a publicly dedicated
street or a street that has received the legal status as such.
436. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §405.320.
437. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §405.320.
Section
405.170
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.200
100:1121
Section 405.210. Public Sites and Open Spaces. [R.O. 2009
§154.042; CC 1981 §25-39; Ord. No. 3775, 8-7-1970]
Dedication of public spaces shall be deemed accepted as public property
by the City Council upon approval of the final plat unless the City Council
objects to the dedication.
C. Lines. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to straight
street lines or radial to curved street lines.
D. Corner Lots. Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to
permit appropriate building setback from orientation to both streets.
Lots abutting on a pedestrian walkway shall be required to have a side
yard of not less than ten (10) feet.
E. Uninhabitable Lots. Lots subject to flooding and lots deemed by the
Council to be uninhabitable shall not be platted for residential
occupancy nor for such other uses as may increase danger to health,
life or property or aggravate the flood hazard, but such land within the
plat shall be set aside for such uses and shall not be endangered by
periodic or occasional inundation or shall not produce unsatisfactory
living conditions.
F. Lot Remnants. All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after
subdividing of a larger tract must be added to adjacent lots, rather than
allowed to remain as unusable parcels.
Section
405.200
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
405.210
100:1122
ARTICLE IV
Required Improvements
Section 405.220. Improvements Installed and Guaranteed. [R.O.
2009 §154.055; CC 1981 §25-51; Ord. No. 3775, 8-7-1970; Ord. No.
87-243, 12-9-1987; Ord. No. 06-61, 3-10-2006; Ord. No. 09-179,
10-2-2009]
A. Improvement Plan Review Fee And Improvement Guarantee Required.
A developer shall submit with its improvement plans a fee of one
hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) for the cost of the Department of
Engineering's plan review. After the improvement plans have been
approved and all construction inspection fees paid, but before
consideration of a final plat of a subdivision, the Council shall be
satisfied that all improvements required by Sections 405.230 through
405.250 have been constructed, the developer shall guarantee the
completion of improvements required by the approved improvement
plans ("required improvements") and guarantee maintenance of such
improvements as required herein. Except as provided in Subsection (B),
the developer shall either: [Ord. No. 18-081, 4-17-2018]
1. Complete the improvements in accordance with the approved
improvement plans under the observation and inspection of the
Public Works Department or the appropriate public agency and
establish a maintenance agreement and provide a deposit to
guarantee maintenance of such improvements as required herein;
or
2. Establish a deposit under a deposit agreement with the City
guaranteeing the construction, completion and installation
("construction deposit") and a separate deposit amount for
maintenance obligations ("maintenance deposit") as required
herein and for the improvements shown on the approved
improvement plans within the improvement completion period
approved by the Director of Public Works, which shall not exceed
two (2) years.
B. Exceptions. The Director of Public Works may require any specific
improvement to be installed prior to approval of the record plat where
failure to install such improvement prior to further development could
result in damage to the site or surrounding property.
C. Deposit Options. Deposits required by this Section shall be in
conjunction with a deposit agreement and may be in the form of cash or
letter of credit as follows:
1. Cash deposited with the Finance Department to be held in an
interest-bearing account dedicated for that purpose, with all
interest accruing to the City to offset administrative and other costs
of maintaining the cash deposits.
Section
405.220
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.220
100:1123
2. An irrevocable letter of credit drawn on a local financial institution
acceptable to and in a form approved by the City Attorney and the
Director of Public Works. The instrument may not be drawn on any
financial institution with whom the developer or a related entity
has any ownership interest or with whom there is any joint financial
connection that creates any actual or potential lack of
independence between the institution and the developer. The letter
of credit shall provide that the issuing institution will pay on
demand to the City such amounts as the City may require to fulfill
the obligations herein and may be reduced from time to time by a
writing of the Director of Public Works. The letter of credit shall be
irrevocable for at least one (1) year and shall state that any balance
remaining at the expiration shall automatically be deposited in cash
with the Finance Department, unless a new letter of credit is issued
and agreed to by the City or the City issues to the institution a
written release of the obligations for which the letter of credit was
deposited. The developer shall pay a non-refundable fee of two
hundred dollars ($200.00) to the City with submission of a letter of
credit and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for any amendment or
extension thereto to partially reimburse the City's administration
and review costs in accepting and maintaining such letter of credit.
3. Due to the costs of administering deposit guarantees/escrows and
the compliance with State law relating thereto, any developer that
elects to use a construction escrow in lieu of completing the
improvements, as otherwise provided for in this Chapter and
Section 89.410, RSMo., shall deposit an additional fee of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) that shall be used by the City to defray
costs of administration, legal costs, procedural changes and other
costs not otherwise reimbursed to the City resulting from the City's
acceptance of such deposit guarantees. The developer shall be
obligated to reimburse the City for any additional costs, including,
but not limited to, reasonable attorneys fees, above such deposit
amount arising in any way from the City's acceptance of a deposit/
escrow in lieu of completion of improvements. The developer may
request a refund of any principal amounts, if any, of any initial or
supplemented deposit above the costs attributable to the
development during the period of the escrow by written request
made within thirty (30) days after the developer has received a City
approval of all categories of improvements subject to such deposit
agreement.
D. Amount Of Deposit. The amount of the deposit required by this Section
shall be calculated as follows:
1. Construction deposit. The deposit required of a developer
establishing a deposit agreement pursuant to Subsection (A)(2)
shall be, in addition to the separate maintenance deposit sum, in
the amount of one hundred ten percent (110%) of the Department
of Public Works approved estimate of the cost of the construction,
Section
405.220
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
405.220
100:1124
completion and installation of the required improvements. The
Director of Public Works shall adopt, to the extent practical,
schedules reflecting current cost estimates of typically required
improvements.
2. Maintenance deposit. The deposit required of a developer pursuant
to Subsection (A)(1) and (A)(2) for maintenance obligations shall be
in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the Department of Public
Works estimate of the cost of the construction, completion and
installation of the required improvements. The maintenance
deposit shall be established by cash sum or submission of a
separate letter of credit.
3. Where certain improvements are required to be installed prior to
approval of the record plat pursuant to Subsection (B)(2), the gross
deposit amount for the construction deposits shall be reduced by
the estimated cost of such improvements.
E. Deposit Agreement—Releases. The deposit agreement shall be entered
into with the City of St. Charles, shall require the developer to agree to
fulfill the obligations imposed by this Section and shall have such other
terms as the City Attorney may require consistent with this Section. The
agreement shall authorize the Director of Public Works to release the
cash or reduce the obligation secured under the letter of credit as
permitted herein. Such releases or reductions may occur upon
completion, inspection and approval by the Director of Public Works of
all required improvements within a category of improvements or may
occur from time to time, as work on specific improvements is
completed, inspected and approved, provided however, that:
1. Releases—general. The Director of Public Works shall release the
cash or release the letter of credit as to all or any part of its
obligation only after construction, completion and installation of
some phase of work on the improvements indicated on the
approved improvement plans, receipt of requisite written
notification from the appropriate inspecting public authority and
approval by the Public Works Department; and only in the amounts
permitted herein.
2. Extension of completion period. If, at the end of the improvement
completion period, all the improvements shown on the approved
improvement plans have not been completed, the developer may
request and the Director of Public Works may grant an extension to
the improvement completion period for a period of up to two (2)
years if after review by the Public Works Department such longer
period is deemed necessary to facilitate adequate and coordinated
provisions for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks,
playgrounds or other public improvements, facilities or
requirements so long as all guarantees are extended and approved
by the City Attorney; provided that the Director of Public Works
may require as a condition of the extension execution of a new
Section
405.220
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.220
100:1125
agreement, recalculation of deposit amounts or satisfaction of new
Code of Ordinance requirements or other reasonable conditions
as may be needed to ensure that the extended agreement fully
complies with the terms of this Section.
3. Construction deposit releases. After an inspection of any specific
improvements, the Director of Public Works may at the Director's
discretion release up to the ninety-five percent (95%) of the
original sum deposited for the construction of such specific
required improvements. Irrespective of any discretionary prior
releases that may be authorized by the Director of Public Works
after completion of any component of the guaranteed
improvements (i.e., less than all of the improvements in a given
category), the remaining amount held for any category of
improvements for the entire development shall be released within
thirty (30) calendar days of completion of all of the improvements
in such category of improvement, minus a retention of five percent
(5%) which shall be released only upon completion of all
improvements. The Director of Public Works shall establish the
improvement categories, which may consist of improvement
components or line items, to be utilized for calculation of deposit
amounts, but such categories, components and line items shall in
no way modify or reduce the developer's guarantee as to all
required improvements, irrespective of any release or completion
of any category or underlying component or line item. All
improvements in a category shall be deemed complete only when:
a. Each and every component and line item within a category for
the entire development has been constructed and completed as
required;
b. The developer has notified the Director of Public Works in
writing of the completion of all components of the category,
provided all necessary or requested documentation and
requests an inspection;
c. The developer is not in default or in breach of any obligation to
the City under this Section including, but not limited to, the
Director of Public Work's demand for maintenance or for
deposit of additional sums for the development; and
d. The inspection has been completed and the results of the
inspection have been approved in writing by the Director of
Public Works. Releases of the maintenance deposit amounts
shall be as provided elsewhere in this Section for maintenance
deposits.
4. Effect of release—continuing obligations. The developer shall
continue to be responsible for defects, deficiencies and damage to
public streets and other required improvements for the
development. No inspection approval or release of funds from the
Section
405.220
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
405.220
100:1126
construction deposit as to any component or category shall be
deemed to be City approval of improvement or otherwise release
the developer of its obligation relating to the completion of the
improvements until the final development release on all
improvements and maintenance is issued declaring that all
improvements have in fact been constructed as required.
Inspection and approval of any or all required improvements shall
not constitute acceptance of the improvement by the City as a
public improvement for which the City shall bear any responsibility.
5. Deficient improvements. No approval of required improvements
shall be granted for improvements that fail to meet the
specifications established herein or otherwise adopted by the
Department of Public Works.
6. Final construction deposit release. Upon final inspection and
approval of all required improvements and a favorable
recommendation by the Board of Public Works and the City
Council, the remaining amount of the construction deposit shall be
released; provided that no such funds shall be released on a final
inspection until the development is complete as determined by the
Director of Public Works.
7. Appeals. If the developer believes that a release or certificate of
completion has been improperly denied including, but not limited
to, under Subsections (E) or (F), an appeal shall be filed to the
Director of Administration.
8. The Department of Public Works shall inspect each category of
improvement or utility work within twenty (20) business days after
a request for such inspection has been filed with the department by
the developer and no inspection shall be required until such
request is received by the department. For purposes of this
Section, an "inspection request" shall constitute and occur only on
a completed written request on a form that shall include:
a. The category of improvement reflected in the deposit
agreement that is requested to be inspected;
b. An engineer's certification that the category of improvement
has been installed and on the date of inspection application is
maintained and in conformance with the final approved
improvement plans and all applicable requirements thereto
and is therefore ready for inspection; and
c. A verified statement from the representative officer of the
developer attesting that the information in the inspection
request is true and accurate.
Nothing herein shall preclude the Department of
Public Works from completing additional inspections
at its discretion or as a courtesy to the developer.
Section
405.220
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.220
100:1127
F. Maintenance Guarantee.
1. Scope and duration. Upon commencement of installation of the
required improvements within the subject development, the
developer shall be responsible for the maintenance of the
improvements including undeveloped lots, streets, sidewalks,
utilities, common areas and storm and drainage facilities, until the
sooner of: [Ord. No. 18-205, 9-25-2018]
a. The expiration of twelve (12) months after acceptance for
public dedication of the specific improvement by the City; or
b. The expiration of twelve (12) months after occupancy permits
have been issued on ninety-five percent (95%) of all of the lots
or units in the development subject to the deposit agreement.
Maintenance shall include repair or replacement of all
defects, deficiencies and damage to the improvements
that may exist or arise, abatement of nuisances caused
by such improvements, removal of mud and debris
from construction, erosion control, grass cutting,
removal of construction materials (except materials to
be used for construction on the lot or as permitted
by site plan) and street de-icing and snow removal.
All repairs and replacement shall comply with City
specifications and standards. Any maintenance on
improvements accepted by the City for public
dedication shall be completed under the supervision of
and with the prior written approval of the Director of
Public Works.
2. Maintenance deposit—amount—use.
a. The maintenance deposit shall be retained by the City to
guarantee maintenance of the required improvements and, in
addition to being subject to the remedies of Subsection (G) and
other remedies of the Code of Ordinances, shall be subject to
the immediate order of the Director of Public Works to defray
or reimburse any cost to the City of maintenance or repair of
improvements related to the development which the developer
fails or refuses to perform. Such costs shall include off-site
damage caused by deficiencies in the improvements or failure
of maintenance. Except in emergency circumstances or where
action is otherwise required before written notice can be
provided, the Director of Public Works shall provide the
developer with a written demand and opportunity to perform
the maintenance before having such maintenance performed
by the City. The Director of Public Works shall have the
authority to require the maintenance deposit to be placed or
replenished by the developer in any form permitted for an
original deposit where the amount remaining is determined to
Section
405.220
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
405.220
100:1128
be insufficient or where the maintenance deposit was drawn
upon by the City for maintenance.
b. In determining the amount of maintenance deposit that shall
continue to be held, portions of the deposit amount that were
attributable to improvement that have been accepted by any
third (3rd) party governmental entity or utility legally
responsible for the maintenance of the improvement may be
released upon such acceptance of the improvement by the
entity. The Director of Public Works may approve such further
releases if it is determined in his/her discretion, after
inspection of the improvements, that the total maintenance
amount retained is clearly in excess of the amount necessary
for completion of the maintenance obligation, after all
reasonable contingencies are considered.
3. Final maintenance deposit release. Upon expiration of the
maintenance obligations established herein, the Director of Public
Works shall cause a final inspection to be made of the required
improvements. Funds shall then be released if there are no defects
or deficiencies found and all other obligations are shown to be
satisfied on inspection thereof or at such time thereafter as any
defects or deficiencies are cured with the permission of, and within
the time allowed, by the Director of Public Works. This release shall
in no way be construed to indemnify or release any person from any
civil liability that may exist for defects or damages caused by any
construction, improvement or development for which any deposit
has been released.
G. Failure To Complete Improvements. The obligation of the developer to
construct, complete, install and maintain the improvements indicated
on the approved improvement plans and provide for street maintenance
shall not cease until the developer shall be finally released by the
Director of Public Works, nor shall any deposit agreements or
obligations hereunder be assignable by developer. If, after the initial
improvement completion period or after a later period as extended
pursuant to this Section, the improvements indicated on the approved
improvement plans are not constructed, completed, installed, accepted
and maintained as required or if the developer shall violate any
provision of the deposit agreement, the Director may notify the
developer to show cause within not less than ten (10) calendar days
why the developer should not be declared in default. Unless good cause
is shown, no building or other permit shall be issued to the developer in
the development during any period in which the developer is in
violation of the deposit agreement or any Section of the Code of
Ordinances. If the developer fails to cure any default or present
compelling reason why no default should be declared, the Director shall
declare the developer in default and may take any one (1) or more of the
following acts:
Section
405.220
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.220
100:1129
1. Deem the balance under the deposit agreement not theretofore
released as forfeited to the City, to be then placed in an appropriate
trust and agency account subject to the order of the Director of
Public Works for such purposes as letting contracts to bring about
the completion or maintenance of the improvements indicated on
the approved improvement plans or other appropriate purposes in
the interest of the public safety, health and welfare; or
2. Require the developer or surety to pay to the City the balance of the
surety not theretofore released; or
3. Require the developer to submit an additional cash sum sufficient
to guarantee the completion or maintenance of the improvements
indicated on the approved improvement plans after recalculation in
order to allow for any inflated or increased costs of constructing or
maintaining the improvements.
The failure of a developer to complete the improvement
obligations within the time provided by the agreement (or any
extension granted by the City) and including the payment of
funds to the City due to such failure or an expiration of a letter
of credit shall be deemed an automatic act of default entitling
the City to all remedies provided in this Section without further
or prior notice. It shall be the sole responsibility of the
developer to timely request an extension of any deposit
agreement if the improvements are not completed in the
original time period provided by the deposit agreement and no
right to any extension shall exist or be assumed.
H. Other Remedies For Default. If the developer or surety fails to comply
with the Director's requirements for payment as described above or
fails to complete the improvements as required or otherwise violates
the deposit agreement provisions and there is a risk that development
will continue in the subdivision without the timely prior completion of
improvements or compliance with deposit agreement provisions, the
Director of Public Works may in addition or alternatively to other
remedies:
1. Suspend the right of anyone to build or construct on the
undeveloped portion of the development. For the purpose of this
Subsection the "undeveloped portion" means all lots other than lots
which have been sold for personal use and occupancy or are under
bona fide contract for sale to any person for personal use or
occupancy. The Director shall give the developer ten (10) calendar
days' written notice of an order under this Subsection with copies
to all sureties, as appropriate, who have outstanding obligations for
any undeveloped portion of the development and shall record an
affidavit of such notice with the Recorder of Deeds. If, within the
ten (10) calendar day period after notice is given, the Director is
not convinced by compelling evidence that completion of the
improvements is adequately assured and maintenance of streets
Section
405.220
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
405.220
100:1130
assured as provided herein, the Director of Public Works shall
order construction suspended on the undeveloped portion of the
development. The order shall be served upon the developer with
a copy to the issuer of the surety, as appropriate, and a copy
recorded with the Recorder of Deeds. Public notice of said order
shall be conspicuously and prominently posted by the Director
at the subdivisions or lots subject to said order. The notice shall
contain the following minimum language which may be
supplemented at the discretion of the Director of Public Works.
a. If said notice is for a subdivision:
THIS SUBDIVISION, (name of subdivision), HAS BEEN
DECLARED IN DEFAULT BY THE CITY OF ST. CHARLES
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. NO DEVELOPMENT,
CONSTRUCTION, BUILDING OR DEMOLITION IN ANY
MANNER SHALL TAKE PLACE WITHIN THE LIMITS OF THIS
SUBDIVISION UNTIL SUCH TIME AS THE CITY OF ST.
CHARLES DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS REMOVES THIS
PROHIBITION. ANY DEVELOPMENT, CONSTRUCTION,
BUILDING OR DEMOLITION IN ANY MANNER WHILE THIS
PROHIBITION IS IN EFFECT IS ILLEGAL AND SHALL BE
ENFORCED PURSUANT TO CHAPTER 405, CITY OF ST.
CHARLES CODE OF ORDINANCES.
b. If said notice is for a lot:
THIS LOT, (lot number), HAS BEEN DECLARED IN DEFAULT
BY THE CITY OF ST. CHARLES DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC
WORKS. NO DEVELOPMENT, CONSTRUCTION, BUILDING
OR DEMOLITION IN ANY MANNER SHALL TAKE PLACE
WITHIN THE LIMITS OF THIS LOT UNTIL SUCH TIME AS
THE CITY OF ST. CHARLES DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS
REMOVES THIS PROHIBITION. ANY DEVELOPMENT,
CONSTRUCTION, BUILDING OR DEMOLITION IN ANY
MANNER WHILE THIS PROHIBITION IS IN EFFECT IS
ILLEGAL AND SHALL BE ENFORCED PURSUANT TO
CHAPTER 405 CITY OF ST. CHARLES CODE OF
ORDINANCES.
The suspension shall be rescinded in whole or in part
only when the Director of Public Works is convinced
that completion of the improvements is adequately
assured in all or an appropriate part of the
development and a guarantee of public street
maintenance provided; or
2. Suspend the rights of the developer or any related entity to
construct structures in any development platted after the effective
date of such suspension throughout the City of St. Charles. The
Director of Public Works shall give the developer ten (10) calendar
Section
405.220
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.220
100:1131
days' written notice of an order under this clause with a copy to
sureties known to the Director of Public Works to have obligations
outstanding on behalf of the developer or related entities and shall
record an affidavit of such notice with the Recorder of Deeds. If,
within the ten (10) calendar day period after notice is given, the
Director of Public Works is not convinced by compelling evidence
that completion of the improvements is adequately assured and
maintenance of streets assured as provided herein, the Director
of Public Works shall order construction suspended. The order
shall be served upon the developer with a copy to the surety, as
appropriate, and a copy recorded with the Recorder of Deeds. The
suspension shall be rescinded only when the Director of Public
Works is convinced that completion of the improvements is
adequately assured and public street maintenance is assured.
I. Suspension Of Development Rights. From and after the effective date of
this Section, if a developer or any related entity has a development
improvement guarantee that is in default as determined by the Director
of Public Works including any escrow or bond under any prior version of
this Section:
1. The Director of Public Works shall be authorized, but not be
limited, to thereafter pursue the remedies of Subsection (H); and
2. The rights of the developer or any related entity to receive
development approval, which approval shall include, but not be
limited to, approval of any plat or deposit agreement for new or
further development in the City, shall be suspended. The
suspension shall be rescinded only when the Director of Public
Works is convinced that completion and maintenance of the
improvements is adequately assured.
J. Additional Remedies. If any party fails to comply with any obligation of
this Section, the Director of Public Works may recommend that the City
Attorney take appropriate legal action and the City may also withhold
any building or occupancy permits to this developer or related entities
until such compliance is cured. The City shall also have the right to
partially or wholly remedy a developer's deficiencies or breached
obligations under this Code of Ordinances by set-off of any funds or
assets otherwise held by the City of the developer to the maximum
extent permitted by law. Such set-off shall occur upon written notice of
such event by the Director of Public Works to the developer after the
developer has failed to timely cure the deficiencies. It shall be deemed a
provision of every deposit agreement authorized under this Chapter
that the developer shall pay the City's costs, including reasonable
attorney's fees, of enforcing such agreement in the event that the
developer is judicially determined to have violated any provision herein
or in such agreement. The developer may appeal any decision taken
pursuant to this Section by filing an appeal to the Director of
Administration.
Section
405.220
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
405.220
100:1132
Section 405.230. Monuments. [R.O. 2009 §154.056; CC 1981
§25-52; Ord. No. 3775, 8-7-1970]
Monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle points, points of
curves in streets and at intermediate points as shall be required by the City
Engineer. The monuments shall be of such material, size and length as may
be approved by the Engineer.
Section 405.240. Streets, Related Structures and Facilities, and
Other Public Improvements.438 [R.O. 2009 §154.057; CC 1981
§25-52; Ord. No. 3775, 8-7-1970; Ord. No. 89-16, 1-19-1989; Ord.
No. 94-150, 6-22-1994; Ord. No. 01-292, 12-21-2001]
K. Related Entities. For purposes of this Section, "related entity" has the
following meaning: a developer is a related entity of another person or
entity:
1. If either has a principal or controlling interest in the other; or
2. If any person, firm, corporation, association, partnership or other
entity with a controlling interest in one has a principal or
controlling interest in the other.
The identification of related entities shall be supported by
documentation from the Secretary of State's office, Jefferson
City, Missouri.
A. Street Standards.
1. Specifications And Inspections. All streets shall be constructed in
accordance with St. Louis County Standard Specifications for
Highway Construction, Divisions 200 through 1,000, developed by
the St. Louis County Department of Highways and Traffic, and with
applicable standard specifications of the City, or as otherwise
specified below. Such construction shall be subject to inspection
and approval by the Director of Engineering. [Ord. No. 17-157
§ 1, 8-16-2017; Ord. No. 17-303, 1-2-2018]
2. Subgrade specifications. Soil compaction for all sewer and street
construction shall be to ninety percent (90%) Modified Proctor
standards.
3. Pavement Thickness. Pavement shall be constructed of seven (7)
inches concrete (non-reinforced) in accordance with Eastern
Missouri Pavement Consortium (EMPC) 2017 Specifications on
five-inch Modified Type 5 aggregate base on prepared subgrade.
The gradation requirements for the Modified Type 5 base is the
same as the requirements for Type 5 aggregate base, with the
exception that only zero percent (0%) to ten percent (10%) by
438. Cross References—As to penalty, §405.320; as to drains and driveways, §§505.350 et seq.;
as to poles and wires, §§505.650 et seq.
Section
405.220
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.240
100:1133
weight can pass the No. 200 sieve. Two (2) inches Type "C"
bituminous asphalt on six (6) inches Type "X" bituminous asphalt
on five-inch Modified Type 5 aggregate base on prepared subgrade
is also acceptable. [Ord. No. 17-157 § 1, 8-16-2017]
4. Control joints and expansion joints. Control joints shall be spaced
fifteen (15) feet apart. Expansion joints shall be placed as directed
by the site geotechnical engineer and approved by the Director of
Public Works.
5. Underdrains. Underdrains shall be placed under the new pavement
at areas directed by the site soils engineers which will be subject to
final approval of the Director of Public Works.
6. The provisions of this Section shall not be subject to variance under
Section 405.300.
B. Curbs, Gutters And Drainage. Curbs, gutters and drainage structures
shall be provided in accordance with standard specifications of the City.
Such construction shall be subject to inspection and approval by the
Director of Engineering. [Ord. No. 17-303, 1-2-2018]
C. Name Signs. Street name signs shall be placed at all street
intersections within or abutting the subdivision. Such signs shall be of a
type approved by the City and shall be placed in accordance with
standards of the City.
D. Underground Wiring. All electric and telephone distribution lines shall
be installed underground. Cable switching enclosures, pad-mounted
transformers and service pedestals may be installed above ground.
E. Lighting. The minimum requirement for street lighting facilities shall
be one (1) light emitting diodes light at each street intersection, but not
further apart than two hundred (200) feet within or abutting the
subdivision to maintain a minimum of .4 foot-candles lighting pattern
throughout. Light standards and photometric report(s) shall be
approved by the Director of Engineering or designee. After acceptance
by the City, the lighting facilities will be maintained and operated at the
expense of the City. [Ord. No. 13-178 §2, 9-24-2013; Ord. No.
17-303, 1-2-2018]
1. All street lights for each plat shall be installed by the developer
within six (6) months time after the streets have been installed or
when fifty percent (50%) or more of the lots within the subdivision
have been developed.
2. Connection fee charges for each street light are to be paid to the
City by the developer when the improvement plans are approved by
the City.
F. Sidewalk Construction. Sidewalks shall be constructed by the
developer along all portions of public streets which are adjacent to
Section
405.240
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
405.240
100:1134
Section 405.245. Sanitary Sewer System. [Ord. No. 13-178 §2,
9-24-2013]
Section 405.250. Public Water Supply and Fire Hydrants.439 [R.O.
2009 §154.058; CC 1981 §25-54; Ord. No. 3775, 8-7-1970]
common ground or land which is not part of the development.
Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with City specifications
and at locations approved by the Director of Engineering. Ord. No.
17-303, 1-2-2018
G. Other Public Improvements. Any improvement proposed on an
improvement plan (for example, a parking garage, bus shelter, or
pedestrian walkway) to be offered for dedication for public use,
ownership, or maintenance by the City or other public entity, shall be
installed and constructed in accordance with the approved
improvement plans and shall be subject to approval by the Director of
Public Works. [Ord. No. 13-178 §2, 9-24-2013]
A. Accessible Sanitary Sewer System. Each lot within a subdivision shall
connect to the public sanitary sewer system from a single lateral, in
accordance with Chapter 705 of the City Code of Ordinances.
B. Non-Accessible Sanitary Sewer System. If a subdivision of land is
proposed where a public sanitary sewer system is not adjacent to each
proposed lot, then the subdivider of the land shall construct a public
sanitary sewer main in accordance with City standards and shall create
lateral connections to a public sanitary sewer main for every lot in the
proposed subdivision at the time improvements are constructed, in
accordance with Chapter 705 of the City Code of Ordinances.
A. Accessible Public Water Supply. Where a public water supply approved
by the City is reasonably accessible, each lot within the subdivision area
shall be provided with a connection thereto. All connections shall be
subject to the approval of the Board of Public Works.
B. Non-Accessible Public Water Supply. In a proposed subdivision pending
accessibility of a public water supply, the subdivider may be required to
construct wells or a private water supply system in such a manner that
an adequate supply of potable water, by the State Board of Health, will
be available to every lot in the subdivision at the time improvements are
erected thereon.
C. Fire Hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed in all subdivisions by the
subdivider under the supervision of the Board of Public Works. The fire
hydrant standards shall be subject to the approval of the Board of
Public Works.
439. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §405.320.
Section
405.240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.260
100:1135
Section 405.260. Roadway Construction Standards. [R.O. 2009
§154.059; Ord. No. 03-220, 9-3-2003; Ord. No. 10-174 §4,
7-18-2010]
A. The St. Louis County Standard Specifications for Highway
Construction, Divisions 200 through 1000, developed by the St. Louis
County Department of Highways and Traffic, one (1) copy of which is on
file with the City Clerk, are hereby adopted for the City's standard
construction specifications for roadway facilities. More specifically,
those Divisions are as follows:
Division Standards
Division 200 Earthwork
Division 300 Bases aggregate surfaces
Division 400 Flexible pavements
Division 500 Rigid pavements
Division 600 Incidental construction
Division 700 Structures
Division 800 Roadside development
Division 900 Traffic control facilities
Division 1000 Material details
B. Those Divisions listed above shall be adopted in whole with the
following exceptions:
1. All references to "St. Louis County" in any form shall be replaced
with "City of St. Charles" where appropriate.
2. All references to "department" shall mean the "Public Works
Department of the City of St. Charles" where appropriate.
3. The standard details for construction of pavements shall follow
those standards established by the ordinances of the City. The City
Engineer will maintain and make available at a reasonable cost
copies of said details. The ordinances of the City supersede and
take precedence over the St. Louis County Standard Specifications
for Highway Construction.
4. Seed/sod. Sections 803 and 805 are to be modified to include fortyfive
(45) days of maintenance by the contractor prior to acceptance
by the City. During this period the contractor shall keep adequate
moisture in the top six (6) inches of soil to promote proper growth
of the grass. No grass that is dead or in poor health shall be
accepted by the City and the contractor is responsible for
replacement of dead or grass in poor health.
5. Construction staking. All construction staking shall be provided by
the contractor unless otherwise indicated by the City Engineer.
Section
405.260
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
405.260
100:1136
6. A developer achieving Tier 1 status under the Green Point Rating
System Guide established in Section 400.920 may make application
to the Department of Public Works for the use of a Green Point
Rating System Alternative to the requirements of Section
405.260(B) as set forth in the "Development Guide: Infrastructure
Alternatives for St. Charles "GPRS" Projects" on file with the City
Clerk.
Section
405.260
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.260
100:1137

ARTICLE V
Plats and Data
Section 405.270. Pre-Application Plans and Data. [R.O. 2009
§154.070; CC 1981 §25-66; Ord. No. 3775, 8-7-1970]
Section 405.280. Preliminary Plat and Data. [R.O. 2009 §154.071;
CC 1981 §25-67; Ord. No. 3775, 8-7-1970]
A. General Subdivision Information. General subdivision information shall
describe or outline the existing conditions of the site and the proposed
development as necessary to supplement the drawings required below.
This information may include data on existing covenants, land
characteristics and available community facilities and utilities; and
information describing the subdivision proposal such as number of
residential lots, typical lot width and depth, price range, business areas,
playgrounds, park areas and other public areas, proposed protective
covenants and proposed utilities and street improvements.
B. Location Map. The location map shall show the relationship of the
proposed subdivision to existing community facilities which serve or
influence it. Include development name and location; main traffic
arteries; public transportation lines; shopping centers; elementary and
high schools; parks and playgrounds; principal places of employment;
other community features such as railroad stations, airports, hospitals
and churches; title; scale; north arrow and date.
C. Sketch Plan. A sketch plan on a topographic survey shall show in simple
sketch form the proposed layout of streets, lots and other features in
relation to existing conditions. The sketch plan may be a freehand
pencil sketch made directly on a print of the topographical survey.
A. Form. The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn. The size
of the map shall not be less than twelve (12) inches by eighteen (18)
inches. The map of a subdivision containing three (3) acres or less shall
be drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet. All other
subdivisions shall be drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals one
hundred (100) feet.
B. Map Contents. The preliminary plat shall contain the following
information:
1. Description.
a. Proposed name of the subdivision. The name shall not
duplicate, be the same in spelling or alike in pronunciation
with any other recorded subdivision in the County.
b. Names of adjacent subdivisions and owners of adjoining
parcels of unsubdivided land.
c. Names and addresses of the subdivider, owner and engineer.
Section
405.270
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.280
100:1139
d. Location by section, town, range, township, County, State.
e. Names of streets within the adjoining plat.
2. Existing conditions.
a. Boundaries of the subdivision indicated by a heavy line and the
approximate acreage.
b. Location, widths and names of existing or platted streets,
railroad rights-of-way, easements, parks, permanent buildings,
section and corporation lines.
c. Zoning districts, if any.
3. Survey data. Existing contours with intervals of no more than five
(5) feet. Elevations are to be based on U.S.G.S. datum.
a. Drainage channels, wooded areas, power transmission poles
and lines and any other significant items should be shown.
b. Vicinity sketch.
4. Drafting of plat. Date of preparation, scale of map and north arrow.
5. Proposals. Locations and principal dimensions for all proposed
streets, alleys, easements, lot lines and areas to be reserved for
public use.
C. Other Information.
1. Statement of the proposed use of lots stating type of residential
buildings with number of proposed dwelling units, type of
commercial use, so as to reveal the effect of the development on
traffic, fire hazards or congestion of population.
2. Proposed utility systems and sources.
3. Provisions for sewage disposal, drainage, flood control and
proposed culverts or bridges.
4. Dimensions of lot lines and building setbacks.
5. Names of new streets.
6. Present zoning classification.
7. Acreage subdivided.
8. If any zoning changes are contemplated, the proposed zoning plan
for the areas including dimensions.
9. Information required in Subsections (C)(1) through (4) above may
be provided in a separate instrument attached to the plat.
Section
405.280
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
405.290
100:1140
Section 405.290. Final Plat and Data. [R.O. 2009 §154.072; CC 1981
§25-68; Ord. No. 3775, 8-7-1970; Ord. No. 13-178 §2, 9-24-2013;
Ord. No. 16-015 §1, 1-19-2016]
A. Form Of Final Plat. The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn in
black ink on polyester film or plastic sheet, sometimes commonly
referred to by its registered trademark name as "Mylar." The size of the
map shall not be less than twelve (12) inches by eighteen (18) inches.
The map of a subdivision containing three (3) acres or less shall be
drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, unless
otherwise required by the Council.
B. Final Plat To Be Prepared By Engineer Or Surveyor; Seal Affixed; And
Form Of Certification.
1. The final plat shall be prepared by an engineer or land surveyor
that is registered in the State of Missouri. The engineer or surveyor
shall affix his or her seal to the final plat.
2. The form of certification of the registered professional engineer or
land surveyor shall certify that the plat represents a survey made
by him/her and that all monuments shown thereon actually exist
and that their location is correctly shown. In the alternative, the
certification may State that the survey was prepared in accordance
with the laws of the State of Missouri or the Code of State
Regulations.
C. Map Contents. A map shall contain the following:
1. Description.
a. Name of the subdivision.
b. Names of adjacent subdivisions and owners of adjoining
parcels of unsubdivided land.
c. Names and addresses of subdivider, owner and engineer.
d. Location by section, town, range, township, County, State.
e. Names of streets within the adjoining plat.
2. Existing conditions.
a. All plat boundaries.
b. Bearings and distances to the nearest established street lines,
section corners or other recognized permanent monuments
which shall be accurately described on the plat.
c. Municipal, township, County or section lines accurately tied to
the lines of the subdivision by distance and bearings.
d. Accurate location of all monuments.
Section
405.290
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.290
100:1141
3. Survey data.
a. Length of all arcs, radii, internal angles, points of curvature
and tangent bearings.
b. When lots are located on a curve or when side lines are at
angles other than ninety degrees (90°), the width at the
building line shall be shown.
c. Vicinity sketch.
4. Drafting of plat. Title, date of preparation, scale of map and north
arrow.
5. Proposals.
a. All easements for right-of-way provided for public services or
utilities and any limitations of such easements.
b. All lot numbers and lines with accurate dimensions in feet and
hundredths and with bearings or angles to street and alley or
crosswalk lines.
c. Accurate outlines of any areas to be dedicated or temporarily
reserved for public use with the purpose indicated thereon.
d. Building setback lines with dimensions.
D. Required Information. The following information or items shall be
printed on the plat or submitted at the same time that the final plat is
filed:
1. Certification that real estate taxes are paid shall be furnished in the
form of copies of paid real estate tax bills on the land within the
proposed subdivision. In addition, the following sentence in
substantial form shall appear within the owner's certification on
the plat: "All real estate taxes due on the property have been paid
in full."
2. If a zoning change was involved, certification from the City Clerk
shall be furnished indicating that the change requested has been
approved and is in effect.
3. Certification by an engineer or land surveyor registered in the
State, to the effect that the plat represents a survey made by him/
her and that all monuments shown thereon actually exist and that
their location is correctly shown. In the alternative, the
certification may State that the survey was prepared in accordance
with the laws of the State of Missouri or the Code of State
Regulations. The following sentence in substantial form shall
comply with the engineer or surveyor certification: "This record
plat and the survey on which it is based were prepared in
accordance with the current minimum standards for an urban class
Section
405.290
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
405.290
100:1142
boundary survey as established by the Missouri Board for
Architects, Professional Engineers, Professional Land Surveyors
and Professional Landscape Architects."
4. The owner's certificate shall include the following, as applicable:
a. An acknowledgement that the owner has adopted the plat;
b. A dedication of streets to the City for public use forever;
c. A dedication of utility easements that identifies each utility by
name;
d. A dedication of common ground and an affirmative statement
identifying the entity with maintenance responsibility;
e. A dedication of storm water drainage easements to the City;
f. An affirmative statement identifying the entity with
maintenance responsibility for storm water detention; and
g. A statement that building lines are established.
The owner's certificate shall contain the appropriate
certificate of acknowledgement commensurate with the
owner's form of ownership pursuant to Section 486.330
RSMo., as amended.
5. Plan and profiles of streets, storm and sanitary sewers and
appurtenances, proposed connections to the public water and
sanitary sewer mains for each proposed lot, sewage disposal
facilities, topographical map, grading plan and corrections,
culverts and all other construction drawings related to the
improvements to be constructed in the subdivision.
6. A statement by the City Engineer certifying that he/she is in receipt
of two (2) maps showing all utilities in exact location and elevation,
identifying those portions already installed and those to be
installed and that subdivider has complied with Section 405.220.
Section
405.290
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.290
100:1143

ARTICLE VI
Variances
Section 405.300. Authorized By Council — Prerequisites.440 [R.O.
2009 §154.085; CC 1981 §25-80; Ord. No. 3775, 8-7-1970; Ord. No.
87-131, 6-19-1987]
Section 405.310. Application Requirements. [R.O. 2009 §154.086;
CC 1981 §25-81; Ord. No. 3775, 8-7-1970]
A. A majority of elected Council may authorize upon recommendation from
the Zoning Commission a variance from these regulations when, in its
opinion, extreme hardship may result from strict compliance. In
granting any variance, the Council shall prescribe only conditions that
it deems necessary to or desirable for the public interest. In making its
findings, as required herein below, the Council shall take into account
the nature of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the
vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless the Council finds:
1. There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the
property such that the strict application of the provisions of this
Chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of the
land.
2. The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right of the petitioner.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, no variance shall
be granted to allow private streets, except in planned unit
developments, and then only when the private streets are built to the
same standards as the City's public streets.
A. Generally. Application for such variance should be submitted in writing
by the subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is filed for the
consideration of the Planning and Zoning Commission. The petition
shall state fully the grounds for the application and all the facts relied
upon by the petitioner.
B. Complete Neighborhood. Application for any such variance shall be
made in writing by the subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat
is filed for the consideration of the Planning and Zoning Commission
stating fully and clearly all facts relied upon by the petitioner and shall
be supplemented with maps, plans and other additional data which may
aid the Council in the analysis of the proposed project. The plans for
such development shall include such covenants, restrictions or other
legal provisions necessary to guarantee the full achievement of the
plan.
440. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §405.320.
Section
405.300
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
405.320
100:1145
Section 405.320. Penalty. [R.O. 2009 §154.999; CC 1981 §25-93;
Ord. No. 3775, 8-7-1970; Ord. No. 73-38, 6-20-1973]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and subject to the penalty provisions set forth in Section
100.150.
Section
405.320
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
405.320
100:1146
Chapter 410
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section 410.010. Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact and
Purposes. [Ord. No. 15-293 §1, 12-15-2015441]
A. Statutory Authorization. The Legislature of the State of Missouri has in
Section 89.020 of the Revised Statutes of the State of Missouri
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
floodplain management regulations designed to protect the health,
safety, and general welfare; and as such, the City Council of the City of
St. Charles, Missouri has enacted Chapter 410 of the Code of
Ordinances.
B. Findings Of Fact.
1. The special flood hazard areas of the City of St. Charles, Missouri,
are subject to inundation which results in loss of life and property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and
governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base; all of which
adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
2. These flood losses are caused by:
a. The cumulative effect of development in any delineated
floodplain causing increases in flood heights and velocities;
and
b. The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods, hazardous to others, inadequately elevated, or
otherwise unprotected from flood damages.
3. The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) that is the basis of this Chapter
uses a standard engineering method of analyzing flood hazards
which consist of a series of interrelated steps as follows:
a. Selection of a base flood that is based upon engineering
calculations which permit a consideration of such flood factors
as its expected frequency of occurrence, the area inundated,
and the depth of inundation. The base flood selected for this
Chapter is representative of large floods which are
characteristic of what can be expected to occur on the
particular streams subject to this Chapter. It is in the general
order of a flood which could be expected to have a one-percent
chance of occurrence in any one year as delineated on the
441. Editor's Note: Former Chapter 410, Flood Damage Prevention, containing Sections
410.010 through 410.180, which derived from R.O. 2009 §§152.01 — 152.99, CC 1981
§§12-1 — 12-40, Ord. No. 96-225, 7-23-1996 and Ord. No. 77-7, 3-9-1997, as amended, was
repealed 12-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-293. Section 3 also provided an effective date of
1-20-2016.
Section
405.320
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
410.010
100:1147
Section 410.020. Definitions. [Ord. No. 15-293 §1, 12-15-2015]
For purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Unless specifically
defined below, words or phrases used in this Chapter shall be interpreted so
as to give them the same meaning they have in common usage and to give
this Chapter its most reasonable application.
100-YEAR FLOOD — See "Base Flood".
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — The same as "Appurtenant Structure".
ACTUARIAL RATES — See "Risk Premium Rates".
ADMINISTRATOR — The Federal Insurance Administrator.
Federal Insurance Administrator's FIS, and illustrative
materials for St. Charles County, Missouri dated January 20,
2016, as amended, and any future revisions thereto.
b. Calculation of water surface profiles are based on a standard
hydraulic engineering analysis of the capacity of the stream
channel and overbank areas to convey the regulatory flood.
c. Computation of a floodway required to convey this flood
without increasing flood heights more than one (1) foot at any
point.
d. Delineation of flood way encroachment lines within which no
development is permitted that causes any increase in flood
height.
e. Delineation of flood fringe, which is, that area outside the
floodway encroachment lines, but subject to inundation by the
base flood.
C. Statement Of Purpose. It is the purpose of this Chapter to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare; to minimize those losses
described in Section 410.010(B)(1); to establish or maintain the
community's eligibility for participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP) as defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR)
59.22(a)(3); and to meet the requirements of 44 CFR 60.3(d) by
applying the provisions of this Chapter 410 to:
1. Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flooding or cause undue increases in flood
heights or velocities;
2. Require uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities that
serve such uses, be provided with flood protection at the time of
initial construction; and
3. Protect persons from buying lands that are unsuited for the
intended development purposes due to the flood hazard.
Section
410.010
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
410.020
100:1148
AGENCY — The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
AGRICULTURAL COMMODITIES — Agricultural products and livestock.
AGRICULTURAL STRUCTURE — Any structure used exclusively in
connection with the production, harvesting, storage, drying, or raising of
agricultural commodities.
APPEAL — A request for review of the Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this Chapter or a request for a variance.
APPURTENANT STRUCTURE — A structure that is on the same parcel of
property as the principle structure to be insured and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Is the land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the structure having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "Structure."
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER or CHIEF ELECTED OFFICIAL — The official
of the community who is charged with the authority to implement and
administer laws, ordinances, and regulations for that community.
COMMUNITY — Any State or area or political subdivision thereof, which
has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for
the areas within its jurisdiction.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, levees,
levee systems, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING — For insurance purposes, a non-basement building
which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation
walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
ELIGIBLE COMMUNITY or PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY — A community
for which the Administrator has authorized the sale of flood insurance under
the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION — For the purposes of determining rates,
structures for which the "Start of Construction" commenced before the
effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective
before that date.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION — May also be referred to as "Existing
Structures".
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
Section
410.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
410.020
100:1149
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from, (1) the overflow of
inland waters, and/or (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of
surface waters from any source.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map of
a community on which the Administrator has delineated both special flood
hazard areas and the designated regulatory floodway.
FLOOD ELEVATION DETERMINATION — A determination by the
Administrator of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the
flood level that has a one-percent or greater chance of occurrence in any
given year.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards.
FLOOD FRINGE — The area outside the floodway encroachment lines, but
still subject to inundation by the regulatory flood.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Administrator, where the boundaries of the flood
areas having special flood hazards have been designated as (unnumbered
or numbered) A Zones.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community,
on which the Administrator has delineated both the special flood hazard
areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — An examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations.
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see "Flooding").
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including
but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and
floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as floodplain and grading ordinances) and other
Section
410.020
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
410.020
100:1150
applications of police power. The term describes Such State or local
regulations, in any combination thereof that provide standards for the
purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, or structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY or REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one (1) foot.
FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT LINES — The lines marking the limits of
floodways on Federal, State and local floodplain maps.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as bridge openings and the hydrological effect of
urbanization of the watershed.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use that cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water. This term includes only docking facilities and facilities that are
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, but does
not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
1.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the United States Secretary of
the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary
to qualify as a registered historic district;
2.
Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in States
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
3.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior, or
a.
4.
Section
410.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
410.020
100:1151
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable floodproofing design requirements of this Chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, that is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "Manufactured Home" does not include a "Recreational Vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MAP — The Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM), Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM), or the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) for a
community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
MARKET VALUE OR FAIR MARKET VALUE — An estimate of what is fair,
economic, just and equitable value under normal local market conditions.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP), the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or
other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For the purposes of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is
later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
floodplain management purposes, "New Construction" means structures for
which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lot on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by the community.
(NFIP) — The National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY also known as an ELIGIBLE COMMUNITY
— A community in which the Administrator has authorized the sale of flood
insurance.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in States without approved
programs.
b.
Section
410.020
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
410.020
100:1152
PERSON — Includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation,
limited liability company, partnership, trust, association, or any other entity,
including Federal, State, and local governments and agencies.
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — That at least fifty-one percent (51%) of
the actual cash value of the structure, less land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REMEDY A VIOLATION — To bring the structure or other development
into compliance with Federal, State, or local floodplain management
regulations; or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two (2) separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, equals or exceeds twentyfive
percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
RISK PREMIUM RATES — Those rates established by the Administrator
pursuant to individual community studies and investigations which are
undertaken to provide flood insurance in accordance with Section 1307
of the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 and the accepted
actuarial principles. "Risk Premium Rates" include provisions for operating
costs and allowances.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — See "Area of Special Flood Hazard".
SPECIAL HAZARD AREA — An area having special flood hazards and shown
on an FHBM, FIRM or FBFM as Zones (unnumbered or numbered) A and
AE.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial-improvements, and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start
of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement,
or other improvements were within one hundred eighty (180) days of the
permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, any work
beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home
on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading and filling, the installation of streets and/or
1. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
2.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
3.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
4.
Section
410.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
410.020
100:1153
walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, foundations, the
erection of temporary forms, nor installation on the property of accessory
structures, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial-improvement, the actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
STATE COORDINATING AGENCY — That agency of the State government,
or other office designated by the governor of the State or by State Statute
at the request of the Administrator to assist in the implementation of the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) in that State.
STRUCTURE — For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed
building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home. "Structure" for insurance
purposes, means a walled and roofed building, other than a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground and affixed to a permanent
site, as well as a manufactured home on a permanent foundation. For
the latter purpose, the term includes a building while in the course of
construction, alteration or repair, but does not include building materials or
supplies intended for use in such construction, alteration or repair, unless
such materials or supplies are within an enclosed building on the premises.
SUBSTANTIAL-DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred. The term includes repetitive loss
buildings (see definition). For the purposes of this definition, "repair" is
considered to occur when the first repair or reconstruction of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences. The word
"repair" does not apply to:
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any combination of reconstruction,
alteration, or improvement to a building, taking place during a ten-year
period, in which the cumulative percentage of improvement equals or
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the current market value of the building.
For the purposes of this definition, an improvement occurs when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building. This term includes structures, which have incurred
Any project for improvement of a building required to comply with
existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the Code Enforcement Official and which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions;
1.
Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure, or
2.
3. Any improvement to a building.
Section
410.020
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
410.020
100:1154
repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
done. The words "substantial improvement" do not apply to:
SUBSTANTIALLY IMPROVED EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
OR SUBDIVISIONS — Is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation
or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair,
reconstruction or improvement commenced.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by the community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation. Flood insurance requirements remain
in place for any varied use or structure and cannot be varied by the
community.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this Chapter
is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is
provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION — The height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum where specified)
of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplain.
Section 410.030. Lands to Which This Chapter Applies. [Ord. No.
15-293 §1, 12-15-2015]
This Chapter shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of St.
Charles, Missouri, identified as numbered and unnumbered A Zones and AE
Zones, on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) for St. Charles County,
Missouri, on map panels 29183C0260G, 29183C0262G, 29183C0264G,
29183C0266G, 29183C0267G, 29183C0268G, 29183C0269G,
29183C0280G, 29183C0286G, 29183C0287G, 29183C0288G,
29183C0456G, and 29183C0457G, dated January 20, 2016, as amended,
and any future revisions thereto. In all areas covered by this Chapter, no
development shall be permitted except through the issuance of a floodplain
development permit, granted by the City Council or its duly designated
representative under such safeguards and restrictions as the City Council
or the designated representative may reasonably impose for the promotion
and maintenance of the general welfare, health of the inhabitants of the
Any project for improvement of a building required to comply with
existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the Code Enforcement Official and which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions;
1.
Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure; or
2.
Any building that has been damaged from any source or is categorized
as repetitive loss.
3.
Section
410.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
410.030
100:1155
City, and as specifically noted in Section 410.110. Provisions for Flood
Hazard Reduction.
Section 410.040. Floodplain Administrator Designated; Duties and
Responsibilities. [Ord. No. 15-293 §1, 12-15-2015]
A. Designation. The Director of Community Development is designated as
the Floodplain Administrator and is appointed to administer and
implement the provisions of this Chapter.
B. Duties And Responsibilities. Duties of the Floodplain Administrator
shall include but not be limited to:
1. Review of all applications for floodplain development permits to
assure that sites are reasonably safe from flooding and that the
floodplain development permit requirements of this Chapter have
been satisfied;
2. Review of all applications for floodplain development permits for
proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have
been obtained from Federal, State, or local governmental agencies
from which prior approval is required by Federal, State, or local
law;
3. Review all subdivision proposals and other proposed new
development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions,
to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from
flooding;
4. Issue floodplain development permits for all approved applications;
5. Notify adjacent communities and the Missouri State Emergency
Management Agency (Mo SEMA) prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA);
6. Assure that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished and shall
be maintained within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse;
7. Verify and maintain a record of the actual elevation (in relation to
mean sea level) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new
or substantially improved structures;
8. Verify and maintain a record of the actual elevation (in relation to
mean sea level) that the new or substantially improved nonresidential
structures have been flood-proofed; and
9. When flood-proofing techniques are utilized for a particular nonresidential
structure, the Floodplain Administrator shall require
certification from a registered professional engineer or architect.
Section
410.030
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
410.050
100:1156
Section 410.050. Compliance. [Ord. No. 15-293 §1, 12-15-2015]
No development located within the special flood hazard areas of the City of
St. Charles, Missouri shall be located, extended, converted, or structurally
altered without full compliance with the terms of this Chapter.
Section 410.060. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. [Ord. No.
15-293 §1, 12-15-2015]
It is not intended by this Chapter to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this Chapter
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this Chapter shall prevail.
Section 410.070. Interpretation. [Ord. No. 15-293 §1, 12-15-2015]
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements, shall be liberally construed in favor
of the governing body, and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any
other powers granted by State Statutes.
Section 410.080. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability; Severability.
[Ord. No. 15-293 §1, 12-15-2015]
Section 410.090. Floodplain Development Permit Required. [Ord.
No. 15-293 §1, 12-15-2015]
A floodplain development permit shall be required for all proposed
construction or other development, including the placement of
manufactured homes, in the areas described in Section 410.030. No person,
corporation, or other entity recognized by law or unit of government shall
initiate any development or substantial improvement or cause the same to
be done without first obtaining a separate floodplain development permit
for each structure or other development.
A. Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability. The degree of flood protection
required by this Chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods of study.
Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood heights may be
increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge
openings restricted by debris. This Chapter does not imply that areas
outside the floodway and flood fringe or land uses permitted within
such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This Chapter
shall not create a liability on the part of the City of St. Charles, any
elected official, officer or employee thereof, for any flood damages that
may result from reliance on this Chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
B. Severability. If any Section, clause, provision, or portion of this Chapter
is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of appropriate
jurisdiction, the remainder of this Chapter shall not be affected thereby.
Section
410.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
410.100
100:1157
Section 410.100. Application for Floodplain Development Permit.
[Ord. No. 15-293 §1, 12-15-2015]
Section 410.110. Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction. [Ord. No.
15-293 §1, 12-15-2015]
A. To obtain a floodplain development permit, the applicant shall first file
an application, in writing, on a form furnished for that purpose. Every
floodplain development permit application shall:
1. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot,
block and tract, house and street address, or similar description
that will readily identify and specifically locate the proposed
structure or work;
2. Identify and describe the work to be covered by the floodplain
development permit;
3. Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended;
4. Indicate the assessed value of the structure and the fair market
value of the improvement;
5. Specify whether development is located in designated flood fringe
or floodway;
6. Identify the existing base flood elevation and the elevation of the
proposed development;
7. Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the
Director of Community Development;
8. Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed
construction; and
9. Be signed by the permittee or his authorized agent who may be
required to submit evidence to indicate such authority.
A. General Standards.
1. No permit for floodplain development shall be granted for new
construction, substantial-improvements, and other improvements,
including the placement of manufactured homes, within any
numbered or unnumbered A Zones and AE Zones, unless the
conditions of this Section are satisfied.
2. All areas identified as unnumbered A Zones on the FIRM are
subject to inundation of the one-hundred-year flood; however, the
base flood elevation is not provided. Development within
unnumbered A Zones is subject to all provisions of this Chapter. If
flood insurance study data is not available, the community shall
obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation or
Section
410.100
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
410.110
100:1158
floodway data currently available from Federal, State, or other
sources.
3. Until a floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development, including fill, shall be
permitted within any numbered A Zone or AE Zone on the FIRM,
unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point in the
City.
4. All new construction, subdivision proposals, substantialimprovements,
prefabricated structures, placement of
manufactured homes, and other developments shall require:
a. Design or adequate anchorage to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy;
b. Construction with materials resistant to flood damage;
c. Utilization of methods and practices that minimize flood
damage;
d. All electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding;
e. New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary
sewage systems be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges
from the systems into flood waters, and on-site waste disposal
systems be located so as to avoid impairment or
contamination; and
f. Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, located
within special flood hazard areas are required to assure that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
(2) All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems are located and constructed
to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to
flood hazards; and
Section
410.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
410.110
100:1159
(4) All proposals for development, including proposals for
manufactured home parks and subdivisions, of five (5)
acres or fifty (50) lots, whichever is lesser, include within
such proposals base flood elevation data.
5. Storage, material, and equipment.
a. The storage or processing of materials within the special flood
hazard area that are in time of flooding buoyant, flammable,
explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life
is prohibited.
b. Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not
subject to major damage by floods, if firmly anchored to
prevent flotation, or if readily removable from the area within
the time available after a flood warning.
6. Non-conforming use. A structure, or the use of a structure or
premises that was lawful before the passage or amendment of the
ordinance, but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this
Chapter, may be continued subject to the following conditions:
a. If such structure, use, or utility service is discontinued for
twelve (12) consecutive months, any future use of the building
shall conform to this Chapter.
b. If any non-conforming use or structure is destroyed by any
means, including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost
is more than fifty percent (50%) of the pre-damaged market
value of the structure. This limitation does not include the cost
of any alteration to comply with existing State or local health,
sanitary, building, safety codes, regulations or the cost of any
alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places, the State Inventory of Historic Places, or local
inventory of historic places upon determination.
7. Accessory structures. Structures used solely for parking and
limited storage purposes, not attached to any other structure on
the site, of limited investment value, and not larger than four
hundred (400) square feet, may be constructed at-grade and wetfloodproofed
provided there is no human habitation or occupancy
of the structure; the structure is of single-wall design; a variance
has been granted from the standard floodplain management
requirements of this Chapter; and a floodplain development permit
has been issued.
8. Hazardous materials. All hazardous material storage and handling
sites shall be located out of the floodplain.
9. Cumulative improvement. A structure may be improved (remodeled
or enlarged) without conforming to current requirements for
elevation so long as the cumulative value of all work done within
Section
410.110
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
410.110
100:1160
the last five calendar years does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of
the structure's current market value. If the cumulative value of the
improvement exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the structure's current
market value, the structure must be brought into compliance with
Subsection (B)(1) of this Section which requires elevation of
residential structures to or above the base flood elevation or the
elevation/floodproofing of non-residential structures to or above
the base flood elevation.
10. Critical facilities.
a. All new or substantially improved critical non-residential
facilities, including, but not limited to, governmental buildings,
police stations, fire stations, hospitals, orphanages, penal
institutions, communication centers, water and sewer pumping
stations, water and sewer treatment facilities, transportation
maintenance facilities, places of public assembly, emergency
aviation facilities, and schools shall be elevated above the fivehundred-
year flood level or together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, be floodproofed so that below the fivehundred-
year flood level the structure is water tight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of
buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall
certify that the standards of this Subsection are satisfied. Such
certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator
as set forth in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)
regulations.
b. All critical facilities shall have access routes that are above the
elevation of the five-hundred-year flood.
B. Specific Standards.
1. In all areas identified as numbered and unnumbered A Zones and
AE Zones, where base flood elevation data have been provided, as
set forth in Subsection (A)(2) of this Section, the following
provisions are required:
a. Residential construction. New construction or substantialimprovement
of any residential structures, including
manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood
elevation.
b. Non-residential construction. New construction or substantialimprovement
of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential
structures, including manufactured homes, shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one (1)
foot above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, be floodproofed so that below the
Section
410.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
410.110
100:1161
base flood elevation the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify
that the standards of this Subsection are satisfied. Such
certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator
as set forth in Section 410.040(B)(9).
c. Require, for all new construction and substantialimprovements
that fully enclosed areas below lowest floor used
solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an
area other than a basement and that are subject to flooding
shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either
be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of
not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided; and
(2) The bottom of all opening shall be no higher than one (1)
foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that
they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
C. Manufactured Homes.
1. All manufactured homes to be placed within all unnumbered and
numbered A Zones and AE Zones, on the community's FIRM shall
be required to be installed using methods and practices that
minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement,
manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors.
2. Require manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within unnumbered or numbered A Zones and AE Zones,
on the community's FIRM on sites:
a. Outside of manufactured home park or subdivision;
b. In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
c. In an expansion to and existing manufactured home park or
subdivision; or
d. In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on
which a manufactured home has incurred substantial-damage
Section
410.110
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
410.110
100:1162
as the result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation
such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation and
be securely attached to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
3. Require that manufactured homes to be placed or substantially
improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision within all unnumbered and numbered A Zones and AE
Zones, on the community's FIRM, that are not subject to the
provisions of this Subsection (C), be elevated so that either:
a. The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at one (1) foot
above the base flood level; or
b. The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent
strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height
above grade and be securely attached to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement.
D. Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
Section 410.030 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway
is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters that
carry debris and potential projectiles, the following provisions shall
apply:
1. The community shall select and adopt a regulatory floodway based
on the principle that the area chosen for the regulatory floodway
must be designed to carry the waters of the base flood without
increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one
(1) foot at any point.
2. The community shall prohibit any encroachments, including fill,
new construction, substantial-improvements, and other
development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has
been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that
the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in
flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
3. If Subsection (D)(2) of this Section is satisfied, all new construction
and substantial-improvements shall comply with all applicable
flood hazard reduction provisions of section.
4. In unnumbered A Zones, the community shall obtain, review, and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation or floodway data
currently available from Federal, State, or other sources as set
forth in Subsection (A)(2) of this Section.
Section
410.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
410.110
100:1163
Section 410.120. Floodplain Variance Management Procedures.
[Ord. No. 15-293 §1, 12-15-2015]
E. Recreational Vehicles.
1. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within all
unnumbered and numbered A Zones and AE Zones on the
community's FIRM either:
a. Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days;
b. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use which means it is
on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by
quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions; or
c. Meet the permitting, elevation, and the anchoring
requirements for manufactured homes of this Chapter.
A. Establishment Of Appeal Board. The Board of Adjustment shall hear
and decide appeals and requests for variances from the floodplain
management requirements of this Chapter.
B. Responsibility Of Appeal Board. Where an application for a floodplain
development permit or request for a variance from this Chapter is
denied by the Director of Community Development, the applicant may
apply for such floodplain development permit or variance directly to the
Board of Adjustment. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide
appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement,
decision, or determination made by the Director of Community
Development in the enforcement or administration of this Chapter.
C. Further Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of
Adjustment or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the St. Charles
County Circuit Court as provided in Section 89.110 of the Revised
Statutes of Missouri, as amended.
D. Floodplain Management Variance Criteria. In passing upon such
applications for variances, the Board of Adjustment shall consider all
technical data and evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified
in other Sections of this Chapter, and the following criteria:
1. The danger to life and property due to flood damage;
2. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
3. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
4. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
Section
410.110
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
410.120
100:1164
5. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
6. The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flood
damage, for the proposed use;
7. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
8. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area;
9. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
10. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the flood waters, if applicable, expected at the site; and
11. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, water systems, streets and
bridges.
E. Conditions For Approving Floodplain Management Variances.
1. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial-improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2)
acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the base flood level,
providing Subsection (E)(2) through (E)(6) below have been fully
considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre,
the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
2. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic
Places, the State Inventory of Historic Places, or local inventory of
historic places upon determination provided the proposed activity
will not preclude the structures continued historic designation.
3. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
4. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
5. Variances shall only be issued upon:
a. A showing of good and sufficient cause;
b. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
Section
410.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
410.120
100:1165
c. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local
laws or ordinances.
6. The City shall notify the applicant, in writing, over the signature of
the Floodplain Administrator that:
a. The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below base
flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage; and
b. Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with
the record of all variance actions as required by this Chapter.
F. Conditions For Approving Variances For Accessory Structures. Any
variance granted for an accessory structure shall be decided
individually based on a case by case analysis of the building's unique
circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions
as well as those criteria and conditions set forth in Subsections (D) and
(E) of this Section. In order to minimize flood damages during the onehundred-
year flood and the threat to public health and safety, the
following conditions shall be included for any variance issued for
accessory structures that are constructed at-grade and wetfloodproofed:
1. Use of the accessory structures must be solely for parking and
limited storage purposes in Zone A only as identified on the
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
2. For any new or substantially damaged accessory structures, the
exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e.,
foundation, wall framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring,
etc.) below the base flood elevation, must be built with floodresistant
materials in accordance with Section 410.110(A)(4)(b).
3. The accessory structures must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure in
accordance with Section 410.110(A)(4)(a). All of the building's
structural components must be capable of resisting specific floodrelated
forces including hydrostatic, buoyancy, and hydrodynamic
and debris impact forces.
4. Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be
located above the base flood elevation or floodproofed so that they
are contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is
capable of resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance
with Section 410.110(A)(4)(d).
Section
410.120
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
410.120
100:1166
Section 410.130. Amendments. [Ord. No. 15-293 §1, 12-15-2015]
The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this Chapter may
from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or appealed to
reflect any and all changes in the National Flood Disaster Protection Act
of 1973, provided, however, that no such action may be taken until after a
public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties of interest and citizens
shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of
such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in
the City of St. Charles and at least twenty (20) days shall elapse between
the date of publication and the date of the public hearing. A copy of any
such amendment shall be provided by the City to the Region VII office of
the Federal Emergency Management Agency. This Chapter is in compliance
with the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
5. The accessory structures must meet all National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP) opening requirements. The NFIP requires that
enclosure or foundation walls, subject to the one-hundred-year
flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters in accordance with Section 410.110(B)(1)(c).
6. The accessory structures must comply with the floodplain
management floodway encroachment provisions of Section
410.110(D)(2). No variances may be issued for accessory
structures within any designated floodway, if any increase in flood
levels would result during a one-hundred-year flood.
7. Equipment, machinery, or other contents must be protected from
any flood damage.
8. No disaster relief assistance under any program administered by
any Federal agency shall be paid for any repair or restoration costs
of the accessory structures.
9. The City shall notify the applicant, in writing, over the signature of
the Floodplain Administrator that:
a. The issuance of a variance to a construct a structure below
base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage; and
b. Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with
the record of all variance actions as required by this Chapter.
10. Wet-floodproofing construction techniques must be reviewed and
approved by the City and a registered professional engineer or
architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain development
permit for construction.
Section
410.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
410.140
100:1167
Section 410.140. Penalties For Violation. [Ord. No. 15-293 §1,
12-15-2015]
Chapter 415
MOBILE HOME PARKS
Cross Reference—As to flood regulations—manufactured homes,
§410.130(4).
Section 415.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §153.01; CC 1981 §17-1;
Ord. No. 3409, 8-10-1966]
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CONDUCTING, MAINTAINING OR OPERATING A MOBILE HOME PARK —
Permitting, suffering or allowing a mobile home or homes to be parked,
kept, stored, camped, maintained or to remain upon any lot, parcel or tract
of real property within the City for any fee, charge, rent, price or other
valuable consideration which in any way directly or indirectly emanates
from or is paid by the owner or occupant of such mobile home to the owner,
occupant or manager of such real estate.
MOBILE HOME — Any vehicle, contraption or structure set or equipped to
be set upon wheels and designed to be moved or propelled by being towed,
pulled or carried along behind a vehicle and so constructed, equipped or
furnished that the interior of the same may be used as a place for the
dwelling, living, sleeping or housing of a human being.
MOBILE HOME SPACE — A plot of ground within a mobile home park
designed for the accommodation of one (1) mobile home, containing a
concrete pad with a minimum of four hundred (400) square feet in area; and
each mobile home space shall have water, sewer and electric connections;
such mobile home space shall consist of a minimum of three thousand
(3,000) square feet which shall be at least thirty-five (35) feet wide and
clearly defined.
A. Any person who violates this Chapter or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to punishment
as provided in Section 100.150 of this Code of Ordinances.
B. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
C. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation of this
Chapter.
Section
410.140
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
415.020
100:1168
Section 415.020. License Required.442 [R.O. 2009 §153.02; CC 1981
§17-2; Ord. No. 3409, 8-10-1966]
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, renting, leasing, operating,
managing or occupying any lot, parcel or tract of real property within the
City to conduct, maintain or operate a mobile home park, containing one
(1) or more mobile home spaces thereupon, without first obtaining a license
therefor from the City Collector.
Section 415.030. License Fee.443 [R.O. 2009 §153.03; CC 1981 §17-3;
Ord. No. 3409, 8-10-1966; Ord. No. 3453, 12-24-1966]
Section 415.040. Plot and Certificate Required.444 [R.O. 2009
§153.04; CC 1981 §17-4; Ord. No. 3409, 8-10-1966]
A. The annual license fee for each mobile home park shall be forty dollars
($40.00) for each block of five (5) mobile home spaces or fraction
thereof contained in any mobile home park and an additional seven
dollars ($7.00) for each mobile home space in excess of five (5).
B. The annual license fees payable under the provisions of this Chapter
shall be due and payable in advance on the first (1st) day of each year;
provided that the fees for license issued after the first (1st) day of any
year shall be, for the part of the year then remaining, one-twelfth (1/12)
of the annual fee for each month or part thereof from the date of
issuance to January first (1st) thereafter.
A. No license shall be issued to any person to conduct, maintain or operate
a mobile home park unless he/she shall have first produced to the City
Council:
1. A plot of the tract of land on which the established or proposed
mobile home park is to be located showing plot of the entire tract
and designating the location and size of the required mobile home
space; a twenty-four (24) foot wide paved roadway with a minimum
of sixteen (16) feet wide opening at all times. Through or collector
streets are to be a minimum of thirty-four (34) feet in width.
2. A certificate in writing stating:
a. The maximum number of mobile homes the mobile home park
will accommodate.
b. The lot, parcel or tract of real property whereon the mobile
home park is or is to be set up now conforms to the regulations
prescribed by this Chapter.
c. The location of the established or proposed mobile home park.
442. Cross References—As to penalty, §100.150; as to business licensing and taxation, ch. 605.
443. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
444. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
415.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
415.040
100:1169
Section 415.050. Fee Deposited With Certificate.445 [R.O. 2009
§153.05; CC 1981 §17-5; Ord. No. 3409, 8-10-1966]
At the time of filing a certificate for a license under the provisions of Section
415.040, the applicant shall place in the hands of the City Clerk the amount
of the license fee for the license applied for, either in cash, or bank draft,
money order, certified check or cashier's check, made payable to the City or
the City Collector. No license shall be granted by the Council unless such
deposit of the license fee has been made. If the license is not granted, the
amount of the license fee shall be refunded to the applicant. If the license
is granted, such amount deposited with the application shall be turned over
to the City Collector whose receipt therefor shall be given to the applicant,
together with the license issued.
Section 415.060. Revocation of License. [R.O. 2009 §153.06; CC
1981 §17-6; Ord. No. 3409, 8-10-1966]
The City Council may revoke any license issued under the provisions of this
Chapter upon proof of the violation of or the failure to comply with any of
the provisions of this Chapter, the laws of the State, this Code of Ordinances
or any other ordinance of the City regulating, controlling or relating to
health, sanitation, fire protection, the public peace or the public morality.
Section 415.070. Manner of Locating Mobile Homes.446 [R.O. 2009
§153.07; CC 1981 §17-7; Ord. No. 3409, 8-10-1966; Ord. No. 3513,
9-6-1967]
Mobile homes shall be so located on each space that there shall be at least
twenty-five (25) feet clearance between mobile homes; provided however,
that with respect to mobile homes parked end to end, clearance may be
less than twenty-five (25) feet but shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. No
mobile home shall be located closer than fifteen (15) feet to any building
within the park or from any property line bounding the park. Neither the
front end nor primary entrance side of any trailer or mobile home which is
located on the periphery of the park shall face the exterior of the park.
d. It is agreed that provisions of this Chapter, the laws of the
State, this Code of Ordinances and any other ordinance of the
City shall be fully complied with in the conducting, maintaining
and operating of such mobile home park.
B. In all cases no such license shall be issued unless and until the City
Council shall have made an order directing the City Collector to issue
such license.
445. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
446. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
415.040
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
415.080
100:1170
Section 415.080. Park Register. [R.O. 2009 §153.08; CC 1981 §17-8;
Ord. No. 3409, 8-10-1966]
For the purpose of the proper and efficient administration of this Chapter,
the person conducting, maintaining or operating a mobile home park within
the City shall at all times keep a register, wherein the name of the owner
or occupant of any mobile home shall be recorded together with his/her
permanent address. Such register shall at all times be available for
inspection by the Mayor, Chief of Police or Building Inspector.
Section 415.090. Inspections — Enforcement. [R.O. 2009 §153.09;
CC 1981 §17-9; Ord. No. 3409, 8-10-1966]
Any person conducting, maintaining or operating a mobile home park within
the City shall at all times grant the Mayor, Chief of Police, Building
Inspector and Chief of Fire Department the right to inspect the premises
upon which such mobile home park is located. It shall be the duty of the
various named officials, upon their findings and discovery of a violation of
or failure to comply with the terms of this Chapter, to report such fact to the
City Council in writing immediately and, further, to cause the violator to be
arrested and prosecuted in the Municipal Court of the City.
Section 415.100. Kept in Park — Exceptions.447 [R.O. 2009 §153.10;
CC 1981 §17-10; Ord. No. 3409, 8-10-1966; Ord. No. 73-30,
5-23-1973]
Section 415.110. Effective Date. [R.O. 2009 §153.11; CC 1981
§17-11; Ord. No. 3409, 8-10-1966]
This Chapter shall take effect and be in full force and effect from and after
its passage and approval; provided however, that these amendments shall
not interfere with any vested property rights or contractual rights.
A. It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain any mobile home any place in
the City for living or sleeping purposes unless it shall be located within
a mobile home park, except as provided in Subsection (B) of this
Section.
B. The Building Commissioner may permit a mobile home to be used for
living and sleeping purposes so as to provide quarters for a watchman
or guard during construction of a non-residential structure costing in
excess of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00); provided that
such permit shall not exceed a period of two (2) years and that the
mobile home shall be removed before a certificate of occupancy is
issued on the structure.
447. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
415.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
415.110
100:1171
Chapter 500
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Cross References—As to fire prevention code, §§205.060 et seq.; as to
occupational license fees, §605.160; as to streets and sidewalks, ch. 505.
Section
415.110
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
415.110
100:1172
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 500.010. Department of Community Development
Responsible For Permits and Inspections. [R.O. 2009 §150.001; CC
1981 §5-6; Ord. No. 88-47, 4-7-1988; Ord. No. 10-152 §1, 7-21-2010]
Section 500.020. Stop Work Orders. [R.O. 2009 §150.002; Ord. No.
04-192, 8-13-2004; Ord. No. 06-91, 4-26-2006; Ord. No. 07-162,
6-11-2007; Ord. No. 08-127, 6-18-2008]
The Directors of Public Works or Community Development shall have the
power to order all work to be stopped on any building(s) or structure(s)
where such work is being done in violation of any provision of the City
Code or where work is being done in the development as a whole that
is in violation of any provision of the City Code. Such order shall stop
work on all projects the subject contractor or subcontractor is currently
engaged in at the discretion of the Mayor. Such stop orders may be given
orally and may be enforced when so given, provided however, that any oral
stop work order shall be followed by a written order within two (2) hours.
Copies of the written stop work order shall be provided to all members
of the City Council within eight (8) hours of the order being issued. All
work that is stopped shall not be resumed except upon permission of the
Mayor. All members of the City Council shall be informed, within eight
(8) hours, once the Mayor has granted permission to resume all stopped
work. Written stop orders may be served by any Police Officer, Director
of Public Works, Assistant Director of Public Works, City Engineer, Senior
Project Managers, Project Managers, Assistant Project Managers, Street
Superintendent, Assistant Street Superintendent, Street Supervisors, Water
Systems Manager, Water Distribution Supervisor, Facilities Maintenance
Supervisor or any Community Development Department employee and may
be served by personal service or by posting on the premises affected.
A. The Department of Community Development shall be responsible for
issuing building, electrical, mechanical and plumbing permits in
accordance with the provisions of this Code and any other City
ordinance and shall be responsible for the building, electrical,
mechanical and plumbing inspections as provided for by the provisions
of this Code and any other City ordinance.
B. The Director of Community Development shall be the official in charge
of the codes adopted pursuant to this Chapter. The Director of
Community Development in accordance with the prescribed procedures
of the City of St. Charles shall have the authority to appoint the Building
Official, related technical officers, inspectors, plans examiners and
other employees as necessary to enforce the codes.
Section
500.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.030
100:1173
Section 500.030. Waiver of Building Permit Fees. [R.O. 2009
§150.003; CC 1981 §5-7; Ord. No. 90-24, 2-7-1990]
Building permit fees shall not be assessed for construction projects of the
City of St. Charles.
Section 500.033. Authority. [Ord. No. 10-152 §2, 7-21-2010]
All references to the Board of Appeals in the codes or reference material
adopted pursuant to this Chapter shall use the procedures set forth in
Chapter 125 of the Code of Ordinances.
Section 500.035. Building Permit Expiration. [Ord. No. 10-152 §3,
7-21-2010]
A. Building permits are valid for a twelve (12) month period from the date
of issuance and may be extended for an additional six (6) month period
with the approval of the Director of Community Development, at no
additional cost, if in the opinion of the Director of Community
Development work is proceeding and the applicant needs additional
time to complete the project or the applicant was unduly delayed
through no fault of the applicant. The Mayor may extend a building
permit for additional six (6) month periods upon the recommendation of
the Director of Community Development.
B. Once construction starts, if no building inspections have occurred
within a six (6) month period, the permit shall be deemed to have
expired. The site of an expired building permit shall be posted with a
stop work order and all construction shall cease until such time as a
new building permit is issued, including payment of the full cost of the
building permit.
C. Any uncompleted construction project for which a building permit has
been expired for a period of six (6) months may be ordered to be
removed or enclosed.
Section
500.030
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.035
100:1174
ARTICLE II
Building Code
Section 500.040. International Building Code Adopted By
Reference. [R.O. 2009 §150.015; Ord. No. 88-47, 4-7-1988; Ord. No.
95-149, 6-7-1995; Ord. No. 97-146, 5-8-1997; Ord. No. 02-21,
2-6-2002; Ord. No. 05-151, 5-27-2005; Ord. No. 10-152 §5,
7-21-2010; Ord. No. 15-102 §1, 5-19-2015]
Section 500.050. Amendments — Exemptions.448 [R.O. 2009
§150.016; CC 1981 §5-3; Ord. No. 88-47, 4-7-1988; Ord. No. 89-76,
5-4-1989; Ord. No. 91-22, 2-7-1991; Ord. No. 93-40, 3-3-1993; Ord.
No. 94-8, 1-5-1994; Ord. No. 95-149, 6-7-1995; Ord. No. 95-242,
9-20-1995; Ord. No. 97-146, 5-8-1997; Ord. No. 98-494, 11-19-1998;
Ord. No. 98-496, 12-1-1998; Ord. No. 99-135, 5-6-1999; Ord. No.
01-239, 10-19-2001; Ord. No. 02-21, 2-6-2002; Ord. No. 05-151,
5-27-2005; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007; Ord. No. 10-152 §5,
7-21-2010; Ord. No. 15-102 §1, 5-19-2015]
A. The 2015 Edition of the International Building Code, including
Appendices C, E, F, G, H, I and J, except as otherwise provided in this
Chapter, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is
adopted by reference as the Building Code of the City and made a part
of this Section as if fully set forth herein.
B. Wherever the phrase "Name of Jurisdiction" appears in the 2015
Edition of the International Building Code, it shall be deemed to mean
the City.
C. Nothing in Sections 500.040 and 500.050 in the Building Code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in
any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or
causes of action acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby
amended by Sections 500.040 and 500.050. No just or legal right or
remedy of any character shall be lost, impaired or affected by Sections
500.040 and 500.050.
D. One (1) copy of Sections 500.040 and 500.050, the 2015 Edition of the
International Building Code, and the proposed amendments have been
on file in the City Clerk's office at least ninety (90) days prior to the
adoption of Sections 500.040 and 500.050.
A. The code adopted by Section 500.040 of this Chapter is hereby
amended as follows:
1. Section 102.4, Referenced codes and standards, is deleted and the
following is inserted in lieu thereof, to read as follows:
448. Cross Reference—As to certificates of occupancy to which above fees apply, see §400.1350.
Section
500.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.050
100:1175
102.4 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and
standards referenced in this code shall be considered part of the
requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such
reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code
and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this code
shall apply. If a referenced standard is in conflict with a code
independently and specifically adopted by the City, the standard
in the code specifically adopted by the City shall prevail over the
referenced standard.
2. Section 103 is deleted.
3. Section 105.2, Work exempt from permit, shall have the following
sections amended.
1. One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and
storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided that the
floor area does not exceed one hundred forty-four (144)
square feet.
2. Fences not over six feet (1,820 mm) high.
4. Section 105.5 is deleted.
5. Section 114.4, Violation penalties, is deleted.
6. Section 310.1, Residential Group R, shall be amended to include
the following use under the R-3 Residential Occupancies heading:
bed-and-breakfast.
7. Section 310.2, Definitions, shall be amended to include the
following definition:
BED-AND-BREAKFAST. A building or structure arranged for
lodging of not more than six (6) lodgers or boarders (primarily
transient in nature) for compensation, with or without meals, and
occupied as a single-family dwelling unit.
8. Section 1109.5.1., Minimum number, shall be amended to read as
follows:
No fewer than one drinking fountain shall comply with the
requirements for people using a wheelchair.
Exception: Occupancies with an occupant load of less than fifty
(50) people shall be permitted to provide an approved bottledwater
dispenser in lieu of the required drinking fountain.
9. Section 2902.2, Separate facilities, shall have the following
exception amended to read as follows:
2. Separate facilities shall not be required in structures or tenant
spaces with a total occupant load, including both employees and
customers, of thirty (30) or less.
Section
500.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.050
100:1176
Section 500.060. Conflict With Other Regulations. [R.O. 2009
§150.017; CC 1981 §5-4; Ord. No. 88-47, 4-7-1988]
Where the Building Code adopted by this Article imposes a greater
restriction or requirement than is imposed or required by other ordinances,
the provisions of the Building Code shall control. Any provision of this Code
of Ordinances or any other ordinance of the City that imposes a greater
restriction or requirement than the Building Code shall control.
Section 500.065. Violation and Penalty.
Any person who shall violate any provision of the code adopted in this
Article or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation
of an approved plan of or directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provision of this code, shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding three (3) months, or
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after
due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
10. Section 2902.4, Required public toilet facilities, shall be amended
to read as follows:
Customers, patrons and visitors shall be provided with public toilet
facilities in structures and tenant spaces intended for public
utilization. Employees shall be provided with toilet facilities in all
occupancies. Employee toilet facilities shall be either separate or
combined employee and public toilet facilities.
Section
500.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.065
100:1177

ARTICLE III
Residential Code For One and Two-Family Dwellings
Section 500.070. International Residential Code For One and Two-
Family Dwellings Adopted By Reference. [R.O. 2009 §150.020; Ord.
No. 97-152, 5-8-1997; Ord. No. 02-46, 3-5-2002; Ord. No. 05-152,
5-27-2005; Ord. No. 10-152 §6, 7-21-2010; Ord. No. 15-102 §2,
5-19-2015]
Section 500.080. Amendments.449 [R.O. 2009 §150.021; Ord. No.
97-152, 5-8-1997; Ord. No. 98-494, 11-19-1998; Ord. No. 02-46,
3-5-2002; Ord. No. 05-152, 5-27-2005; Ord. No. 10-152 §6,
7-21-2010; Ord. No. 15-102 §2, 5-19-2015]
A. The 2015 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family
Dwellings, including Appendices A, B, C, D, G, H, J, K, N, and P, except
as otherwise provided in this Chapter, as published by the International
Code Council, Inc., is adopted by reference as the One- and Two-Family
Dwelling Code of the City and made a part of this Section as if fully set
forth herein.
B. Wherever the phrase "Name of Jurisdiction" appears in the 2015
Edition of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family
Dwellings, it shall be deemed to mean the City.
C. Nothing in Sections 500.070 and 500.080 or in the One- and Two-Family
Dwelling Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or
proceeding pending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability
incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing under
any act or ordinance hereby amended by Section 500.070 and 500.080.
No just or legal right or remedy of any character shall be lost, impaired
or affected by Sections 500.070 and 500.080.
D. One (1) copy of Sections 500.070 and 500.080, the 2015 Edition of the
International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings and
the proposed amendments have been on file in the City Clerk's office at
least ninety (90) days prior to the adoption of Sections 500.070 and
500.080.
A. The code adopted by Section 500.070 of this Chapter is hereby
amended as follows:
1. Section R102.4, Referenced codes and standards, is amended to
read as follows:
R102.4 Referenced codes and standards. If a referenced
standard is in conflict with a code independently and specifically
adopted by the City, the standard in the code specifically adopted
by the City shall prevail over the referenced standard.
449. Note: The insulation shall be along the perimeter of the foundation wall downward from
the slab a minimum distance of 24" or horizontally under the slab for a minimum of 24".
Section
500.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.080
100:1179
2. Section R103, Department of Building Safety, is deleted.
3. In Section R105.2, Work exempt from permit, the following
sections are amended to read as follows:
R105.2 Work exempt from permit.
Building:
1. One-story detached accessory structures, provided that the
floor area does not exceed one hundred forty-four (144)
square feet, or decks/porches, provided that the floor area
does not exceed twenty-five (25) square feet.
3. Retaining walls that are not over four (4) feet (1,219 mm) in
height measured from finished grade to the top of the wall,
unless supporting a surcharge.
5. Sidewalks and driveways not more than thirty (30) inches
(762 mm) above adjacent grade and not over any basement or
story below.
8. Swings and other playground equipment accessory to a oneor
two-family dwelling.
4. Section R106.3.1, Approval of construction documents, is amended
to read as follows:
R106.3.1 Approval of construction documents. Where the
building official issues a permit, the construction documents shall
be approved in writing or by a stamp that states "REVIEWED
FOR CODE COMPLIANCE." One set of construction documents so
reviewed shall be retained by the building official. The other set
may be kept at the site of work or made available at the time of
inspection and shall be open to inspection by the building official
or a duly authorized representative.
5. Section R112, Board of Appeals, is deleted.
6. Section R113.4, Violation penalties, is deleted.
7. In Section R202, Definitions, the definitions of "Rough-In" and
"Story Above Grade Plane" are amended to read as follows:
ROUGH-IN. The installation of all parts of the plumbing system
that must be completed prior to the installation of fixtures. This
includes DWV, water supply and built-in fixture supports. In
unfinished areas, rough-ins will require waste lines only.
STORY ABOVE GRADE PLANE. Any story having its finished
floor surface entirely above grade plane, or in which the finished
surface of the floor next above is either of the following:
Section
500.080
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.080
100:1180
1. More than six (6) feet (1,829 mm) above grade plane.
2. More than twelve (12) feet (3,658 mm) above the finished
ground level at any point.
Exception: When a crawl space or supporting wall is below a
walkout basement, that supporting wall is to be engineered but
will not be considered a story.
8. Table R301.2(1), Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria.
a. The following values shall be entered into the table, and
Footnotes b and h to the table are amended as follows:
Ultimate Wind Speed: 115 (51)
Ground Snow Load: 20 psf
Wind Design Speed: 90 mph
Wind Topographical Effect: No
Seismic Design Category: C (unless indicated otherwise in a
soils evaluation report from an approved geotechnical agency)
Weathering: Severe
Frost Line Depth: 30 inches
Termite: Heavy to Severe
Winter Design Temp: 6
Ice Barrier Underlayment Required: No
Flood Hazards: (a) 4-9-1977, (b) 8-2-1996
Air Freezing Index: 1000
Special Wind Region: No
Windborne Debris Zone: No
Mean Annual Temp: 55.2
b. Footnotes b and h are amended to read as follows:
b. The frost line depth may require deeper footings than
indicated in Figure R403.1(1). The jurisdiction shall fill in
the frost line depth column with 30 inches, the minimum
depth of footing below finish grade.
h. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with
"No."
9. In Section R302.1, Exterior walls, the following exceptions are
added to the list of exceptions to read as follows:
Section
500.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.080
100:1181
6. Cantilevered manufactured fireplaces.
7. Roof eave overhangs.
8. Uncovered decks.
10. Section R302.2, Townhouses, is amended to read as follows:
R302.2 Townhouses. Common walls separating townhouses shall
be assigned a fire-resistance rating in accordance with Section
R302.2, Item 1 or 2. The common wall shared by two townhouses
shall be constructed without plumbing or mechanical equipment,
ducts or vents in the envity of the common wall. The wall shall be
rated for fire exposure from both sides and shall extend to and be
tight against exterior walls and the underside of the roof sheathing.
Electrical installations shall be in accordance with Chapters 34
through 43. Penetrations of the membrane of common walls for
electrical outlet boxes shall be in accordance with Section R302.4.
1. Where a fire sprinkler system in accordance with Section
P2904 is provided, the common wall shall be not less than
a one-hour fire-resistance-rated wall assembly tested in
accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263.
2. Where a fire sprinkler system in accordance with Section
P2904 is not provided, the common wall shall be not less
than a two-hour fire-resistance-rated wall assembly tested in
accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263.
Each townhouse shall be considered a separate building and shall
be separated by fire-resistance-rated wall assemblies meeting the
requirements of Section R302.1 as amended for exterior walls.
Each townhouse may be separated with two (2) one-hour fireresistant
exterior walls or a common two-hour fire-resistant-rated
wall. The two-hour fire-resistant common wall shall not be used for
any plumbing or mechanical equipment, including duels or vents.
Electrical outlet box penetrations of the common two-hour fireresistant
assembly shall be installed in accordance with Section
R302.4. A parapet is required above the two-hour common wall
or two (2) one-hour fire-resistant exterior walls constructed in
accordance with Section R302.2.3.
11. Section R302.5.2, Duct penetration, is amended to read as follows:
R302.5.2 Duct penetration. Ducts in the garage and ducts
penetrating the walls or ceilings separating the dwelling from the
garage shall be constructed of a minimum No. 28 gauge (0.48 mm)
sheet steel or other approved material and shall not have openings
into the garage.
12. Section R302.11, Fireblocking required, is amended by amending
Section 7 to read as follows:
Section
500.080
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.080
100:1182
7. Open web or perforated truss floor joists must be covered by
one (1) sheet of five-eighths-inch Type X fire-rated gypsum
board (or equivalent), or a NFPA 13D or a NFPA 13R sprinkler
system must be installed in the basement.
13. In Section R303.1, Habitable rooms, the following exception is
added to the list of exceptions to read as follows:
4. Unfinished basements and utility rooms require natural
ventilation (net openable area) at the ratio of one percent (1%)
of the square footage floor area served. Mechanical ventilation
with outdoor air (not recirculated air) in accordance with the
Mechanical Code may be substituted at a rate of .05 cfm/sq. ft.
of area.
14. In Section R303.3, Bathrooms, the exception is amended to read as
follows:
Exception: The glazed areas shall not be required where artificial
light and a local exhaust system are provided. The minimum local
exhaust rates shall be determined in accordance with Section
M1507. Exhaust air from the space shall be exhausted directly to
the outdoors or to an attic gable vent or ventilated soffit.
15. Section R303.4, Mechanical ventilation, is amended to read as
follows:
Where the air infiltration rate of a dwelling unit is three (3) air
changes per hour or less where tested with a blower door at
a pressure of 0.2 inch w.c. (50 Pa) in accordance with Section
N1102.4.1.2, the dwelling unit shall be provided with whole-house
mechanical ventilation in accordance with Section M1507.3.
16. Section R303.5.2, Exhaust openings, is amended to read as follows:
Exhaust air shall not be directed below six (6) feet eight (8) inches
onto public walkways.
17. Section R303.8, Exterior stairway illumination, is amended by
adding an exception to read as follows:
Exception: Illumination is not required on residential decks that
are not part of the required of egress path.
18. Section R306.5, Hose bibb, the following section is added to read
as follows:
R306.5 Hose Bibb. Every dwelling shall provide one (1) outside
frost-proof hose bibb. The hose bibb shall be protected from
backflow per Section P2902.
19. Section R306.6, Floor Drain, the following section is added to read
as follows:
Section
500.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.080
100:1183
R306.6 Floor Drain. All basements shall have a floor drain within
twenty (20) feet of the heating/cooling system(s) and water
heaters. The floor drain shall comply with Chapter 27 of the
International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings.
20. Section R309.5, Fire sprinklers, is amended to read as follows:
R309.5 Fire sprinklers. Private garages shall be protected by
fire sprinklers where the garage wall has been designed based
on Table 302.1(2), Footnote a, and the homeowner has opted to
purchase a fire sprinkler system for his or her residence, as per
Section 67.281, RSMo. Sprinklers in garages shall be connected to
an automatic sprinkler system that complies with Section P2904.
Garage sprinklers shall be residential sprinklers or quick-response
sprinklers, designed to provide a density of 0.05 gpm/ft2. Garage
doors shall not be considered obstructions with respect to sprinkler
placement.
21. Section R310.1, Emergency escape and rescue opening required, is
amended by amending the exceptions to read as follows: [Ord. No.
19-235, 11-19-2019]
Exceptions:
1. Storm shelters and basements used only to house mechanical
equipment not exceeding a total floor area of two hundred
(200) square feet (18.58 m2).
22. Section R311.3, Floors and landings at exterior doors, is amended
to read as follows:
R311.3 Floors and landings at exterior doors. There shall be a
landing or floor at each required egress exterior door. The width of
each landing shall not be less than the door served. Every landing
shall have a dimension of not less than thirty-six (36) inches (914
mm) measured in the direction of travel. The slope at exterior
landings shall not to exceed one-fourth (1/4) unit vertical in twelve
(12) units horizontal two percent (2%).
Exceptions:
1. Exterior balconies less than sixty (60) square feet (5.6 m2) and
only accessible from a door are permitted to have a landing
less than thirty-six (36) inches (914 mm) measured in the
direction of travel.
2. Non-required means of egress doors with no landing for future
deck/balcony shall be protected with a mechanical fastened
thirty-six-inch tall guardrail if/when the door sill height
exceeds twenty-three and one-fourth (23 1/4) inches above
grade.
Section
500.080
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.080
100:1184
23. Section R311.3.2, Floor elevations for other exterior doors, is
amended by amending the exceptions to read as follows.
Exceptions:
1. A top landing is not required where a stairway of three (3)
or fewer risers is located on the exterior side of the door,
provided that the door does not swing over the stairway.
2. Doors with no landing for future deck/balcony shall be
protected by an approved guard if the door threshold is more
than three (3) risers twenty-three and one-fourth (23 1/4)
inches above grade.
3. Exterior balconies less than sixty (60) square feet and only
accessible from a door are permitted to have a landing less
than thirty-six (36) inches measured in the direction of travel.
24. Section R403.1.4.1, Frost protection, is amended by amending the
exceptions to read as follows:
Exceptions:
1. Freestanding accessory structures with an area not exceeding
one hundred forty-four (144) square feet and an eave height of
ten (10) feet or less shall not be required to be protected.
2. Decks not supported by a dwelling, not exceeding one hundred
forty-four (144) square feet, need not be provided with
footings that extend below the frost line. Footings shall not
bear on frozen soil unless such frozen condition is of a
permanent character.
25. Section R403.1.7, Footings on or adjacent to slopes, is amended to
read as follows:
The placement of buildings and structures on or adjacent to slopes
steeper than one (1) unit vertical in three (3) units horizontal [slope
of thirty-three percent (33%)] shall conform to Sections R403.1.7.1
through R403.1.7.4 or plans as signed and sealed by a registered
structural engineer.
26. Section R405.1, Concrete and masonry foundations, is amended by
amending the exceptions to read as follows:
Exceptions:
1. A drainage system is not required where the foundation is
installed on well-drained ground or sand-gravel mixture soils
according to the Unified Soil Classification System, Group I
soils, as detailed in Table R405.1.
2. Drains provided as detailed in Section R405.1.2 are approved
as an alternative method to meet the requirements of this
section.
Section
500.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.080
100:1185
27. Section R405, Foundation drainage, is amended to add five (5) new
subsections to read as follows:
R405.1.2 Soil evaluations. An evaluation of the soil by a
geotechnical engineer for the presence or absence of groundwater
is required. The evaluation report shall be based on either a
subsurface soil investigation or satisfactory data from adjacent
areas together with an inspection of the excavation prior to pouring
concrete.
R405.1.2.1 Groundwater present. Provide drain tile, perforated
pipe or other approved foundation drainage systems (such as water
channel system) around perimeter of the outside of the foundation
and inside the foundation. Drain discharge shall be by gravity to
daylight or be connected to a basement floor sump.
R405.1.2.2 No groundwater present. Provide drain tile,
perforated pipe or other approved foundation drainage systems
(such as water channel system) around perimeter of the outside of
the foundation or inside the foundation. Drain discharge shall be by
gravity to daylight or be connected to a basement floor sump pit/
pump.
R405.1.2.3 Filter membranes. An approved filter membrane
shall be placed over the top of the joints/pipe perforations. The
tile/pipe shall be placed on two (2) inches minimum of gravel or
crushed stone and have six (6) inches of minimum cover.
R405.1.2.4 Drainage system. A drainage system shall discharge
by gravity to daylight or be connected to an approved sump
[eighteen (18) inches in diameter by twenty-four (24) inches deep
with fitted cover]. A sump pump shall be provided if the basement
is finished or partially finished with pump discharge by an
approved method.
28. Table R502.2.2.1, Deck Ledger Connection to Band Joist, is
amended to read as follows:
Section
500.080
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.080
100:1186
Table R507.2
Deck Ledger Connection to Band Joist
(Deck Live Load = 40 psf; Deck Dead Load = 10 psf; Snow
Load < 40 psf)
Joist
Span
6'-0"
and
Less
6'-1"
to
8'-0"
8'-1"
to
10'-0"
10'-1"
to
12'-0"
12'-1"
to
14'-0"
14'-1"
to
16'-0"
16'-1"
to
18'-0"
Connection
details
On-center spacing of fastenersd, e
1/2"
diameter
lag screw
with 1/2"
maximum
sheathing
16 16 16 15 13 11 10
1/2"
diameter
bolt with
1/2"
maximum
sheathing
24 24 24 24 24 21 19
1/2"
diameter
bolt with
1"
maximum
sheathing
24 24 24 24 21 18 16
29. Section R905.2.8.2, Valleys, is amended to read as follows:
R905.2.8.2 Valleys. Valley linings shall be installed in accordance
with the manufacturer's instructions before applying shingles.
Valley linings of the following types shall be permitted:
1. For open valleys (valley lining exposed) lined with metal, the
valley lining shall be not less than twenty-four (24) inches (610
mm) wide and be of any of the corrosion-resistant metals in
Table R905.2.8.2.
2. For open valleys, valley lining of two (2) plies of mineralsurfaced
roll roofing, complying with ASTM D 3909 or ASTM
D 6380 Class M, shall be permitted. The bottom layer shall be
eighteen (18) inches (457 mm) and the top layer not less than
thirty-six (36) inches (914 mm) wide.
Section
500.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.080
100:1187
3. For closed valleys (valley covered with shingles), valley lining
of two (2) plies of No. 15 felt complying with ASTM D 226
Type 1, ASTM D 4869 Type 1, or ASTM D 6757, or valley
lining as described in Item 1 and 2 shall be permitted. Selfadhering
polymer modified bitumen underlayment complying
with ASTM D 1970 shall be permitted in lieu of the lining
material.
30. Section R905.2.8.5, Drip edge, is amended to read as follows:
R905.2.8.5 Drip edge. A drip edge or equivalent shall be provided
at eaves and rake edges of shingle roofs. Adjacent segments of drip
edge shall be overlapped not less than two (2) inches (51 mm).
Drip edges shall extend not less than one-fourth (1/4) inch (6.4
mm) below the roof sheathing and extend up back onto the roof
deck not less than two (2) inches (51 mm). Drip edges shall be
mechanically fastened to the roof deck at not more than twelve
(12) inches (305 mm) o.c. with fasteners as specified in Section
R905.2.5. Underlayment shall be installed over the drip edge along
eaves and under the underlayment along rake edges.
31. Section R1005.7, Factory-built chimney offsets, is amended to add
an exception to read as follows:
Exception: When chimneys are installed per manufacturer's
installation instructions.
32. Section R1005.8, Installation, is added, which shall read as follows:
R1005.8 Installation. Factory-built chimneys shall be installed in
accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. The
flue chase for a factory-built chimney shall have a minimum of one
(1) thickness of five-eighths-inch. Type X drywall or its equivalent
extending to the roof sheathing of the structure applied to the
inside of every portion of the flue chase that abuts a structure.
33. Section 1005.9, Required Fire Separation Enclosures, is added,
which shall read as follows:
R1005.9 Required fire separation enclosures. All prefabricated
metal chimneys shall be enclosed in a shaft with one (1) layer of
five-eighths-inch, Type X drywall or equivalent from the fireplace
connector to the underside of the roof sheathing securely attached
with framing material. When the chimney is located on the exterior
of the structure, it need only be separated by lining the exterior
wall adjacent to the shaft with one (1) layer of five-eighths-inch,
Type X drywall or equivalent. All joints are to be tight within oneeighth
(1/8) inch or taped with a layer of joint compound. Required
clearances shall be maintained between chimney and the drywall
per the chimney manufacturer's specifications.
Section
500.080
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.080
100:1188
34. Section N1101.13 (R401.2), Compliance, is amended to read as
follows:
N1101.13 (R401.2) Compliance. Projects shall comply with one
of the following:
1. Sections N1101.14 through N1104 as amended.
2. Section N1105 and the provisions of Sections N1101.14
through N1104 labeled "Mandatory."
3. An energy rating index (ERI) approach in Section N1106.
35. Section N1102.14 (R401.3), Certificate (Mandatory), is amended to
read as follows:
N1101.14 (R401.3) Certificate (Mandatory). Unless otherwise
presented to the home owner and building official in writing, a
permanent certificate shall be completed by the builder or
registered design professional and posted on a wall in the space
where the furnace is located, a utility room or an approved location
inside the building. Where located on an electrical panel, the
certificate shall not cover or obstruct the visibility of the circuit
directory label, service disconnect label or other required labels.
The certificate shall list the predominant R-values of insulation
installed in or on ceiling/roof, walls, foundation (slab, basement
wall, crawl space wall and/or floor) and ducts outside conditioned
spaces; U-factors for fenestration and the solar heat gain
coefficient (SHGC) of fenestration; and the results from any
required duct system and building envelope air leakage testing
done on the building. Where there is more than one (1) value for
each component, the certificate shall list the value covering the
largest area. The certificate shall list the types and efficiencies
of heating, cooling and service water heating equipment. Where
a gas-fired unvented room heater, electric furnace, or baseboard
electric heater is installed in the residence, the certificate shall list
"gas-fired unvented room heater," "electric furnace" or "baseboard
electric heater," as appropriate. An efficiency shall not be listed
for gas-fired unvented room heaters, electric furnaces or electric
baseboard heaters.
36. Table N1102.1.2 (R402.1.2), Insulation and Fenestration
Requirements by Component, is amended to read as follows:
Section
500.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.080
100:1189
Table N1102.1.2 (R402.1.2)
Insulation and Fenestration Requirements by Componenta
Climate
Zone
Fenestration
U-Factorb
Skylightb
U-Factor
Glazed
Fenestration
SHGCb, e
Ceiling RValue
1 NR 0.75 0.25 30
2 0.40 0.65 0.25 38
3 0.35 0.55 0.25 38
4 except
Marine
0.40 0.55 NR 38
5 and
Marine 4
0.32 0.55 NR 49
6 0.32 0.55 NR 49
7 and 8 0.32 0.55 NR 49
Insulation and Fenestration Requirements by Componenta
(Continued)
Climate
Zone
Wood
Frame
Wall
R-Value
Mass
Wall
R-Valuei
Floor
RValue
Basementc
Wall
R-Value
Slabd
RValue
and
Depth
Crawl
Spacec
Wall
RValue
1 13 3/4 13 0 0 0
2 13 4/6 13 0 0 0
3 20 or 13 +
5h
8/13 19 5/13f 0 5/13
4
except
Marine
13l, m 8/13 19 0j, k 10, 2
ft
10/13
5 and
Marine
4
20 or 13 +
5h
13/17 30g 15/19 10, 2
ft
15/19
6 20 + 5
or 13 +
10h
15/20 30g 15/19 10, 4
ft
15/19
Section
500.080
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.080
100:1190
Insulation and Fenestration Requirements by Componenta
(Continued)
Climate
Zone
Wood
Frame
Wall
R-Value
Mass
Wall
R-Valuei
Floor
RValue
Basementc
Wall
R-Value
Slabd
RValue
and
Depth
Crawl
Spacec
Wall
RValue
7 and 8 20 + 5
or 13 +
10h
19/21 38g 15/19 10, 4
ft
15/19
For SI: 1 foot = 304.8mm.
a. R-values are minimums. U-factors and SHGC are maximums.
When insulation is installed in a cavity which is less than
the label or design thickness of the insulation, the installed
R-value of the insulation shall not be less than the R-value
specified in the table.
b. The fenestration U-factor column excludes skylights. The
SHGC column applies to all glazed fenestration. Exception:
Skylights may be excluded from glazed fenestration SHGC
requirements in Climate Zones 1 through 3 where the SHGC
for such skylights does not exceed 0.30.
c. "15/19" means R-15 continuous insulation on the interior or
exterior of the home or R-19 cavity insulation at the interior
of the basement wall. "15/19" shall be permitted to be met
with R-13 cavity insulation on the interior of the basement
wall plus R-5 continuous insulation on the interior or exterior
of the home. "10/13" means R-10 continuous insulation on the
interior or exterior of the home or R-13 cavity insulation at
the interior of the basement wall.
d. R-5 shall be added to the required slab edge R-values for
heated slabs. Insulation depth shall be the depth of the
footing or two (2) feet, whichever is less in Zones 1 through 3
for heated slabs.
e. There are no SHGC requirements in the Marine Zone.
f. Basement wall insulation is not required in warm-humid
locations as defined by Figure N1101.10 or Table N1101.10.
g. Or insulation sufficient to fill the framing cavity, R-19
minimum.
h. The first value is cavity insulation, the second value is
continuous insulation, so "13+5" means R-13 cavity insulation
plus R-5 continuous insulation.
Section
500.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.080
100:1191
i. The second R-value applies when more than half of the
insulation is on the interior of the mass wall.
j. Exception: Unfinished basements may have up to a maximum
of twenty percent (20%) of the total basement wall area
exposed above the outside finished grade/ground level as
uninsulated concrete foundation walls. The foundation wall
area above the outside grade/ground level that may be
uninsulated is determined by the formula [.20 times the
basement wall height of all walls (including insulated exterior
frame walls for walkout basements and walls common to
both basement and attached garages) times the perimeter
of these basement walls]. In unfinished areas, the basement
foundation wall insulation shall extend down to the basement
floor slab or to a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches below
outside finished grade when the grade is above the floor slab
elevation.
k. Basement blankets will be required only to depth of the frost
line.
l. Low expansive foam shall be used around doors and windows.
Foam insulations shall be applied around all exterior wall
penetrations and electrical boxes, and caulking shall be
applied at the top and bottom of wall plates.
m. Exhaust systems shall be installed in the home and designed
to have the capacity to exhaust a minimum air flow rate of 50
cfm intermittent or 20 cfm continuous to help provide outside
air through typical home use and passive air infiltration.
37. Section N1102.1.3 (R402.1.3), R-value computation, is amended to
read as follows:
N1102.1.3 (R402.1.3) R-value computation. Insulation
material used in layers, such as framing cavity insulation, or
continuous insulation shall be summed to compute the
corresponding component R-value. The manufacturer's settled Rvalue
shall be used for blown insulation. Computed R-values may
include an R-value for other building materials or air films. Where
insulated siding is used for the purpose of complying with the
continuous insulation requirements of Table N1102.1.2, the
manufacturer's labeled R-Value for insulated siding shall be
reduced by R-0.6.
38. Section N1102.2.1 (R402.2.1), Ceilings with attic spaces, is
amended to read as follows:
N1102.2.1 (R402.2.1) Ceilings with attic spaces. Where
Section R1102.1.2 would require R-38 insulation in the ceiling,
installing R-30 over one hundred percent (100%) of the ceiling area
requiring insulation shall be deemed to satisfy the requirement
for R-38 wherever the full height of uncompressed R-30 insulation
Section
500.080
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.080
100:1192
extends over the wall top plate at the eaves using averaging
computation method (ACM). Similarly, where Section R1102.1.2
would require R-49 insulation in the ceiling, installing R-38 over
one hundred percent (100%) of the ceiling area requiring insulation
shall be deemed to satisfy the requirement for R-49 insulation
wherever the full height of uncompressed R-38 insulation extends
over the wall top plate at the eaves using averaging computation
method (ACM). This reduction shall not apply to the U-factor
alternative approach in Section R1102.1.4 and the total UA
alternative in Section R1102.1.5.
39. Section N1102.4 (R402.4), Air leakage, is amended to read as
follows:
N1102.4 (R402.4) Air leakage. The building thermal envelope
may be designed and constructed to limit air leakage in accordance
with the requirements of Sections R1102.4.1 through R1102.4.4.
40. Table N1102.4.1.1 (R402.4.1.1), Air Barrier and Insulation, is
amended to read as follows:
Table N1102.4.1.1 (402.4.1.1)
Air Barrier and Insulation Installation
Component Air Barrier Criteria
Insulation
Installation Criteria
General
Requirements
A continuous air
barrier shall be
installed in the
building envelope.
The exterior thermal
envelope contains a
continuous air barrier.
Breaks or joints in the
air barrier shall be
sealed.
Air-permeable
insulation shall not be
used as a sealing
material.
Ceiling/attic The air barrier in any
dropped ceiling/soffit
shall be aligned with
the insulation and any
gaps in the air barrier
sealed.
Access openings, drop
down stairs or knee
wall doors to
unconditioned attic
spaces shall be
sealed.
The insulation in any
dropped ceiling/soffit
shall be aligned with
the air barrier.
Section
500.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.080
100:1193
Table N1102.4.1.1 (402.4.1.1)
Air Barrier and Insulation Installation
Component Air Barrier Criteria
Insulation
Installation Criteria
Walls The junction of the
foundation and sill
plate shall be sealed.
The junction of the
top plate and the top
of the exterior walls
shall be sealed.
Knee walls shall be
sealed.
Cavities within corners
and headers of frame
walls shall be insulated
by completely filling
the cavity with a
material having a
thermal resistance of
R-3 per inch minimum.
Exterior thermal
envelope insulation for
framed walls shall be
installed in substantial
contact and continuous
alignment with the air
barrier.
Windows,
skylights and
doors
The space between
window/door jambs
and framing, and
skylights and framing
shall be sealed.
Rim joists Rim joists shall
include the air
barrier.
Rim joists shall be
insulated.
Floors (including
above garage and
cantilevered
floors)
The air barrier shall
be installed at any
exposed edge of
insulation.
Floor framing cavity
insulation shall be
installed to maintain
permanent contact
with the underside of
subfloor decking, or
floor framing cavity
insulation shall be
permitted to be in
contact with the top
side of sheathing, or
continuous insulation
installed on the
underside of floor
framing; and extends
from the bottom to the
top of all perimeter
floor framing members.
Section
500.080
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.080
100:1194
Table N1102.4.1.1 (402.4.1.1)
Air Barrier and Insulation Installation
Component Air Barrier Criteria
Insulation
Installation Criteria
Crawl space
walls
Exposed earth in
unvented crawl
spaces shall be
covered with Class I
vapor retarder with
overlapping joists
taped.
Where provided
instead of floor
insulation, insulation
shall be permanently
attached to the crawl
space walls.
Narrow cavities Batts in narrow cavities
shall be cut to fit, or
narrow cavities shall be
filled by insulation that
on installation readily
conforms to the
available cavity space.
Garage
separation
Air sealing shall be
provided between the
garage and
conditioned spaces.
Plumbing and
wiring
Batt insulation shall be
cut neatly to fit around
wiring and plumbing in
exterior walls, or
insulation that on
installation readily
conforms to available
space shall extend
behind piping and
wiring.
Shower/tub on
exterior wall
The air barrier
installed at exterior
walls adjacent to
showers and tubs
shall separate them
from showers and
tubs.
Exterior walls adjacent
to showers and tubs
shall be insulated.
Electrical/phone
box on exterior
walls
The air barrier shall
be installed behind
electrical or
communication boxes
or air-sealed boxes
shall be installed.
Section
500.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.080
100:1195
Table N1102.4.1.1 (402.4.1.1)
Air Barrier and Insulation Installation
Component Air Barrier Criteria
Insulation
Installation Criteria
Concealed
sprinklers
When required to be
sealed, concealed fire
sprinklers shall only
be sealed in a manner
that is recommended
by the manufacturer.
Caulking or other
adhesive sealants
shall not be used to
fill voids between fire
sprinkler cover plates
and walls or ceilings.
a. In addition, inspection of log walls shall be in accordance with
the provisions of ICC 400.
41. Section N1102.4.1.2 (R402.4.1.2), Testing, is amended to read as
follows:
N1102.4.1.2 (R402.4.1.2) Testing. Any building or dwelling unit
when constructed substantially above the standards set forth in
Table N1102.1.2 shall be tested and verified as having an air
leakage rate of not exceeding five (5) air changes per hour in
Climate Zone 4. Testing shall be conducted in accordance with
ASTM E 779 or ASTM E 1827 and reported at a pressure of
0.2 inches w.g. (50 Pascals). Where required by the code official,
testing shall be conducted by an approved third party. A written
report of the results of the test shall be signed by the party
conducting the test and provided to the code official. Testing shall
be performed at any time after creation of all penetrations of the
building thermal envelope.
During testing:
1. Exterior windows and doors, fireplace and stove doors shall be
closed, but not sealed, beyond the intended weatherstripping
or other infiltration control measures.
2. Dampers, including exhaust, intake, makeup air, backdraft and
flue dampers, shall be closed, but not sealed beyond intended
infiltration control measures.
3. Interior doors, if installed at the time of the test, shall be open.
4. Exterior doors for continuous ventilation systems and heat
recovery ventilators shall be closed and sealed.
Section
500.080
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.080
100:1196
5. Heating and cooling systems, if installed at the time of the test,
shall be turned off.
6. Supply and return registers, if installed at the time of the test,
shall be fully open.
42. Section N1102.4.5 (R402.4.5), Recessed lighting, is amended to
read as follows:
N1102.4.5 (R402.4.5) Recessed lighting. Recessed luminaires
penetrating the building thermal envelope shall be sealed to limit
air leakage between conditioned and unconditioned spaces. All
recessed luminaires shall be IC-rated and labeled as having an
air leakage rate not more than 2.0 cfm (0.944 L/s) when tested
in accordance with ASTM E 283 at a 1.57 psf (75 Pa) pressure
differential. All recessed luminaires shall be sealed with a gasket or
caulk between the housing and interior wall or ceiling covering.
43. Section N1103.7 (R403.7), Equipment sizing and efficiency rating
(Mandatory), is amended to read as follows:
N1103.7 (R403.7) Equipment sizing and efficiency rating
(Mandatory). Heating and cooling equipment shall be sized in
accordance with ACCA Manual J or other approved heating and
cooling calculation methodologies. New or replacement heating
and cooling equipment shall have an efficiency rating equal to
or greater than the minimum required by federal law for the
geographic location where the equipment is installed.
44. Section N1104.1 (R404.1), Lighting equipment (Mandatory), is
amended to read as follows:
N1104.1 (R404.1) Lighting equipment (Mandatory). When
provided by the builder, not less than seventy-five percent (75%) of
the supplied lamps in permanently installed lighting fixtures shall
be high-efficacy lamps or not less than seventy-five percent (75%)
of the permanently installed lighting fixtures shall contain only
high-efficacy lamps.
Exception: Low-voltage lighting.
45. Section N1104.1.1 (R404.1.1), Lighting equipment (Mandatory), is
deleted.
46. Table N1105.5.2(1), Specifications for the Standard Reference and
Proposed Designs, is amended to read as follows:
Section
500.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.080
100:1197
Table N1105.5.2(1) [R405.5.2(1)]
Specifications for the Standard Reference and Proposed
Designs
Building
Component
Standard Reference
Design
Proposed
Design
Above-grade walls Type: mass wall if
proposed wall is mass;
otherwise wood frame
As proposed
Gross area: same as
proposed
As proposed
U-factor: as specified in
Table N1102.1.4
As proposed
Solar absorptance = 0.75 As proposed
Remittance = 0.90 As proposed
Basement and
crawl space walls
Type: same as proposed As proposed
Gross area: same as
proposed
As proposed
U-factor: from Table
N1102.1.4, with
insulation layer on
interior side of walls
As proposed
Above-grade floors Type: wood frame As proposed
Gross area: same as
proposed
As proposed
U-factor: as specified in
Table N1102.1.4
As proposed
Ceilings Type: wood frame As proposed
Gross area: same as
proposed
As proposed
U-factor: as specified in
Table N1102.1.4
As proposed
Roofs Type: composition shingle
on wood sheathing
As proposed
Gross area: same as
proposed
As proposed
Solar absorptance = 0.75 As proposed
Emittance = 0.90 As proposed
Section
500.080
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.080
100:1198
Table N1105.5.2(1) [R405.5.2(1)]
Specifications for the Standard Reference and Proposed
Designs
Building
Component
Standard Reference
Design
Proposed
Design
Attics Type: vented with
aperture = 1 ft2 per 300
ft2 ceiling area
As proposed
Foundations Type: same as proposed As proposed
Foundation wall area
above and below grade
and soil characteristics:
same as proposed
As proposed
Opaque doors Area: 40 ft2 As proposed
Orientation: North As proposed
U-factor: same as
fenestration from Table
N1102.1.4
As proposed
Vertical
fenestration other
than opaque doors
Total areab = 15% of the
conditioned floor area
As proposed
Orientation: equally
distributed to 4 cardinal
compass orientations (N,
E, S and W)
As proposed
U-factor: as specified in
Table N1102.1.4
As proposed
SHGC: as specified in
Table N1102.1.2, except
that for climates with no
requirement (NR) SHGC
= 0.40 shall be used
As proposed
Interior shade fraction:
0.92 - (0.21 x SHGC for
the standard reference
design)
0.92 - (0.21 x
SHGC as
proposed)
External shading: none As proposed
Skylights None As proposed
Thermally isolated
sunrooms
None As proposed
Section
500.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.080
100:1199
Table N1105.5.2(1) [R405.5.2(1)]
Specifications for the Standard Reference and Proposed
Designs
Building
Component
Standard Reference
Design
Proposed
Design
Air exchange rate Air leakage rate of 5 air
changes per hour in
Climate Zones 1 and 2,
and 3 air changes per
hour in Climate Zones 3
through 8 at a pressure of
0.2 inches w.g. (50 Pa).
The mechanical
ventilation rate shall be in
addition to the air leakage
rate and the same as in
the proposed design, but
no greater than 0.01 x
CFA + 7.5 x (Nbr + 1).
Where:
CFA = conditioned floor
area
Nbr = number of
bedrooms
Energy recovery shall not
be assumed for
mechanical ventilation.
For residences
that are not
tested, the same
air leakage rate
as the standard
reference design.
For tested
residences, the
measured air
exchange ratea.
The mechanical
ventilation rateb
shall be in
addition to the air
leakage rate and
shall be proposed.
Mechanical
ventilation
None, except where
mechanical ventilation is
specified by the proposed
design, in which case:
Annual vent fan energy
use: kWh/yr = 0.03942 x
CFA + 29.565 x (Nbr + 1)
Where:
CFA = conditioned floor
area
Nbr = number of
bedrooms
As proposed
Section
500.080
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.080
100:1200
Table N1105.5.2(1) [R405.5.2(1)]
Specifications for the Standard Reference and Proposed
Designs
Building
Component
Standard Reference
Design
Proposed
Design
Internal gains IGain = 17,900 + 23.8 x
CFA + 4104 x Nbr (Btu/
day per dwelling unit)
Same as standard
reference design
Internal mass An internal mass for
furniture and contents of
8 pounds per square foot
of floor area
Same as standard
reference design,
plus any
additional mass
specifically
designed as a
thermal storage
elementc but not
integral to the
building envelope
or structure.
Structural mass For masonry floor slabs,
80% of floor area covered
by R-2 carpet and pad,
and 20% of floor directly
exposed to room air
As proposed
For masonry basement
walls, as proposed, but
with insulation required
by Table R402.1.4 located
on the interior side of the
walls
As proposed
For other walls, for
ceilings, floors, and
interior walls, wood frame
construction
As proposed
Section
500.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.080
100:1201
Table N1105.5.2(1) [R405.5.2(1)]
Specifications for the Standard Reference and Proposed
Designs
Building
Component
Standard Reference
Design
Proposed
Design
Heating systemsd, e Fuel type: same as the
proposed design
Efficiencies:
Electric: air-source heat
pump with prevailing
federal minimum
standards.
Non-electric furnaces:
natural gas furnace with
prevailing federal
minimum standards.
Non-electric boilers:
natural gas boiler with
prevailing federal
minimum standards.
Capacity: sized in
accordance with Section
N1103.7.
As proposed
Cooling systemsd, f Fuel type: electric
Efficiency: in accordance
with prevailing federal
minimum standards
Capacity: sized in
accordance with Section
N1103.7
As proposed
Service water
heatingd, e, f
Fuel type; same as
proposed design
Efficiency: in accordance
with prevailing federal
minimum standards
Use: gal/day = 30 + 10 x
Nbr
Tank temperature: 120° F.
As proposed
Same as standard
reference
Section
500.080
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.080
100:1202
Table N1105.5.2(1) [R405.5.2(1)]
Specifications for the Standard Reference and Proposed
Designs
Building
Component
Standard Reference
Design
Proposed
Design
Thermal
distribution
systems
Duct insulation: from
Section N1103.2.1
A thermal distribution
system efficiency (DSE) of
0.88 shall be applied to
both the heating and
cooling system
efficiencies for all systems
other than tested duct
systems. For tested duct
systems, the leakage rate
shall be 4 cfm (113.3 L/
min) per 100 ft2 (9.29 m2)
of conditioned floor area
at a pressure of
differential of 0.1 inches
w.g. (25 Pa)
As tested or
specified in Table
R405.5.2(2) if not
tested. Duct
insulation shall be
as proposed.
Thermostat Type: Manual, cooling
temperature setpoint =
75° F.
Heating temperature
setpoint = 72° F.
Same as standard
reference
For Sl: 1 square foot = 0.93 m2; 1 British thermal unit = 1055J; 1
pound per square foot = 4.88 kg/m2; 1 gallon (US) = 3.785 L; °C =
(°F-32)/1.8; 1 degree = 0.79 rad
a. Where required by the code official, testing shall be conducted
by an approved party. Hourly calculations as specified in the
ASHRAE Handbook of Fundamentals, or the equivalent, shall
be used to determine the energy loads resulting from
infiltration.
b. The combined air exchange rate for infiltration and mechanical
ventilation shall be determined in accordance with Equation 43
of 2001 ASHRAE Handbook of Fundamentals, page 26.24, and
the "Whole-house Ventilation" provisions of 2001 ASHRAE
Handbook of Fundamentals, page 26.19, for intermittent
mechanical ventilation.
Section
500.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.080
100:1203
c. Thermal storage element shall mean a component not part of
the floors, walls or ceilings that is part of a passive solar
system, and that provides thermal storage such as enclosed
water columns, rock beds, or phase-change containers. A
thermal storage element must be in the same room as
fenestration that faces within 15 degrees (0.26 rad) of true
south, or must be connected to such a room with pipes or ducts
that allow the element to be actively charged.
d. For a proposed design with multiple heating, cooling or water
heating systems using different fuel types, the applicable
standard reference design system capacities and fuel types
shall be weighted in accordance with their respective loads as
calculated by accepted engineering practice for each
equipment and fuel type present.
e. For a proposed design without a proposed heating system, a
heating system with the prevailing federal minimum efficiency
shall be assumed for both the standard reference design and
proposed design.
f. For a proposed design home without a proposed cooling
system, an electric air conditioner with the prevailing federal
minimum efficiency shall be assumed for both the standard
reference design and the proposed design.
g. For a proposed design with a non-storage-type water heater, a
forty-gallon storage-type water heater with the prevailing
federal minimum energy factor for the same fuel as the
predominant heating fuel type shall be assumed. For the case
of a proposed design without a proposed water heater, a fortygallon
storage-type water heater with the prevailing federal
minimum efficiency for the same fuel as the predominant
heating fuel type shall be assumed for both the proposed
design and standard reference design.
47. Section M1301.2, Identification, is amended to read as follows:
M1301.2 Identification. Each ten-foot length of pipe and tubing
and each pipe fitting utilized in a mechanical system shall bear the
identification of the manufacturer.
48. Section M1301.5, Third party testing and certification, is deleted.
49. Section M1305.4.1, Ground clearance, is amended to read as
follows:
M1305.1.4.1 Ground clearance. Equipment and appliances
supported from the ground shall be level and firmly supported
on a concrete slab or other approved material extending not less
than two (2) inches (50.8 mm) above the adjoining ground. Such
support shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's installation
Section
500.080
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.080
100:1204
instructions. Appliances suspended from the floor shall have a
clearance of not less than six (6) inches (152 mm) from the ground.
50. Section M1305.1.4.3, Electrical requirements, is amended to add
one exception to read as follows:
Exception: Basements.
51. Section M1401.3, Equipment and appliance sizing, is amended to
read as follows:
M1401.3 Equipment and appliance sizing. Heating and cooling
equipment and appliances shall be sized in accordance with ACCA
Manual J or other approved heating and cooling calculation
methodologies.
Exception: Heating and cooling equipment and appliance sizing
shall not be limited to the capacities determined in accordance with
Manual S where either of the following conditions applies:
1. The specified equipment or appliance utilizes multistage
technology or variable refrigerant flow technology, and the
loads calculated in accordance with the approved heating and
cooling calculation methodology are within the range of the
manufacturer's published capacities for that equipment or
appliance.
2. The specified equipment or appliance manufacturer's
published capacities cannot satisfy both the total and sensible
heat gains calculated in accordance with the approved heating
and cooling calculation methodology and the next larger
standard size unit is specified.
52. Section M1501.1, Outdoor discharge, is amended to read as
follows:
M1501.1 Outdoor discharge. The air removed by every
mechanical exhaust system shall be discharged to the outdoors in
accordance with Section M1506.2. Air shall not be exhausted into
an attic or crawl space.
Exception: Whole-house ventilation-type attic fans that discharge
into the attic space of dwelling units having private attics shall be
permitted.
53. Section M1502.4.1, Material and size, is amended to read as
follows:
M1502.4.1 Material and size. Exhaust ducts shall have a smooth
interior finish and be constructed of metal having a minimum
thickness of 0.0157 inch (0.3950 mm) (No. 30 gage). The duct shall
be four (4) inches (102 mm) nominal in diameter.
Section
500.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.080
100:1205
54. Section M1502.4.2, Duct installation, is amended to read as
follows:
M1502.4.2 Duct installation. Exhaust ducts shall be supported
at intervals not to exceed twelve (12) feet (3,658 mm) and shall be
secured in place. The insert end of the duct shall extend into the
adjoining duct or fitting in the direction of airflow. Exhaust duct
joints shall be sealed in accordance with Section M1601.4.1 and
shall be mechanically fastened, i.e., foil tape or equivalent. Ducts
shall not be joined with screws or similar fasteners that protrude
more than one eighth (1/8) inch (3.2 mm) into the inside of the duct.
55. Section M1503.4, Make up air required, is amended to read as
follows:
M1503.4 Makeup air required. Exhaust hood systems capable
of exhausting in excess of 600 cubic feet per minute shall be
mechanically or naturally provided with makeup air at a rate
approximately equal to the exhaust air rate. Such makeup air
systems shall be equipped with a means of closure and shall be
automatically controlled to start and operate simultaneously with
the exhaust system.
56. Section M1506.3, Exhaust openings, is amended to read as follows:
M1506.3 Exhaust openings. Air exhaust openings shall
terminate not less than three (3) feet (914 mm) from property lines;
three (3) feet (914 mm) from operable and nonoperable openings
into the building and six (6) feet (1,828 mm) from mechanical air
intakes except where the opening is located three (3) feet (914 mm)
above the air intake. Openings shall comply with Sections R303.5.2
and R303.6.
57. Section M1601.4.1, Joints, seams and connections, is amended to
read as follows:
M1601.4.1 Joints, seams and connections. Joints of duct
systems shall be made substantially airtight in an unconditioned
area by means of tapes, mastics, liquid sealants, gasketing or
other approved closure systems. Closure systems used with rigid
fibrous glass ducts shall comply with UL 181A and shall be marked
181A-P for pressure-sensitive tape, 181A-M for mastic or 181AH
for heat-sensitive tape. Closure systems used with flexible air
ducts and flexible air connectors shall comply with UL 181B and
shall be marked 181B-FX for pressure-sensitive tape or 181B-M
for mastic. Duct connections to flanges of air distribution system
equipment or sheet metal fittings shall be mechanically fastened.
Mechanical fasteners for use with flexible non-metallic air ducts
shall comply with UL 181B and shall be marked 181B-C. Crimp
joints for round metal ducts shall have a contact lap of at least
1 1/2 means of at least three (3) sheet metal screws or rivets
Section
500.080
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.080
100:1206
equally spaced around the joint. Closure systems used to seal metal
ductwork shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
installation instructions.
Exceptions:
1. Spray polyurethane foam shall be permitted to be applied
without additional joint seals.
2. Where a duct connection is made that is partially inaccessible,
three (3) screws or rivets shall be equally spaced on the
exposed portion of the joint so as to prevent a hinge effect.
3. For ducts having a static pressure classification of less than
two (2) inches of water column (500 Pa), additional closure
systems shall not be required for continuously welded joints
and seams and locking-type joints and seams of other than
snap-lock and button-lock types.
58. Section G2408.4 (305.7), Clearances from grade, is amended to
read as follows:
G2408.4 (305.7) Clearances from grade. Equipment and
appliances installed at grade level shall be supported on a level
concrete slab or other approved material extending not less than
two (2) inches (50.8 mm) above adjoining grade or shall be
suspended not less than six (6) inches (152 mm) above adjoining
grade. Such supports shall be installed in accordance with the
manufacturer's installation instructions.
59. Section P2503.5.1, Rough plumbing, is amended to read as follows:
P2503.5.1 Rough plumbing. DWV systems shall be tested on
completion of the rough piping installation by water or by air
without evidence of leakage. Either test shall be applied to the
drainage system in its entirety or in sections after rough-in piping
has been installed, as follows:
1. Water test. Each section shall be filled with water to a point
not less than five (5) feet (1,524 mm) above the highest fitting
connection in that section, or to the highest point in the
completed system. Water shall be held in the section under test
for a period of fifteen (15) minutes. The system shall prove
leak-free by visual inspection.
2. Air test. The portion under test shall be maintained at a gauge
pressure of five (5) pounds per square inch (psi) (34 kPa) or ten
(10) inches of mercury column (34 kPa). This pressure shall be
held without introduction of additional air for a period of fifteen
(15) minutes.
60. Section P2903.5, Water hammer, is amended to read as follows:
Section
500.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.080
100:1207
P2903.5 Water hammer. The flow velocity of the water
distribution system shall be controlled to reduce the possibility of
water hammer. A water-hammer arrestor shall be installed where
quick-closing valves are used. Water-hammer arrestors shall be
installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation
instructions. Water-hammer arrestors shall conform to ASSE 1010.
61. Section P2904.1, General, is amended to read as follows:
P2904.1 General. When installed, the design and installation of
residential fire sprinkler systems shall be in accordance with NFPA
13D or Section 2904, which shall be considered equivalent to NFPA
13D. Partial residential sprinkler systems shall be permitted to
be installed only in buildings not required to be equipped with a
residential sprinkler system. Section P2904 shall apply to standalone
and multipurpose wet-pipe sprinkler systems that do not
include the use of antifreeze. A multipurpose fire sprinkler system
shall provide domestic water to both fire sprinklers and plumbing
fixtures. A stand-alone sprinkler system shall be separate and
independent from the water distribution system. A backflow
preventer shall not be required to separate a stand-alone system
from the water distribution system.
62. Section R3201.2.1, Trap seal protection, is amended to add an
exception to read as follows:
Exception: Basement floor drains will be allowed to have a deep
seal.
63. Section E3902.2, Garage and accessory building receptacles, is
amended to add an exception to read as follows:
Exception: Fastened in place garage door openers.
64. Section P3902.5, Unfinished basement receptacles, is amended to
add exceptions to read as follows:
Exceptions:
1. A receptacle supplying only a permanently installed fire alarm
or burglar alarm system. Receptacles installed in accordance
with this exception shall not be considered as meeting the
requirements of Section E3901.9.
2. Sump pump: sump pump receptacles must be a single
dedicated outlet (not a duplex) and only when a sump pump
has been installed.
65. Section P3902.6, Kitchen receptacles, is amended to add an
exception to read as follows:
Exception: Fastened-in-place appliances or outlets designated for
refrigerators/freezers.
Section
500.080
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.080
100:1208
Section 500.085. Violation and Penalty.
Any person who shall violate any provision of the code adopted in this
Article or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation
of an approved plan of or directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provision of this code, shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding three (3) months, or
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after
due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
66. Section P3902.10, Kitchen dishwater branch circuit, is deleted.
67. Section P3902.14, Location of ground-fault circuit interrupters, is
amended to read as follows:
E3902.14 Location of ground-fault circuit interrupters.
Ground-fault circuit interrupters shall be installed only in a readily
accessible location. [210.8(A)]
68. Section P3902.17, Arc-fault circuit interrupter protection for
branch circuit extensions or modifications, is amended by
amending the exception to read as follows:
Exception: AFCI protection shall not be required where the
extension of the existing conductors is not more than thirty (30)
feet (9.5 m) in length and does not include any additional outlets or
devices. [210.12(B) Exception]
69. Section E4002.14, Tamper-resistant receptacles, is deleted.
70. Section 302.5.1 Opening protection, shall be amended to read as
follows: [Ord. No. 19-025, 2-5-2019]
302.5.1 Opening protection. Openings from a private garage
directly into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be
permitted. Other openings between the garage and residence
shall be equipped with solid wood doors not less than one and
three-eighths (1 3/8) inches (35 mm) in thickness, solid or
honeycomb-core steel doors not less than one and three-eighths
(1 3/8) inches (35 mm) thick, or twenty-minute fire-rated doors.
Section
500.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.085
100:1209

ARTICLE IV
Energy Conservation Code
Section 500.090. International Energy Conservation Code Adopted
By Reference. [R.O. 2009 §150.025; Ord. No. 05-153, 5-27-2005;
Ord. No. 10-152 §7, 7-21-2010; Ord. No. 15-102 §3, 5-19-2015]
Section 500.100. Amendments. [R.O. 2009 §150.026; Ord. No.
05-153, 5-27-2005; Ord. No. 10-152 §7, 7-21-2010; Ord. No. 15-102
§3, 5-19-2015]
Section 500.105. Violation and Penalty.
Any person who shall violate any provision of the code adopted in this
Article or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation
of an approved plan of or directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provision of this code, shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding three (3) months, or
A. The 2015 Edition of the International Energy Conservation Code,
except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, as published by the
International Code Council, Inc., is adopted by reference as the Energy
Conservation Code of the City and made a part of this Section as if fully
set forth herein.
B. Wherever the phrase "Name of Jurisdiction" appears in the 2015
Edition of the International Energy Conservation Code, it shall be
deemed to mean the City.
C. Nothing in Sections 500.090 and 500.100 or in the Energy Conservation
Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
pending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any
cause or causes of action acquired or existing under any act or
ordinance hereby amended by Sections 500.090 and 500.100. No just
or legal right or remedy of any character shall be lost, impaired or
affected by Sections 500.090 and 500.100.
D. One (1) copy of Sections 500.090 and 500.100, the 2015 Edition of the
International Energy Conservation Code, and the proposed
amendments have been on file in the City Clerk's office at least ninety
(90) days prior to the adoption of Sections 500.090 and 500.100.
A. The code adopted by Section 500.090 of this Chapter is amended in the
following respects:
1. Section 101.1, Title, is amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Energy
Conservation Code of the City of Saint Charles, Missouri,"
hereinafter referred to as "this code."
Section
500.090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.105
100:1211
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after
due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section
500.105
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.105
100:1212
ARTICLE V
Property Maintenance Code
Section 500.110. International Property Maintenance Code Adopted
By Reference. [R.O. 2009 §150.030; Ord. No. 95-153, 6-7-1995; Ord.
No. 97-151, 5-8-1997; Ord. No. 00-141, 6-9-2000; Ord. No. 05-154,
5-27-2005; Ord. No. 10-152 §8, 7-21-2010; Ord. No. 15-102 §4,
5-19-2015]
Section 500.120. Amendments. [R.O. 2009 §150.031; Ord. No.
95-153, 6-7-1995; Ord. No. 97-151, 5-8-1997; Ord. No. 00-141,
6-9-2000; Ord. No. 00-268, 9-21-2000; Ord. No. 05-154, 5-27-2005;
Ord. No. 10-152 §8, 7-21-2010; Ord. No. 11-32 §1, 3-4-2011; Ord.
No. 15-102 §4, 5-19-2015]
A. The 2015 Edition of the International Property Maintenance Code,
except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, as published by the
International Code Council, Inc., is adopted by reference as the
Property Maintenance Code of the City and made a part of this Section
as if fully set forth herein.
B. Wherever the phrase "Name of Jurisdiction" appears in the 2015
Edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, it shall be
deemed to mean the City.
C. Nothing in Sections 500.110 and 500.120 or in the Property
Maintenance Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit
or proceeding pending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability
incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing under
any act or ordinance hereby amended as cited in Sections 500.110 and
500.120. No just or legal right or remedy of any character shall be lost,
impaired or affected by Sections 500.110 and 500.120.
D. One (1) copy of Sections 500.110 and 500.120, the 2015 Edition of the
International Property Maintenance Code, and the proposed
amendments have been on file in the City Clerk's Office at least ninety
(90) days prior to the adoption of Sections 500.110 and 500.120.
A. The code adopted by Section 500.110 is hereby amended as follows:
1. Section PM-101.1, Title, is amended to read as follows:
PM-101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the
"Property Maintenance Code of the City of Saint Charles,
Missouri," hereinafter referred to as "this code."
2. Section 103, Department of Property Maintenance Inspection, is
deleted.
3. Section PM-106.4, Violation penalties, is deleted.
4. Sections PM-111.2 through PM-111.8 are hereby deleted.
Section
500.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.120
100:1213
5. The following section is deleted: PM-302.4, Weeds.
6. The following section is deleted: PM-302.8, Motor Vehicles.
7. Section PM-304.13, Window, skylight and door frames, is amended
by adding a new Subsection PM-304.13.3 which shall read as
follows:
With the approval of the Director of Community Development,
doors and windows in structures with broken, cracked or missing
glazing material may be temporarily boarded up for a period not
to exceed ninety (90) days or for the term of any permit issued by
the Department of Community Development. After the expiration of
such permit, or after ninety (90) days when no permit is required,
boarding on all doors and windows must be removed and doors
and windows shall then contain glazing which is free from cracks
and holes. In no event shall a door be boarded up which had no
glazing as part of its composition. Upon failure of the owner to
comply with this section and by order of the Director of Community
Development, the Director of Community Development after notice
pursuant to Section PM-107 shall cause the installation of the
appropriate glazing through any available public agency, or by
contract or arrangements by private parties, and the cost thereof
shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure
is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
8. Section PM-304.14, Insect screens, is amended to read as follows:
PM-304.14 Insect screens. During the period from April 1 to
November 1, every door, window and other outside opening
required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas,
food service areas, or any areas where products to be included
or utilized in food for human consumption are processed,
manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved
tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh
per 25 mm), and every swinging door shall have a self-closing
device in good working condition.
Exception: Screen doors shall not be required where other
approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are
employed.
9. Section PM-602.3, Heat supply, is amended to read as follows:
PM-602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building
who rents, leases or lets one (1) or more dwelling units, rooming
units, dormitory or guestroom on terms, either expressed or
implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply
sufficient heat during the period from October 1 through May 15
to maintain a temperature of not less than 65° F. (18° C.) in all
habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms.
Section
500.120
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.120
100:1214
Section 500.125. Violation and Penalty.
Any person who shall violate any provision of the code adopted in this
Article or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation
of an approved plan of or directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provision of this code, shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding three (3) months, or
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after
due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
10. Section PM-602.4, Occupiable work spaces, is amended to read as
follows:
PM-602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work
space shall be supplied with sufficient heat during the period from
October 1 to May 15 to maintain a temperature of not less than 65°
F. (18° C.) during the period the space is occupied.
Exceptions:
1. Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling
or special temperature conditions.
2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous
physical activities.
Section
500.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.125
100:1215

ARTICLE VI
Existing Building Code
Section 500.130. International Existing Building Code Adopted By
Reference. [R.O. 2009 §150.035; Ord. No. 05-155, 5-27-2005; Ord.
No. 10-152 §9, 7-21-2010; Ord. No. 15-102 §5, 5-19-2015]
Section 500.140. Amendments. [R.O. 2009 §150.036; Ord. No.
05-155, 5-27-2005; Ord. No. 10-152 §9, 7-21-2010; Ord. No. 15-102
§5, 5-19-2015]
A. The 2015 Edition of the International Existing Building Code, including
Appendixes A and B, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, as
published by the International Code Council, Inc., is adopted by
reference as the Existing Building Code of the City and made a part of
this Section as if fully set forth herein.
B. Wherever the phrase "Name of Jurisdiction" appears in the 2015
Edition of the International Existing Building Code, it shall be deemed
to mean the City.
C. Nothing in Sections 500.130 and 500.140 or in the Existing Building
Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
pending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any
cause or causes of action acquired or existing under any act or
ordinance hereby amended by Sections 500.130 and 500.140. No just
or legal right or remedy of any character shall be lost, impaired or
affected by Sections 500.130 and 500.140.
D. One (1) copy of Sections 500.130 and 500.140, the 2015 Edition of the
International Existing Building Code, and the proposed amendments
have been on file in the City Clerk's office at least ninety (90) days prior
to the adoption of Sections 500.130 and 500.140.
A. The code adopted by Section 500.130 is amended as follows:
1. Section 101.1, Title, is deleted and one new Section is enacted in
lieu thereof which shall read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Existing
Building Code of the City of Saint Charles, Missouri," hereinafter
referred to as "this code."
2. Section 103, Department of Building Safety, is deleted.
3. Section 112, Board of Appeals, is deleted.
4. Section 113.4, Violations penalties, is hereby deleted.
5. Section 114, Stop work order, is deleted.
Section
500.130
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.145
100:1217
Section 500.145. Violation and Penalty.
Any person who shall violate any provision of the code adopted in this
Article or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation
of an approved plan of or directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provision of this code, shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding three (3) months, or
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after
due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section
500.145
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.145
100:1218
ARTICLE VII
Mechanical Code
Section 500.150. International Mechanical Code Adopted By
Reference. [R.O. 2009 §150.040; CC 1981 §5-125; Ord. No. 88-111,
6-23-1988; Ord. No. 95-150, 6-7-1995; Ord. No. 97-149, 5-8-1997;
Ord. No. 00-143, 6-9-2000; Ord. No. 05-156, 5-27-2005; Ord. No.
10-152 §10, 7-21-2010; Ord. No. 15-102 §6, 5-19-2015]
Section 500.160. Amendments. [R.O. 2009 §150.041; CC 1981
§5-126; Ord. No. 88-111, 6-23-1988; Ord. No. 88-196, 10-19-1988;
Ord. No. 95-150, 6-7-1995; Ord. No. 97-149, 5-8-1997; Ord. No.
98-494, 11-19-1998; Ord. No. 00-143, 6-9-2000; Ord. No. 05-156,
5-27-2005; Ord. No. 10-152 §10, 7-21-2010; Ord. No. 15-102 §6,
5-19-2015]
A. The 2015 Edition of the International Mechanical Code, including
Appendix A, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, as published
by the International Code Council, Inc., is adopted by reference as the
Mechanical Code of the City and made a part of this Section as if fully
set forth herein.
B. Wherever the phrase "Name of Jurisdiction" appears in the 2015
Edition of the International Mechanical Code, it shall be deemed to
mean the City.
C. Nothing in Sections 500.150 and 500.160 or in the Mechanical Code
hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
pending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any
cause or causes of action acquired or existing under any act or
ordinance hereby amended by Sections 500.150 and 500.160. No just
or legal right or remedy of any character shall be lost, impaired or
affected by Sections 500.150 and 500.160.
D. One (1) copy of Sections 500.150 and 500.160, the 2015 Edition of the
International Mechanical Code, and the proposed amendments have
been on file in the City Clerk's office at least ninety (90) days prior to
the adoption of Sections 500.150 and 500.160.
A. The code adopted by Section 500.150 is amended as follows:
1. Section 101.1, Title, is amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Mechanical
Code of the City of Saint Charles, Missouri," hereinafter referred to
as "this code."
2. Section 101.2.2, Appendix A is added: Section 101.2.2, Appendix A.
Appendix A is adopted.
3. Section 103 is deleted.
Section
500.150
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.160
100:1219
4. Section 106.1, Permits — when required, is amended to read as
follows:
106.1 Permits — when required. An owner, authorized agent
or contractor who desires to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair,
remove, convert or replace a mechanical system, the installation of
which is regulated by this code, or to cause such work to be done,
shall make application to the Code Official and obtain the required
permit for the work.
Exception: Where equipment replacements and repairs must be
performed in an emergency situation, permit application shall be
made within the next working business day of the Department of
Community Development.
5. Section 106.3, Application for permit, is deleted and one new
Section is enacted as follows:
106.3 Application for permit. Each application for a permit shall
be made to the Code Official and include a general description of
the proposed work and its location.
6. Section 106.4, Permit issuance, is amended to read as follows:
106.4 Permit issuance. The application, construction documents
and other data filed by an applicant for a permit shall be reviewed
by the Code Official. If the Code Official finds that the proposed
work conforms to the requirements of this code and all laws and
ordinances applicable thereto, and that the fees specified
elsewhere in this code have been paid, a permit shall be issued to
the applicant.
7. Section 106.4.3, Expiration, is deleted.
8. Section 106.4.4, Extensions, is deleted.
9. Sections 106.5, 106.5.1, 106.5.2 and 106.5.3, Fees, are deleted.
10. Section 108.4, Violation penalties, is deleted.
11. Section 108.5, Stop-work orders, is deleted.
12. Section 108.6, Abatement of violation, is deleted.
13. Sections 109.2 through 109.7, Membership of board, are deleted.
14. Section 805.1, Factory-built chimneys — listing, is amended to read
as follows:
805.1 Listing. Factory-built chimneys shall be listed and labeled
and shall be installed and terminated in accordance with the
manufacturer's installation instructions. The flue chase for a
factory-built chimney shall have a minimum of one (1) thickness
of five-eighths-inch Type X drywall or its equivalent extending to
Section
500.160
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.160
100:1220
Section 500.165. Violation and Penalty.
Any person who shall violate any provision of the code adopted in this
Article or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation
of an approved plan of or directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provision of this code, shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding three (3) months, or
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after
due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
the roof sheathing of the structure applied to the inside of every
portion of the flue chase that abuts a structure. All joints are
to be tight within one-eighth (1/8) inch or taped with a layer of
joint compound. Required clearances shall be maintained between
chimney and the gypsum board per the chimney manufacturer's
specifications.
15. A new Section 903.1.2, Required fire separation enclosures, is
added to Section 903 to read as follows:
903.1.2 Required fire separation enclosures. All prefabricated
metal chimneys shall be enclosed in a shaft with one (1) layer
of five-eighths-inch Type X gypsum board or equivalent from the
fireplace connector to the underside of the roof sheathing securely
attached with framing material. When the chimney is located on
the exterior of the structure, it need only be separated by lining the
exterior wall adjacent to the shaft by one layer of five-eighths-inch
Type X gypsum board or equivalent. All joints are to be tight within
one-eighth (1/8) inch or taped with a layer of joint compound.
Required clearances shall be maintained between chimney and the
gypsum board per the chimney manufacturer's specifications.
Section
500.160
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.165
100:1221

ARTICLE VIII
Fuel Gas Code
Section 500.170. International Fuel Gas Code Adopted By
Reference. [R.O. 2009 §150.045; Ord. No. 05-157, 5-27-2005; Ord.
No. 10-152 §11, 7-21-2010; Ord. No. 15-102 §7, 5-19-2015]
Section 500.180. Amendments. [R.O. 2009 §150.046; Ord. No.
05-157, 5-27-2005; Ord. No. 10-152 §11, 7-21-2010; Ord. No. 15-102
§7, 5-19-2015]
A. The 2015 Edition of the International Fuel Gas Code, including
Appendixes A, B, C and D, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter,
as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is adopted by
reference as the Fuel Gas Code of the City and made a part of this
Section as if fully set forth herein.
B. Wherever the phrase "Name of Jurisdiction" appears in the 2015
Edition of the International Fuel Gas Code, it shall be deemed to mean
the City.
C. Nothing in Sections 500.170 and 500.180 or in the Fuel Gas Code
hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
pending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any
cause or causes of action acquired or existing under any act or
ordinance hereby amended by Sections 500.170 and 500.180. No just
or legal right or remedy of any character shall be lost, impaired or
affected by Sections 500.170 and 500.180.
D. One (1) copy of Sections 500.170 and 500.180, the 2015 Edition of the
International Fuel Gas Code, and the proposed amendments have been
on file in the City Clerk's office at least ninety (90) days prior to the
adoption of Sections 500.170 and 500.180.
A. The code adopted by Section 500.170 is amended as follows:
1. Section 101.1, Title, is amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Fuel Gas
Code of the City of Saint Charles, Missouri," hereinafter referred to
as "this code."
2. Section 103 is deleted.
3. Sections 106.6, 106.6.1, 106.6.2 and 106.6.3 are deleted.
4. Section 108.4, Violation penalties, is deleted.
5. Section 108.5, Stop-work orders, is deleted.
6. Section 108.6, Abatement of violation, is deleted.
7. Section 109, Means for appeal, is deleted.
Section
500.170
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.185
100:1223
Section 500.185. Violation and Penalty.
Any person who shall violate any provision of the code adopted in this
Article or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation
of an approved plan of or directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provision of this code, shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding three (3) months, or
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after
due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section
500.185
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.185
100:1224
ARTICLE IX
Electrical Code
Section 500.190. National Electrical Code Adopted By Reference.
[R.O. 2009 §150.055; CC 1981 §9-1; Ord. No. 3793, 10-9-1970; Ord.
No. 76-78, 10-20-1976; Ord. No. 88-110, 6-23-1988; Ord. No.
95-152, 6-7-1995; Ord. No. 97-148, 5-8-1997; Ord. No. 00-142,
6-9-2000; Ord. No. 05-158, 5-27-2005; Ord. No. 10-152 §12,
7-21-2010; Ord. No. 15-102 §8, 5-19-2015]
Section 500.200. Amendments. [R.O. 2009 §150.056; Ord. No.
05-158, 5-27-2005; Ord. No. 10-152 §12, 7-21-2010; Ord. No. 15-102
§8, 5-19-2015]
A. The 2014 Edition of the National Electrical Code, including Annex H,
except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, as published by the
National Fire Protection Association, Inc., is adopted by reference as
the Electrical Code of the City and made a part of this Section as if fully
set forth herein.
B. All electrical installations in this City shall be in accordance with the
Electrical Code of the City, and no installation or alteration of electrical
equipment shall be made for light, heat, or power in any building in this
City until and unless the installation of the electric wiring therein and
thereto shall conform to the requirements of such Electrical Code or as
near as practical in the protection from danger of fire and other
electrical hazards.
C. Nothing in Sections 500.190 and 500.200 and the Electrical Code
hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
pending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any
cause or causes of action acquired or existing under any act or
ordinance hereby amended or by Sections 500.190 and 500.200. No
just or legal right or remedy of any character shall be lost, impaired or
affected by Sections 500.190 and 500.200.
D. One (1) copy of Sections 500.190 and 500.200, the 2014 Edition of the
National Electrical Code, and the proposed amendments have been on
file in the City Clerk's office at least ninety (90) days prior to the
adoption of Sections 500.190 and 500.200.
A. The code adopted by Section 500.190 is amended as follows:
1. Article 80.1, Scope, is amended to read as follows:
80.1 Scope. The following functions are covered:
(1) The inspection of electrical installations as covered by 90.2.
(2) (Reserved)
(3) The review of construction plans, drawings, and specifications
for electrical systems.
Section
500.190
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.200
100:1225
(4) The design, alteration, modification, construction,
maintenance, and testing of electrical systems and equipment.
(5) The regulation and control of electrical installations at special
events, including but not limited to exhibits, trade shows,
amusement parks, and other similar special occupancies.
2. Article 80.5, Adoption, is amended to read as follows:
80.5 Adoption. Article 80 is adopted.
3. Article 80.13, Authority (13), is amended to read as follows:
(13) Whenever any installation subject to inspection prior to use
is covered or concealed without having first been inspected, the
authority having jurisdiction shall be permitted to require that such
work be exposed for inspection. The authority having jurisdiction
shall be notified when the installation is ready for inspection and
shall conduct the inspection within two (2) business days.
4. Article 80.15, Electrical Board, is deleted and one new Section is
enacted in lieu thereof to read as follows:
80.15(A) Creation of the Electrical Board. The Board of
Appeals shall be the Electrical Board, hereinafter designated as the
"Board."
80.15 (B), (C), (D), (E), and (F) are deleted.
80.15(G) Appeals.
(1) Review of decisions. Any person, firm, or corporation may
register an appeal with the Board for a review of any decision
of the Electrical Inspector, provided that such appeal is made
in writing within twenty (20) days after such person, firm,
or corporation shall have been notified. Upon receipt of such
appeal, said Board shall, if requested by the person making
the appeal, hold a public hearing and proceed to determine
whether the action of the Board or the Electrical Inspector
complies with this law and, within twenty (20) days after
receipt of the appeal or after holding the hearing, shall make
a decision in accordance with its findings.
(2) Conditions. Any person shall be permitted to appeal a decision
of the authority having jurisdiction to the Board when it is
claimed that any one (1) or more of the following conditions
exist:
a. The true intent of the codes or ordinances described in this
Code has been incorrectly interpreted.
b. The provisions of the codes or ordinances do not fully
apply.
Section
500.200
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.200
100:1226
Section 500.210. Permit Required.450 [R.O. 2009 §150.058; CC 1981
§9-16; Ord. No. 3793, 10-9-1970; Ord. No. 88-110, 6-23-1988; Ord.
No. 13-127 §1, 7-2-2013]
No person shall do or cause to be done any electrical wiring or alter or
repair any electrical work in the City unless a permit has been obtained
from the Director of Community Development or a designee and the person
has proof of having a County electric license, together with a surety
company bond, in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00),
conditioned that the person will indemnify and save harmless the City from
all accidents and damage caused by any negligence in protecting the work
or by unfaithful, imperfect or improper work done under the permit and
that the person will promptly pay all fines and charges lawfully imposed
for a violation of any of the rules, regulations and ordinances pertaining to
electricians and electric wiring; provided however, that any person desiring
to continue as an electrician shall have a current County license and a bond
to the City.
Section 500.220. Scope of Permit — Compliance With Terms.451
[R.O. 2009 §150.059; CC 1981 §§9-19—9-20; Ord. No. 3793,
10-6-1970]
c. A decision is unreasonable or arbitrary as it applies to
alternatives or new materials.
(3) Submission of appeals. A written appeal, outlining the Code
provision from which relief is sought and the remedy
proposed, shall be submitted to the authority having
jurisdiction within twenty (20) calendar days of notification of
violation.
5. Article 80.23(B), Penalties, is deleted.
6. Article 80.27, Inspector's qualifications, is deleted.
7. Article 80.35, Effective date, is amended as follows:
80.35 Effective date: Article 80 shall take effect immediately after
its passage and publication.
A. Scope Of Permit. No permit issued under this Article shall be deemed to
authorize anything or any work not stated in the application and permit.
B. Compliance With Terms Of Permit Required. No person shall install or
do any electrical wiring, except under and in accordance with the terms
and conditions of a permit issued pursuant to this Article.
450. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §500.650.
451. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §500.650.
Section
500.200
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.230
100:1227
Section 500.230. Homeowner Permits. [R.O. 2009 §150.060; CC
1981 §9-16.1; Ord. No. 90-106, 4-30-1990; Ord. No. 96-139,
5-8-1996]
Section 500.235. Violation and Penalty.
Any person who shall violate any provision of the code adopted in this
Article or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation
of an approved plan of or directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provision of this code, shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding three (3) months, or
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after
due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
A. A homeowner permit may be issued for an addition to, or repair,
modification or reconstruction of an existing electrical or plumbing
system on the premise of a detached single-family dwelling, including
accessory structures, to the owner or to a member of the owner's
immediate family residing with the owner, without any proof that the
owner has a electrical or plumbing license under the following
conditions:
1. The dwelling shall be designed and used solely for living purposes.
2. The dwelling shall be occupied by, or vacant and intended for
immediate occupancy by the owner and the owner's family and by
no other persons.
3. The permittee shall personally perform all required work.
4. Prior to the issuance of a permit under this Section, the Code
Enforcement Officer may require an affidavit or other reasonable
proof that the request for a permit complies with the foregoing
provisions and that the applicant has the necessary knowledge and
ability to perform the proposed work.
5. The permit may be revoked by the Code Enforcement Officer if the
Officer determines that work under the permit is not being properly
performed or that the application did not comply or no longer
complies with this Section. Upon such revocation, the property
owner may be required by the Officer to proceed immediately to
procure a licensed person to correct or complete the work.
B. This Section does not authorize a waiver or modification of any
provision of this Article relating to the materials, design, installation or
practice of electrical or plumbing work or to the preparation and
approval of plans or to required fees for permits, inspections and
reinspections.
Section
500.230
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.235
100:1228
ARTICLE X
Plumbing Code
Section 500.240. International Plumbing Code Adopted By
Reference. [R.O. 2009 §150.075; CC 1981 §22-1; Ord. No. 76-80,
10-20-1976; Ord. No. 88-112, 6-23-1988; Ord. No. 95-154, 6-7-1995;
Ord. No. 97-147, 5-8-1997; Ord. No. 00-140, 6-9-2000; Ord. No.
05-159, 5-27-2005; Ord. No. 10-152 §13, 7-21-2010; Ord. No. 15-102
§9, 5-19-2015]
Section 500.250. Amendments. [R.O. 2009 §150.076; CC 1981
§22-2; Ord. No. 76-80, 10-20-1976; Ord. No. 88-112, 6-23-1988; Ord.
No. 91-31, 2-20-1991; Ord. No. 95-154, 6-7-1995; Ord. No. 97-147,
5-8-1997; Ord. No. 98-494, 11-19-1998; Ord. No. 00-140, 6-9-2000;
Ord. No. 05-159, 5-27-2005; Ord. No. 10-152 §13, 7-21-2010; Ord.
No. 15-102 §9, 5-19-2015]
A. The 2015 Edition of the International Plumbing Code, including
Appendixes B, C, D, and E except as otherwise provided in this Chapter,
as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is adopted by
reference as the Plumbing Code of the City and made a part of this
Section as if fully set forth herein.
B. Wherever the phrase "Name of Jurisdiction" appears in the 2015
Edition of the International Plumbing Code, it shall be deemed to mean
the City.
C. Nothing in Sections 500.240 and 500.250 or in the Plumbing Code
hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
pending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any
cause or causes of action acquired or existing under any act or
ordinance hereby amended as cited in Sections 500.240 and 500.250.
No just or legal right or remedy of any character shall be lost, impaired
or affected by Sections 500.240 and 500.250.
D. One (1) copy of Sections 500.240 and 500.250, the 2015 Edition of the
International Plumbing Code, and the proposed amendments have been
on file in the City Clerk's office at least ninety (90) days prior to the
adoption of Sections 500.240 and 500.250.
A. The code adopted by Section 500.240 is amended to read as follows:
1. Section 101.1, Title, is amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Plumbing
Code of the City of Saint Charles. Missouri," hereinafter referred to
as "this code."
2. Section 101.2, Scope, is amended to read as follows:
101.2 Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to the
creation, installation, alteration, repairs, relocation, replacement,
Section
500.240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.250
100:1229
addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems within this
jurisdiction. This code shall also regulate nonflammable medical
gas, inhalation anesthetic, vacuum piping, nonmedical oxygen
systems and sanitary and condensate vacuum collection systems.
The installation of fuel gas distribution piping and equipment, fuel
gas-fired water heaters and water heater venting systems shall be
regulated by the International Fuel Gas Code.
Exceptions:
1. Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple onefamily
dwellings (townhouses) not more than three (3)
stories high with separate means of egress and their
accessory structures shall comply with the International
Residential Code.
2. Plumbing systems in existing buildings undergoing repair,
alteration, or additions, and change of occupancy shall
be permitted to comply with the International Existing
Building Code.
3. Sections 103.1 through 103.4 are deleted.
4. Sections 106.6, 106.6.1, 106.6.2, and 106.6.3 are deleted.
5. Section 108.4, Violation penalties, is deleted.
6. Section 108.5, Stop-work orders, is deleted.
7. Section 108.6, Abatement of violation, is deleted.
8. Section 109.1, Application for appeal, is deleted.
9. Section 109, Means of appeal, is deleted.
10. Section 305.4.1, Sewer depth, is amended to read as follows:
305.4.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers that connect to private
sewage disposal systems shall be a minimum of thirty (30) inches
(762 mm) below finished grade at the point of septic tank
connection. Building sewers shall be a minimum of thirty (30)
inches (762 mm) below grade.
11. Section 403.2, Separate facilities, shall have the following
exception amended to read as follows.
2. Separate facilities shall not be required in structures or tenant
spaces with total occupant load, including both employees and
customers, of thirty (30) or less.
12. Section 410.1, Approval, is amended to include the following
exception:
Section
500.250
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.250
100:1230
Section 500.260. Exemptions From Plumbing Permit Fees. [R.O.
2009 §150.078; CC 1981 §22-4; Ord. No. 90-24, 2-7-1990; Ord. No.
95-242, 9-20-1995]
Section 500.270. Plumbers and Drainlayers. [R.O. 2009 §150.079;
CC 1981 §§22-4; Ord. No. 3561, 4-24-1968; Ord. No. 3590,
7-24-1968; Ord. No. 85-238, 12-20-1985; Ord. No. 87-106,
5-20-1987; Ord. No. 88-112, 6-23-1988]
Exception: Occupancies with an occupant load of less than fifty
(50) people shall be permitted to provide an approved bottledwater
dispenser in lieu of the required drinking fountain.
13. Section 701.2, Sewer required, is hereby amended to read as
follows:
701.2 Sewer required. Every building in which plumbing fixtures
are installed and all premises having drainage piping shall be
connected to a public sewer, where available, or an approved
private sewage disposal system in accordance with the
International Private Sewage Disposal Code. A public water main
or public sewer system shall be considered available to a building
when the building is located within two hundred (200) feet of the
public water main or sewer.
A. Plumbing permit fees and water tap-on fees shall not be assessed for
construction projects of the City.
B. All governmental entities, comprehensive colleges and universities (not
including single-purpose institutions) and schools offering basic
education to any grade (K through 12) shall pay the cost of all material,
equipment and labor for the water tap-on. The entities set forth in this
Subsection shall be required to obtain all permits and inspection. If an
entity set forth in this Subsection requests that the City expedite its
review and inspections and if the City must contract for the expedited
services, then the entity shall pay the costs for the expedited
contractual services. [Ord. No. 18-256, 11-20-2018]
A. License Required—Bond. Any person desiring to do business as a
plumber or drainlayer shall make application for a license to do so by
filing the application in the office of the Director of Community
Development, together with a surety bond in the sum of ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) conditioned that the applicant will indemnify and
save harmless the City from all accidents and damages caused by any
negligence in conducting the work or by unfaithful, imperfect or
improper work done under the license and that the applicant will
promptly pay all fines and charges lawfully imposed for a violation of
any of the rules, regulations and ordinances pertaining to plumbers,
drainlayers, plumbing and sewers.
Section
500.250
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.270
100:1231
Section 500.275. Violation and Penalty.
Any person who shall violate any provision of the code adopted in this
Article or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation
of an approved plan of or directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provision of this code, shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding three (3) months, or
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after
due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
B. Investigation Of Application—Issuance. The Director of Community
Development shall establish examinations, rules and regulations for the
purpose of determining whether an applicant is qualified to be licensed
as a plumber or drainlayer in this City. An applicant must receive a
passing grade on the examination before a license will be issued to the
applicant. An applicant shall pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) before
taking the test.
C. Fee—Proration. The annual license fee for doing business as a plumber
shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00) and the annual license fee for doing
business as a drainlayer shall be twenty dollars ($20.00); provided
however, that if the license is issued for a period beginning on or after
December thirtieth (30th) and ending on June thirtieth (30th), one-half
(½) of the annual license fee shall be paid.
D. Expiration. All licenses issued under the provisions of this Article shall
be issued to and terminate on June thirtieth (30th) of each year.
E. Renewal. Any person desiring to continue a business as a plumber or as
a drainlayer shall make application for the renewal of each license to
the Director of Community Development. The Director of Community
Development may make an order directing that a license be renewed to
the applicant if all permit fees then due the City are paid and if previous
work done in the City has been satisfactory.
F. Plumbing And Drainlaying To Be In Conformance Therewith. All
plumbing and drainlaying installations in this City shall be in
accordance with the International Plumbing Code and no installations
or alterations of plumbing fixtures or piping shall be made, except in
conformity thereto.452
452. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection G, Deposits, was repealed 7-2-2013 by Ord. No. 13-127,
§1.
Section
500.270
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.275
100:1232
ARTICLE XA
Swimming Pool and Spa Code
Section 500.276. International Swimming Pool and Spa Code
Adopted By Reference. [Ord. No. 15-102§10, 5-19-2015]
Section 500.277. Amendments. [Ord. No. 15-102§10, 5-19-2015;
Ord. No. 15-143§1, 6-16-2015]
A. The 2015 Edition of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, as
published by the International Code Council, Inc., is adopted by
reference as the Swimming Pool and Spa Code of the City and made a
part of this Section as if fully set forth herein.
B. Wherever the phrase "Name of Jurisdiction" appears in the 2015
Edition of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, it shall be
deemed to mean the City.
C. Nothing in Sections 500.276 and 500.277 or in the Swimming Pool and
Spa Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or
proceeding pending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability
incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing under
any act or ordinance hereby amended as cited in Sections 500.276 and
500.277. No just or legal right or remedy of any character shall be lost,
impaired or affected by Sections 500.276 and 500.277.
D. One (1) copy of Sections 500.276 and 500.277, the 2015 Edition of the
International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, and the proposed
amendments have been on file in the City Clerk's office at least ninety
(90) days prior to the adoption of Sections 500.276 and 500.277.
A. The code adopted by Section 500.276 is amended to read as follows:
1. Section 101.1, Title, is amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Swimming
Pool and Spa Code of the City of St. Charles, Missouri," hereinafter
referred to as "this code."
2. Section 103 is deleted.
3. Sections 105.6, 105.6.1, 105.6.2 and 105.6.3 are deleted.
4. Section 107.4, Violation Penalties, is deleted.
5. Section 107.5, Stop-work orders, is deleted.
6. Section 107.6, Abatement of violation, is deleted.
7. Section 108, Means of Appeal, is deleted.
8. Section 307, General Design, is amended by adding a new
subsection to be numbered Section 307.10 which shall read as
follows:
Section
500.276
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.277
100:1233
307.10 Swimming Pool and Spa Water Discharge.
307.10.1. Dechlorination required. All swimming pool or spa
water shall be dechlorinated before the water is discharged from
the pool or spa into the sanitary sewer system or stormwater
system. This section applies to a public, privately owned,
subdivision-owned or commercially owned swimming pool or spa.
307.10.2. Water testing. A swimming pool or spa owner shall
notify the Public Works Department Water Division before water is
discharged from a swimming pool or spa into the sanitary sewer
system or stormwater system. The Water Division shall test the
water before the water is discharged. The water shall be
dechlorinated to 2ug/L for cold water and 10 ug/L for warm water
before the water is discharged.
307.10.3. Permit required for discharge into sanitary sewer
system; maximum discharge rate. An owner or operator of a
swimming pool or spa with a water capacity of over one thousand
(1,000) gallons that desires to discharge dechlorinated water into
the sanitary sewer system shall first obtain a discharge permit
from the Water Division. There is no cost for the discharge permit.
The date, time and quantity of discharge shall be stated on the
discharge permit to coordinate treatment at the Mississippi River
or Missouri River Wastewater Treatment Plant. The water
discharge rate into the sanitary sewer system shall not exceed five
(5) gallons per minute or two (2) gallons per minute for discharge
into the New Town at St. Charles sanitary sewer system.
307.10.4. Discharge into stormwater system. An owner or
operator of a swimming pool or spa that desires to discharge water
into the stormwater system shall direct the water to the street,
a stormwater inlet on the owner's property, or stormwater ditch
on the owner's property. The water shall be directed so as not to
create a nuisance or hazard in the right-of-way, or not to erode,
encroach upon, flow across or pond upon any adjoining property.
Section
500.277
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.277
100:1234
ARTICLE XI
Fees
Section 500.280. Fees. [R.O. 2009 §150.085; Ord. No. 05-160,
5-27-2005; Ord. No. 09-227, 12-10-2009; Ord. No. 10-152 §4,
7-21-2010; Ord. No. 12-110 §1, 6-21-2012]
A. A fee for each integrated permit, certificate of occupancy, application to
the Board of Appeals, plan examination, inspection and miscellaneous
permit is hereby imposed as set forth herein. The Department of
Community Development, Code Enforcement Division is responsible for
the calculation, charging and collection of each fee. The Director of the
Department of Community Development shall have the authority to
decide and set any future fee increases within the maximum allowed by
the formula.
B. Definitions. For the purpose of this Section, the following definitions
shall apply:
ESTIMATED CONSTRUCTION COST — The greater of the following:
the cost of construction as stated by the applicant on the permit
application or the cost of construction according to the most recent
square footage construction costs table as published by the
International Code Council, Inc.
INTEGRATED PERMIT — One (1) permit issued for a combination of
all building, electrical, mechanical and plumbing construction to be
completed in the same structure.
PERMIT FEE MULTIPLIER — Shall be .0045.
C. Fee For Integrated Permit. The Department of Community
Development, Code Enforcement Division shall charge the following fee
for an integrated permit.
1. For residential property requiring no more than two (2)
inspections, the fee shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or the
estimated construction cost multiplied by the permit fee multiplier,
whichever is greater.
2. For all other property, the fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) or the
estimated construction cost multiplied by the permit fee multiplier,
whichever is greater.
D. Fee For Individual Plumbing, Electrical, Mechanical Or Building Permit.
The Department of Community Development, Code Enforcement
Division shall charge the following fee for an individual plumbing,
electrical, mechanical or building permit when an integrated permit
cannot be issued. The fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) or the estimated
construction cost as stated by the applicant on the permit application
multiplied by the permit fee multiplier, whichever is greater.
Section
500.280
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.280
100:1235
E. Fee For Plan Examinations. The Department of Community
Development, Code Enforcement Division shall charge the fee stated in
paragraph (1) below for plan examination:
1. The fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) or the estimated construction
cost multiplied by two thousandths (.002), whichever is greater,
except as stated in paragraph (3) below.
2. The plan examination fee shall be in addition to any other permit
fee.
3. In the event the City shall pay a third (3rd) party for plan
examination, then the plan examination fee shall be the amount
paid by the City for the plan examination.
4. Plan examination fees are not refundable.
F. Fee For Miscellaneous Permits. The Department of Community
Development, Code Enforcement Division shall charge a thirty-five
dollar ($35.00) fee for an electric temporary pole, electrical service
repair or upgrade, furnace, air conditioner, water heater or sewer
lateral permit.
G. Fee For Certificate Of Occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be
required for commercial, miscellaneous and industrial uses whenever
there is a change in ownership, occupancy, use or when a structural
addition, alteration or renovation is made. The Department of
Community Development, Code Enforcement Division shall charge the
following fee for existing structures:
1. Fifty dollars ($50.00) for each commercial or industrial structure.
H. Fee For Additional And Canceled Inspections. The Department of
Community Development, Code Enforcement Division shall charge a
fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) in the following situations:
1. For each inspection, when notice of defective work or material is
made that requires additional inspection to verify correction of the
defect.
2. Failure of applicant to cancel a scheduled inspection within twentyfour
(24) hours or one (1) business day of the date and time of the
inspection.
I. Fee For Renewal Of Integrated Permit. The Department of Community
Development, Code Enforcement Division shall charge a fee of fifty
dollars ($50.00) for renewal of a residential integrated permit and a fee
of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for renewal of any other integrated
permit.
J. Fee For Application To The Board Of Appeals. The Department of
Community Development, Code Enforcement Division shall charge a
Section
500.280
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.280
100:1236
fee of one hundred thirty-five dollars ($135.00) for each application to
the Board of Appeals.
K. Exemptions From Fees. The following are exempt from the payment of
fees for integrated permit, certificate of occupancy, plan examination,
inspection and miscellaneous permit:
1. Governmental entities and political subdivisions;
2. Comprehensive colleges and universities (not including singlepurpose
institutions);
3. Schools offering basic education to any grade (kindergarten
through grade 12) and early childhood education centers; [Ord.
No. 15-167 §1, 8-4-2015]
4. Places of worship.
This exemption from the payment of fees is not an exemption
from the obligation to apply for and obtain permits and
inspections, as required by law. In the event the City shall
pay a third party for any examination or inspection due to
a request for expedited service by the applicant, then the
exempt entity shall pay the costs incurred by the City for such
service.
L. Fee Reduction For Green Point Rating System. There shall be a project
fee reduction for the GPRS Bonus for the applicable tier as set forth
below:
1. GPRS Bonus: Tier 1: Project fee reduction of fifteen percent (15%).
2. GPRS Bonus: Tier 2: Project fee reduction of fifty percent (50%).
3. GPRS Bonus: Tier 3: Project fee reduction of eighty-five percent
(85%).
An exemption or reduction from the payment of fees is not an
exemption from the obligation to apply for and obtain permits
and inspections, as required by law. In the event the City shall
pay a third (3rd) party for any examination or inspection due
to a request for expedited service by the applicant, then the
exempt entity shall pay the costs incurred by the for such
service.
M. Fee For Home Energy Audits. The Department of Community
Development, Code Enforcement Division shall charge a fee of fourteen
cents per square foot ($0.14/square foot) of living space for a home
energy audit. The home energy audit fee is waived for homes that
qualify for the City Home Improvement Loan Program.
N. Nothing in Section 500.280 hereby adopted shall be construed to affect
any suit or proceeding pending in any court, or any rights acquired, or
Section
500.280
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.280
100:1237
liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing
under any act or ordinance hereby amended by this Section. No just or
legal right or remedy of any character shall be lost, impaired or affected
by this Section.
Section
500.280
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.280
100:1238
ARTICLE XII
Rental Dwelling Units
Section 500.290. Statement of Purpose. [R.O. 2009 §150.090; Ord.
No. 00-37, 2-4-2000; Ord. No. 04-254, 11-5-2004; Ord. No. 07-67,
3-13-2007]
The purpose of Sections 500.300 through 500.340 of the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Saint Charles, Missouri, as amended, is to provide
for the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the City of
Saint Charles through the establishment of a rental inspection program.
The rental inspection program shall monitor the general condition of rental
units within the City through the establishment of a regularly scheduled
inspection procedure. At a minimum, the health and safety occupancy
inspection shall review the following areas of potential health and safety
concerns to assure that all necessary utility services are provided and
functioning properly; all HVAC systems are in working condition; all
plumbing fixtures are in proper working condition; no unsafe electrical
hazards exist; the structure is structurally sound; all windows are in place,
unbroken and function properly; plaster and paint on walls are not peeling
or flaking; there is no accumulation of trash, debris, chemicals or fabric
which could pose a fire hazard; there are no insect or rodent infestations;
and the exterior of the structure meets all property maintenance codes.
Section 500.300. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §150.091; CC 1981 §15-50;
Ord. No. 88-38, 3-16-1988; Ord. No. 00-37, 2-4-2000; Ord. No.
04-254, 11-5-2004; Ord. No. 07-67, 3-13-2007]
For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CRIMINAL ACTIVITY — The commission, attempted commission,
conspiracy to commit or the solicitation, coercion or intimidation of another
person to commit any crime which is chargeable by indictment or
information under Missouri law including, but not limited to:
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Community Development Department or
the Director's designee.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one (1) or more persons including permanent provision for
living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. The term "dwelling unit"
shall not apply to any single-family house which is not rented or leased in
whole or in part.
1. Chapter 195, RSMo., relating to drug regulations;
2. Chapter 570, RSMo., relating to stealing and related offenses;
3. Chapter 567, RSMo., relating to prostitution; or
4. Chapter 571, RSMo., relating to weapons.
Section
500.290
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.310
100:1239
Section 500.310. Certificate of Compliance.453 [R.O. 2009 §150.092;
CC 1981 §15-51; Ord. No. 88-38, 3-16-1988; Ord. No. 00-37,
2-4-2000; Ord. No. 04-254, 11-5-2004; Ord. No. 07-67, 3-13-2007]
Section 500.320. Fees.454 [R.O. 2009 §150.093; CC 1981 §15-52; Ord.
No. 88-38, 3-16-1988; Ord. No. 00-37, 2-4-2000; Ord. No. 04-254,
11-5-2004; Ord. No. 13-135 §1, 7-16-2013]
The fee for the certificate shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for each dwelling
unit inspected. A twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fee shall be charged if a private
inspector conducts the inspection under Section 500.330(F). If a unit must
be reinspected, there shall be no reinspection fee.
Section 500.330. Dwelling Unit Inspection. [R.O. 2009 §150.094; CC
1981 §15-53; Ord. No. 88-38, 3-16-1988; Ord. No. 00-37, 2-4-2000;
Ord. No. 01-220, 9-21-2001; Ord. No. 04-254, 11-5-2004; Ord. No.
07-67, 3-13-2007]
A. It shall be unlawful after the adoption of this Article for any person to
occupy or for any owner or agent thereof to rent or lease any dwelling
unit, or any part thereof, for any purpose until the owner or agent has
applied for a health and safety occupancy certificate and a certificate
has been issued by the Department of Community Development. A
certificate shall be valid until such time as an inspection is required
pursuant to Sections 500.330(A) or 500.340.
B. The certificate shall state that the dwelling unit and any adjacent
common area, if applicable, has been inspected and that the same is in
compliance with the provisions of this Article. The certificate shall also
state the name and address of the owner.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false
statement in an application for a certificate.
D. By issuing a health and safety occupancy certificate, the City does not
intend to and does not warrant, insure or guarantee to the holder
thereof, to his/her assignee or to any other person that there are no
violations of any provision of this or any other ordinance. The City
makes no warranty or representation whatsoever as to the condition of
the unit or building.
A. The Department of Community Development is authorized to and may
make inspections of all of the dwelling units and adjacent common
areas, if any, upon any change in occupancy thereof after the adoption
of this Article. At the discretion of the Director, an inspection upon a
change in occupancy may be waived if it is found that the unit in
question has at least a one (1) year history of compliance with these
453. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §500.650.
454. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §500.650.
Section
500.310
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.330
100:1240
Section 500.340. Criminal Activity in Dwelling Unit — Frequency of
Inspection. [R.O. 2009 §150.095; Ord. No. 07-67, 3-13-2007]
regulations and a limited period of time, generally not to exceed one (1)
year, has expired since the previous inspection of said unit.
B. The inspections shall be for the purpose of determining whether the
dwelling unit and the adjacent common areas, if any, conform to the
requirements of this Article. Under this Article, common areas shall not
be subject to independent inspection but shall only be inspected in
conjunction with the inspection of an adjacent dwelling unit.
C. For the purpose of making the inspection, the Director is authorized to
enter, examine and survey the premises by appointment with the
knowledge of the owner and tenant if occupied.
D. The inspection shall determine compliance with the basic health and
safety requirements of Section 500.110, maximum occupancy of
unrelated persons and the Property Maintenance Code.
E. If a violation is found, the owner shall be given a reasonable length of
time to make repairs prior to reinspection. A temporary certificate shall
be issued while repairs are being made, unless a violation renders the
premises unfit for human habitation, as determined in writing by the
Department of Community Development. No final certificate shall be
issued until the dwelling unit and the common area, if applicable,
complies or comply with the requirements of this Article.
F. For the purpose of issuing a certificate under this Article, inspections
may also be performed by private inspectors who are not employed by
the City of St. Charles. Such inspectors shall hold a current, valid
certification issued by the International Code Council (ICC) in its
Property Maintenance Code and shall utilize official inspection forms
provided by the City. The Department of Community Development shall
verify all inspection forms submitted by such inspectors. The
submission of a materially false inspection form by a private inspector
shall be a violation of this Chapter and the City may revoke the approval
of any private inspector who fails to comply with any provision of this
Article or who fails to perform accurate inspections.
G. Appeals from decisions of the Department of Community Development
shall be filed with the Board of Appeals. The procedures for appeal and
for the meetings, hearings and decisions of the Board shall be the same
as set forth elsewhere in the Code of Ordinances of the City of St.
Charles. For informational purposes only, any person appealing under
this Section shall forward a copy of the appeal to the City Council
member in whose ward the affected dwelling unit is located.
A. If a dwelling unit is the site of criminal activity, then the following
procedure shall be used to inspect the dwelling unit and to determine
frequency of re-inspections:
Section
500.330
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.340
100:1241
1. The Chief of Police may request the Director to inspect a dwelling
unit which was a site of criminal activity to determine compliance
of the property with Section 500.330(D).
2. Director may immediately inspect the dwelling unit to determine
compliance of the property with Section 500.330(D).
3. After the initial inspection of a dwelling unit, the Chief of Police and
Director are authorized to determine whether the premises shall be
re-inspected and the Director is authorized to re-inspect the
premises.
Section
500.340
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.340
100:1242
ARTICLE XIII
Dangerous and Unsafe Buildings
Section 500.350. Purpose and Scope. [R.O. 2009 §150.105; CC 1981
§5-31; Ord. No. 74-5, 2-6-1974]
It is the purpose of this Article to provide a just, equitable and practical
method for the repairing, vacation or demolition of buildings or structures
which are detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants
of such buildings or to the general public. This Article shall apply to all
dangerous building as herein defined which are now in existence or which
may hereafter exist in the City.
Section 500.360. Definition. [R.O. 2009 §150.106; CC 1981 §5-32;
Ord. No. 74-5, 2-6-1974]
For the purpose of this Article, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
DANGEROUS BUILDING — All buildings or structures which have any or
all of the following defects:
Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members lift,
lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the
center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base.
1.
Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show thirty-three percent
(33%) or more of damage or the deterioration of the supporting
member or members or fifty percent (50%) of damage or deterioration
of the non-supporting enclosing or outside walls or coverings.
2.
Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floor or roof or
in which the same are overloaded or which have insufficient strength to
be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
3.
Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to
become dangerous to life, safety or the general health and welfare of
the occupants or the people of the City.
4.
Those which are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary or would
ordinarily fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that
they are unfit for human habitation or likely to cause sickness or
disease, so as to work injury to the health, safety or welfare of those
occupying such buildings.
5.
Those having light, air and sanitary facilities which are inadequate to
protect the health, safety or general welfare of human beings who live
or may live therein.
6.
Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic
or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other
means of access.
7.
Section
500.350
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.360
100:1243
Section 500.370. Declared Nuisance — Emergency Measures. [R.O.
2009 §150.107; CC 1981 §§5-33—5-34; Ord. No. 74-5, 2-6-1974; Ord.
No. 98-494, 11-19-1998]
Section 500.380. Historic Districts.455 [R.O. 2009 §150.108; CC 1981
§5-35; Ord. No. 74-5, 2-6-1974; Ord. No. 98-235, 5-20-1998; Ord.
No. 98-494, 11-19-1998]
No enforcement in this Article shall be contrary or adverse to the intent
and purpose of Sections 400.330 through 400.350, which set forth the
provisions effecting the "SMPD", "EHP" and "HDD" historic districts;
provided, no dangerous building shall be allowed to exist without
commencement of the required work longer than ninety (90) days from
the date of declaration by the Building Code Official, excepting in cases
applicable to Section 500.370(B).
Section 500.390. Duties of Building Code Official. [R.O. 2009
§150.109; CC 1981 §5-47; Ord. No. 74-5, 2-6-1974; Ord. No. 95-98,
4-13-1995; Ord. No. 98-494, 11-19-1998]
Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall
or injure members of the public or property.
8.
Those which, because of their condition, are unsafe, unsanitary or
dangerous to the health, safety or general welfare of the people of this
City.
9.
A. Declared Nuisance. All dangerous buildings are hereby declared to be
public nuisances and shall be repaired, vacated or demolished as
provided in this Article.
B. Emergencies. In cases where it reasonably appears that there is
immediate danger to the health, life or safety of any person, the
Building Code Official may take emergency measures to vacate and
repair or demolish such dangerous building or structure and the cost of
such shall be collected in the same manner as provided in Section
500.440.
A. The Building Code Official shall have the duty under this Article to:
1. Inspection, generally. Inspect or cause to be inspected, as often as
may be necessary, all residential, institutional, assembly,
commercial, industrial, garages, special or miscellaneous
occupancy buildings for the purpose of determining whether any
defects exist which render such building a dangerous building
when there are reasonable grounds to believe that any such
building is dangerous.
455. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §500.650.
Section
500.360
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.390
100:1244
2. Inspection upon complaints. Inspect any building, wall or structure
about which complaints are filed by any person to the effect that a
building, wall or structure is or may be existing in violation of this
Article and shall determine if there are reasonable grounds to
determine that such building is dangerous.
3. Inspection upon reports by City department heads. Inspect any
building, wall or structure reported by any department head of this
City as probably existing in violation of this Article.
4. Declaration of nuisance. Declare that any building found to be a
dangerous building is a nuisance.
5. Notification of declaration. Notify in writing, either by personal
service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, or if service
cannot be had by either of these modes of service, publication two
(2) times for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper qualified to
publish legal notices, the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee,
agent and all other persons having an interest in such building as
shown by the land records of the Recorder of Deeds of the County
of any building found by him/her to be a dangerous building within
the standards set forth in this Article.
6. Calling of hearing before Board of Appeals. Upon failure to
commence the required work or demolition within the time
specified or upon failure to proceed continuously with the required
work without unnecessary delay, the Building Code Official shall
call and have a full and adequate hearing upon the matter before
the Board of Appeals, giving the affected parties at least ten (10)
days' written notice of the hearing. Any party may be represented
by counsel and all parties shall have an opportunity to be heard.
After the hearings, if the Board of Appeals finds evidence
supporting that the building or structure is a nuisance or
detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the
City, the Building Code Official shall issue an order making specific
findings of fact, based upon competent and substantial evidence,
which shows the building or structure to be a nuisance and
detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the
City. If the findings of fact do not support a finding that the building
or structure is a nuisance or detrimental to the health, safety or
welfare of the residents of the City, no order shall be issued to
demolish, repair or remove such building. If the findings of fact
show that such building is a nuisance and subject to the provisions
of this Article, the Building Code Official shall order the structure
to be demolished, removed or repaired, whichever is necessary
according to the findings of fact.
7. Posting of declaration. If the building or structure is declared to be
a nuisance, such building shall be marked or posted with a written
notice of such finding.
Section
500.390
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.400
100:1245
Section 500.400. Notice To Repair, Vacate or Demolish. [R.O. 2009
§150.110; CC 1981 §5-48; Ord. No. 74-5, 2-6-1974; Ord. No. 95-98,
4-13-1995]
Section 500.410. Standards For Order To Repair, Vacate or
Demolish. [R.O. 2009 §150.111; CC 1981 §5-49; Ord. No. 74-5,
2-6-1974; Ord. No. 95-98, 4-13-1995; Ord. No. 98-494, 11-19-1998]
A. The required notice to repair, vacate, clean up or demolish shall state
that:
1. The owner must repair, clean up or vacate, repair and clean up or
vacate, demolish and clean up such building in accordance with the
terms of the notice in this Article;
2. The occupant must vacate such building or the building must be
repaired in accordance with the notice and the occupant may
"remain in possession";
3. The mortgagee, agent or other persons having an interest in such
building as shown by the land records may, at their own risk, repair,
vacate, clean up or demolish or have such work done; provided that
any person notified under this Section to repair, vacate, clean up or
demolish any building shall be given such reasonable time not
exceeding thirty (30) days to commence the required work unless
in the judgment of the Building Commissioner it is determined to
be necessary to extend such time to commence the required work.
B. The notice provided for in this Section shall state a description of the
building or structure deemed hazardous, statement of the particulars
which make the building or structure a dangerous building and an
order requiring that the designated work to be commenced within a
time or extension thereof provided for in Subsection (A) above.
A. The following standards shall be followed by the Building Code Official
in ordering repair, vacation, clean up or demolition of any dangerous
buildings:
1. If the dangerous building can reasonably be repaired so that it will
no longer exist in violation of the terms of this Article, it shall be
ordered repaired.
2. If the dangerous building is in such condition as to make it
dangerous to the health, safety or general welfare of its occupants,
it shall be ordered to be vacated and repaired.
3. In all cases where a building cannot be repaired so that it will no
longer exist in violation of the terms of this Article, it shall be
demolished.
4. In all cases where a dangerous building is a fire hazard existing or
erected in violation of the terms of this Article or any other
Section
500.400
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.410
100:1246
Section 500.420. Appeals. [R.O. 2009 §150.112; CC 1981 §5-50; Ord.
No. 74-5, 2-6-1974; Ord. No. 98-494, 11-19-1998]
The person or company ordered to comply with the findings of the Board
of Appeals may, within thirty (30) days from the receipt of the order of the
Building Code Official as directed by the Board of Appeals, appeal such
decision to the County Circuit Court in the manner provided for in Chapter
536, RSMo., as amended.
Section 500.430. Searches. [R.O. 2009 §150.113; CC 1981 §5-51;
Ord. No. 74-5, 2-6-1974; Ord. No. 98-494, 11-19-1998]
Any owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent or any other person having
an interest in an alleged dangerous building shall allow the Building
Inspector to inspect such building. Upon failure to allow inspection, the
Building Code Official may apply to the Municipal Judge for a search
warrant if reasonable grounds exist to believe that such a building is a
dangerous building.
Section 500.440. Action By Building Code Official.456 [R.O. 2009
§150.114; CC 1981 §5-52; Ord. No. 74-5, 2-6-1974; Ord. No. 95-98,
4-13-1995; Ord. No. 98-494, 11-19-1998]
Upon failure to comply with the order of the Building Code Official within
thirty (30) days, the Building Code Official shall cause such building or
structure to be repaired, vacated, cleaned up or demolished as the facts
may warrant. The Building Code Official shall certify the charge for such
repair, vacation, cleanup or demolition to the City Clerk who shall cause a
special tax bill therefor against the property to be prepared and submitted
to the City Council. The Director of Finance shall collect such tax bill. At the
request of the taxpayer, the tax bill may be paid in installments over a period
of not more than ten (10) years. The tax bill, from date of its issuance, shall
be a lien on the property until paid and shall bear the legal interest rate.
Section 500.450. Withholding Insurance Proceeds.457 [R.O. 2009
§150.115; CC 1981 §5-54; Ord. No. 84-153, 12-5-1984; Ord. No.
93-134, 6-16-1993; Ord. No. 95-98, 4-13-1995; Ord. No. 98-494,
11-19-1998]
ordinance of the City or Statute of the State, it shall be repaired or
demolished.
5. In all cases where cleanup is necessary because of the repair or
demolition of a dangerous building, the property shall be ordered
to be cleaned up.
A. As to damage or loss to a building or other structure caused by or
arising out of any fire, explosion or other casualty loss, if an order is
456. Cross References—As to property tax, §§140.250 et seq.
457. Cross Reference—As to insurance companies, ch. 655.
Section
500.410
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.450
100:1247
issued by the Building Code Official or his/her designee as provided in
Section 500.440 and a special tax bill or assessment is issued against
the property, it shall be deemed a personal debt against the property
owner. If there are proceeds of any insurance policy based upon a
covered claim payment made for damage or loss to a building or other
structure caused by or arising out of any fire, explosion or other
casualty loss, this Section establishes a procedure for the payment of up
to twenty-five percent (25%) of the insurance proceeds as set forth in
Subsections (1) through (7) of this Section. This Section shall apply only
to a covered claim payment which is in excess of fifty percent (50%) of
the face value of the policy covering a building or other structure:
1. The insurer shall withhold from the covered claim payment up to
ten percent (10%) of the covered claim payment and shall pay such
monies to the City to deposit into an interest-bearing account. Any
named mortgagee on the insurance policy shall maintain priority
over any obligation under this Section.
2. The City shall release the proceeds and any interest which has
accrued on such proceeds received under Subsection (1) of this
Section to the insured or as the terms of the policy and
endorsements thereto provide within thirty (30) days after receipt
of such insurance monies, unless the City has instituted legal
proceedings under the provisions of Section 500.440. If the City
has proceeded under the provisions of Section 500.440, all monies
in excess of that necessary to comply with the provisions of Section
500.440 for the removal of the building or structure, less salvage
value, shall be paid to the insured.
3. If there are no proceeds of any insurance policy as set forth in
Subsection (2) above, at the request of the taxpayer, the tax bill
may be paid in installments over a period of not more than ten (10)
years. The tax bill from date of its issuance shall be a lien on the
property until paid.
4. This Section shall apply to fire, explosion or other casualty loss
claims arising on all buildings and structures.
5. This Section does not make the City or County a party of any
insurance contract and the insurer is not liable to any party for any
amount in excess of the proceeds otherwise payable under its
insurance policy.
6. The Finance Director shall notify the Director of Insurance within
fourteen (14) days after the adoption of this Section in accordance
with Section 67.412, RSMo. The Director of Insurance shall, in
turn, notify insurance companies which issue policies insuring
buildings and other structures against fire, explosion or other
casualty loss within fourteen (14) days after such notification.
Insurance companies shall have sixty (60) days after the Director of
Insurance notifies them of the adoption of this Section to establish
Section
500.450
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.450
100:1248
procedures within this City to carry out the provisions of Section
67.410, RSMo.
7. The City may certify that in lieu of payment of all or part of the
covered claim payment under Section 67.410, RSMo., if it has
obtained satisfactory proof that the insured has or will remove
debris and repair, rebuild or otherwise make the premises safe and
secure, in this event, the City shall issue a certificate within thirty
(30) days after receipt of proof to permit covered claim payment to
the insured without deduction pursuant to Section 67.410, RSMo.
It shall be the obligation of the insured or other person making
claim to provide the insurance company with the written certificate
provided for in this Subsection (7).
Section
500.450
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.450
100:1249

ARTICLE XIV
Demolition and Removal of Buildings
Section 500.460. Demolition Prohibited Without Permission of
Building Code Official.458 [R.O. 2009 §150.125; CC 1981 §5-65; Ord.
No. 3533, 11-8-1967; Ord. No. 98-494, 11-19-1998]
No person shall demolish or remove or cause the demolition or removal of a
building of greater than five hundred (500) square feet of floor area within
the limits of the City without the permission of the Building Code Official to
do so.
Section 500.470. Permit Requirements. [R.O. 2009 §150.126; CC
1981 §§5-66—5-68; Ord. No. 3533, 11-8-1967; Ord. No. 98-494,
11-19-1998]
Section 500.480. Deposit Required. [R.O. 2009 §150.127; CC 1981
§5-69; Ord. No. 3533, 11-8-1967; Ord. 98-494, 11-19-98]
Upon receipt of the permit required in Section 500.460 from the Building
Code Official, the applicant shall present the same to the City Clerk who
shall endorse upon such permit the fact that the applicant has deposited
with him/her one hundred dollars ($100.00) in the form of a cashier's check
of some banking institution payable to and for the use and benefit of the
City as a forfeiture or guarantee for the proper replacement and restoration
of the lot upon which the building was demolished or removed.
Section 500.490. Notice To Utilities — Release From Utilities. [R.O.
2009 §150.128; CC 1981 §5-70; Ord. No. 3533, 11-8-1967; Ord. No.
98-494, 11-19-1998]
Before a building can be demolished or removed, the owner or agent
or contractor shall notify all utilities having service connections within
the building, such as water, electric, gas, sewer and other connections. A
A. Permit Application. Every person desiring to demolish or remove a
building within the City shall first apply to the Building Code Official for
and obtain the permit required by Section 500.460.
B. Form And Content. The permit required by Section 500.460 shall be on
a blank form to be prepared by the Building Code Official and shall set
forth the address of the building to be demolished or removed and such
other data and information as the Building Code Official may deem
necessary and pertinent.
C. Ninety Day Period—Extension. Permits required by Section 500.460
shall be issued for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days but the time
may be extended by the Building Code Official for a reasonable time for
good cause shown.
458. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §500.650.
Section
500.460
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.490
100:1251
permit to demolish or remove a building shall not be issued until there is
on file with the Building Code Official a release from the utilities having
service connections within the building to be demolished and appurtenant
equipment, such as meters and regulators, stating that they have been
removed or sealed and plugged in a safe manner.
Section 500.500. Removal of Debris and Hazards. [R.O. 2009
§150.129; CC 1981 §5-71; Ord. No. 3533, 11-8-1967]
Whenever a building is demolished or removed, the premises shall, within
thirty (30) days after the completion of demolition or removal, be cleared
of all rubble, debris and otherwise made free of all unsafe or hazardous
conditions and established grades shall be restored as may be needed to
insure public safety.
Section 500.510. Liability Insurance Required. [R.O. 2009 §150.130;
CC 1981 §5-72; Ord. No. 3533, 11-8-1967; Ord. No. 3577, 6-5-1968;
Ord. No. 98-494, 11-19-1998]
The owner or agent or contractor shall carry public liability insurance in
the sum of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) combined single
limit for each occurrence or in excess of such sums to protect the owner
or agent or contractor and the City from all tort liability and such owner
or agent or contractor must furnish evidence of such insurance coverage
before issuance of any permit to demolish or remove a building closer than
ten (10) feet from a property line adjacent to a public street or a greater
distance if the Building Code Official deems it necessary for the safety of
the public.
Section 500.520. Fee For Permit. [R.O. 2009 §150.131; CC 1981
§5-73; Ord. No. 3533, 11-8-1967; Ord. No. 87-108, 5-20-1987; Ord.
No. 93-40, 3-3-1993]
The fee for a permit to demolish or remove a building required by this
Chapter shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00) and shall be paid by the
applicant to the City Collector for deposit in the General Fund of the City.
Section
500.490
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.520
100:1252
ARTICLE XV
Heating, Air-Conditioning, Refrigeration and Ventilation
Section 500.530. General. [R.O. 2009 §150.140; Ord. No. 96-67,
3-6-1996]
This Article shall govern the licensing of persons who design, install,
construct, maintain, service, repair, alter or modify a product or equipment
in heating, air-conditioning, refrigeration, ventilation, process cooling and
process heating by providing reasonable requirements for knowledge and
skill to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
Section 500.540. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §150.141; Ord. No. 96-67,
3-6-1996]
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall have
the following meanings when used in this Article:
BTUH — British Thermal Unit Per Hour of Heat.
HEATING AND AIR-CONDITIONING — The process of treating air to
control temperature, humidity, cleanliness, ventilation or circulation to
meet human comfort requirements.
HORSEPOWER — The equivalent to seven hundred forty-six (746) watts.
HVACR — The design, installation, construction, maintenance, service,
repair, alteration or modification of a product or of equipment in heating
and air-conditioning, refrigeration, ventilation or process cooling or heating
systems.
HVACR EMPLOYEE — A person who is an employee of an HVACR licensee
and who does not hold a Class A, B or C HVACR license and who can only
perform work for an HVACR licensee.
HVACR GAS FITTING WORK — Gas fitting work for the purpose of
supplying a HVACR system from an existing, accessible manual safety shutoff
gas cock, installing flue gas vents and combustion air for the HVACR
system.
HVACR MAINTENANCE WORK — Repair, modification, service and all
other work required for the normal continued performance of a HVACR
system. This term does not include the installation or total replacement of a
system or the installation of boiler or pressure vessels that must be installed
by licensed persons.
LICENSEE — The holder of a license issued pursuant to this Article.
ONE TON — Twelve thousand (12,000) BTUH.
PUBLIC ENTITY — Any agency of the State of Missouri or any political
subdivision of the State.
REFRIGERATION — The use of mechanical or absorption equipment to
control temperature, humidity, or both, in order to satisfy the intended use
of a specific space other than for human comfort.
Section
500.530
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.540
100:1253
REPAIR — The reconstruction or replacement of any part of an existing
HVACR system for the purpose of its maintenance.
SUBCONTRACTOR — A person who performs a portion of the HVACR
installation.
Section 500.550. Administration. [R.O. 2009 §150.142; Ord. No.
96-67, 3-6-1996]
Section 500.560. Licensing. [R.O. 2009 §150.143; Ord. No. 96-67,
3-6-1996]
A. Powers Of The Director. The Director of Community Development may:
1. Adopt rules and regulations to ensure the proper administration
and enforcement of this Article;
2. Assist and advise the City Council on all matters related to
licensing of HVACR maintenance work;
3. Conduct hearings on all matters related to the licensing and
inspection of HVACR work;
4. Establish HVACR code inspection programs;
5. Conduct investigations into the qualifications of applicants for
licensure;
6. Review applications for a Class A, Class B or Class C license; and
7. Assist and advise the City Council in such matters as are requested
by the City Council.
B. City Council Approval Of Rules. No rule or portion of a rule
promulgated under the authority of this Article shall become effective
until it has been approved by the City Council.
A. General. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in HVACR work
without the appropriate license, unless exempted pursuant to this
Section. It is unlawful for any licensee to allow a non-licensed person or
any other person to use his/her St. Charles City HVACR license for any
purpose.
B. Persons Excepted. This Article shall not apply to a person who:
1. Performs HVACR work in an existing building or structure owned
and occupied by the person performing the work as a place of
residence.
2. Performs HVACR work in an existing building or structure owned
or occupied by that person on that person's farm.
Section
500.540
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.560
100:1254
Section 500.570. License Classes. [R.O. 2009 §150.144; Ord. No.
96-67, 3-6-1996]
Section 500.580. License Application. [R.O. 2009 §150.145; Ord. No.
96-67, 3-6-1996]
3. Performs work for a public utility on construction, maintenance and
development work which is incidental to the public utility's
business.
4. Is a HVACR subcontractor who performs HVACR work for a current
HVACR Class A or Class B license.
5. Is a person or public entity servicing or repairing its own HVACR
system with its own personnel specifically trained for such service
or repair.
6. Is a person who is an employee of a licensed HVACR contractor,
performing work under the supervision of the HVACR contractor.
C. Permits Required. Any person exempt under this Section shall conform
to regulations on the performance of HVACR work and shall obtain local
permits and inspections as may be required by local ordinance.
A. General. Except as otherwise provided by Section 500.560, every
individual who designs, installs, constructs, maintains, services,
repairs, alters or modifies any HVACR system or any portion of an
HVACR system in the City of St. Charles, Missouri, shall obtain one (1)
of the following classes of licenses:
1. Class A — Entitles the licensee to perform HVACR work without
limitation to BTUH or horsepower capacities;
2. Class B — Entitles the licensee to perform HVACR work on airconditioning
systems that develop a total of not more than twenty
(20) tons of cooling capacity per unit or five hundred thousand
(500,000) BTUH heating input per unit and refrigeration system of
fifteen (15) horsepower or less per unit; or
3. Class C — Entitles the licensee who is in the business of servicing
and repairing heating, ventilation, air-conditioning or refrigeration
equipment for the public or servicing, repairing or replacing
components of HVACR equipment and performing HVACR work on
air-conditioning systems that develop a total of not more than
twenty (20) tons of cooling capacity per unit or five hundred
thousand (500,000) BTUH heating input per unit and refrigeration
system of fifteen (15) horsepower or less per unit. A Class C license
holder shall not install any original HVACR equipment or replace
any existing HVACR equipment.
B. Supervision. An HVACR employee must perform HVACR work under the
supervision of a HVACR license holder.
Section
500.560
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.580
100:1255
Section 500.590. Expiration of License. [R.O. 2009 §150.146; Ord.
No. 96-67, 3-6-1996]
All licenses issued pursuant to this Article shall be issued to and terminate
on June thirtieth (30th) of each year.
Section 500.600. Gas Fitting Work. [R.O. 2009 §150.147; Ord. No.
96-67, 3-6-1996]
Any individual licensed or registered to perform HVACR work may perform
HVACR gas fitting work without obtaining any other license to perform the
work. HVACR gas fitting work shall be performed in accordance with the
appropriate standards for gas fitting work.
Section 500.610. Enforcement. [R.O. 2009 §150.148; Ord. No.
96-67, 3-6-1996]
A. General. An applicant for a HVACR license must meet the following
minimum requirements:
1. The applicant must be at least eighteen (18) years of age;
2. The applicant must file an application on forms prescribed by the
Director of Community Development;
3. The applicant must specify the class of license desired;
4. The applicant must meet all requirements specified by the rules
and regulations promulgated by the Director of Community
Development;
5. The applicant must pay the appropriate license fees; and
6. The applicant must have a valid HVACR license issued by St.
Charles County or have passed tests equivalent to those required
for HVACR licensure by St. Charles County.
B. Denial And Revocation. All applicants who meet the requirements of
licensure shall be issued the appropriate license except that the
administrative authority may deny a license if the applicant has:
1. Committed any act which, if committed by a licensee, would be
grounds for suspension or revocation of the license;
2. Previously been denied a license for cause or previously had a
license revoked for cause; or
3. Knowingly made any false statement or misrepresentation on the
application.
A. General. The Director of Community Development may make
investigations and conduct hearings and, upon its own investigation or
a complaint in writing, signed and verified by the complainant, suspend
Section
500.580
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.610
100:1256
Section 500.620. Electrical Work. [R.O. 2009 §150.149; Ord. No.
96-67, 3-6-1996]
Nothing in this Article shall be construed as allowing an HVACR licensee
to perform electrical work without complying with applicable local, City
or State electrical licensing requirements and any applicable local code or
State code pertaining to electrical work.
Section 500.630. Bonding. [R.O. 2009 §150.150; Ord. No. 96-67,
3-6-1996]
All persons licensed under this Article shall be required to maintain on file
with the Director of Community Development evidence of an individual or
blanket bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). This bond
must be kept in force at all times.
Section 500.640. Liability Insurance. [R.O. 2009 §150.151; Ord. No.
96-67, 3-6-1996]
All persons licensed under this Article shall be required to maintain on file
with the Director of Community Development evidence of liability insurance
coverage in the amount for five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00)
combined single limit.
Section 500.650. Penalty. [R.O. 2009 §150.999; CC 1981 §§5-5, 5-53,
9-5; Ord. No. 74-5, 2-6-1974; Ord. No. 88-10, 6-23-1988; Ord. No.
88-47, 4-7-1988; Ord. No. 98-494, 11-19-1998]
or revoke any license or registration if it finds that the holder of the
license or registrant has:
1. Made a material misstatement in the application for license or
registration or renewal thereof;
2. Demonstrated incompetency to act as a license holder or registrant
according to the rules and standards promulgated by the Director
of Community Development; or
3. Has violated any provision of this Article or any rule, regulation or
order promulgated by the Director of Community Development.
B. Power Of Appeal. The individual complained against shall have the right
to appeal to the Board of Appeals. One (1) year after the date of the
revocation, an application may be made for a new license or
registration.
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter for which
no other penalty is set forth shall be subject to the penalty set forth in
Section 100.150 of this Code of Ordinances.
B. It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with the notice of declaration of
nuisance, as described in Section 500.370, within a reasonable time or
Section
500.610
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.650
100:1257
Section 500.660. through Section 500.690. (Reserved)
upon failure to proceed continuously without unreasonable delay as
specified in the Building Code Official's order. Such unlawful acts shall
be punishable by fine and imprisonment as specified for offenses in the
Municipal Court of the City.
Section
500.650
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.660
100:1258
ARTICLE XVI
Levels of Contamination Due To The Production of Clandestine
Drugs and Protocols For Abating Such Contamination
Section 500.700. Purpose. [Ord. No. 13-107 §1, 5-22-2013]
The purpose of this Article is to adopt standards for identifying dangerous
levels of toxic chemicals and residue associated with the manufacture of
illegal drugs such as methamphetamine or other hazardous or dangerous
chemicals that may be present and to establish protocols whereby the
Department of Community Development may cooperate with and rely on
the Drug Task Force when applying the Property Maintenance Code of the
City of St. Charles to order or cause the abatement of contamination in
structures due to the production of methamphetamine.
Section 500.710. Definitions. [Ord. No. 13-107 §1, 5-22-2013]
For purposes of this Article, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CLANDESTINE DRUG MANUFACTURE — Chemistry carried out in secret
and particularly in illegal drug laboratories. The term "clandestine lab" is
generally used in any situation involving the production of illicit compounds
synthesized to smaller amounts of controlled substances, regardless of
whether the facilities being used qualify as a true laboratory.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Community Development of the City
of St. Charles.
DRUG TASK FORCE — The St. Charles County Regional Drug Task Force,
a multi-jurisdictional enforcement group or MEG established by
intergovernmental agreements between St. Charles County and the
municipalities of St. Charles, St. Peters, O'Fallon, Lake St. Louis and
Wentzville pursuant to the Intergovernmental Drug Laws Enforcement Act,
Sections 195.501 to 195.511, RSMo., as amended.
METHAMPHETAMINE — Dextro methamphetamine, levo
methamphetamine, and unidentified isomers of the same, any racemic
mixture of dextro/levo methamphetamine, or any mixture of unidentified
isomers of methamphetamine. The term includes derivatives, conjugates,
oxides and reduced forms of the basic structure associated with the
formation of methamphetamine. For the purposes of this protocol, this term
includes methamphetamine, ephedrine and pseudoephedrine.
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE — The International Property
Maintenance Code adopted by the City of St. Charles by reference in
Section 500.110 of the Code of Ordinances including all subsequent
amendments and supplements thereto.
QUALIFIED COMPANY OR QUALIFIED CONTRACTOR — A company or
contractor that tests structures for the presence of unsafe contamination
and/or abates such unsafe contamination and that:
Section
500.700
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.710
100:1259
UNSAFE CONTAMINATION — The presence of chemicals in a structure
at levels exceeding the levels for such chemicals as provided in Section
500.720.
Section 500.720. Unsafe Contamination. [Ord. No. 13-107 §1,
5-22-2013]
Section 500.730. Closure and Abatement Orders Upon Report and
Investigation By Drug Task Force. [Ord. No. 13-107 §1, 5-22-2013]
Complies with the guidelines of the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency Voluntary Guidelines for Methamphetamine Laboratory
Cleanup (August 2009);
1.
Complies with the regulations of the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration of the United States Department of Labor relating to
hazardous waste operations and emergency response, including 29
Code of Federal Regulations Section 1910.120;
2.
Requires that at least one (1) employee or supervisor assigned to and
on duty at any work site shall have completed the forty (40) hour
Hazardous Waste Operations and Emergency Response (HASWOPER)
training [Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) 29
CFR 1910]; and
3.
Requires its personnel to complete a clandestine drug lab assessment
and decontamination course offered by a sponsor acceptable to the
Drug Task Force and/or department.
4.
A. A structure shall be considered unsafe for purposes of the Property
Maintenance Code of the City of St. Charles if it is found to contain any
of the chemicals listed below at exposure limits above the levels listed
below established by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health (NIOSH):
1. Red Phosphorus: any amount.
2. Iodine Crystals: C 0.1 ppm (1 mg/m3).
3. Sulfuric Acid: TWA 1 mg/m3.
4. Hydrogen Chloride: C 5 ppm (7 mg/m3).
5. Hydrochloric Acid (Hcl gas): C 5 ppm (7mg/m3).
6. Methamphetamine: in a concentration equal to or greater than 1.5
µgram/100 cm2.
7. Lead and Mercury: if it is determined that the phenyl-2-propanone
(P2P) method of methamphetamine manufacturing was used,
surface levels for lead in excess of 20 µg/ft 2 and vapor samples for
mercury in excess of 50 ng/m3.
Section
500.710
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.730
100:1260
Section 500.740. Supplemental Notice and Instructions. [Ord. No.
13-107 §1, 5-22-2013]
A. When the Drug Task Force reports to the department that a structure or
one (1) or more units in a multi-unit structure in the City has been used
for the production of methamphetamine/clandestine compounds or as a
storage facility for chemicals used in the manufacturing of
methamphetamine as identified in Section 500.720, the department
may order that structure or unit closed pursuant to Section 109 or
applicable Section of the Property Maintenance Code. The department
shall rescind such an order if the Drug Task Force later reports that
after testing and investigation, it has not found unsafe contamination in
that structure.
B. When the Drug Task Force reports to the department that it has found
unsafe contamination in a structure or in one (1) or more units in a
multi-unit structure in the City that has been used for the production of
methamphetamine/clandestine compounds or as a storage facility for
chemicals used in the manufacturing of methamphetamine as identified
in Section 500.720, the department shall order that structure or unit
closed pursuant to Section 109 or applicable Section of the Property
Maintenance Code.
A. When closure and abatement orders pursuant to Section 109 or
applicable Section of the Property Maintenance Code are posted on a
structure, entry shall be prohibited to anyone except a qualified
company or contractor due to the safety and health concerns commonly
associated with the manufacture of methamphetamine/clandestine
compounds. Tenants desiring to enter the structure to retrieve personal
property must first register with the department. Once registered,
tenants may enter the structure only if accompanied by a member of the
Drug Task Force and/or the St. Charles Police Department.
B. When closure and abatement orders pursuant to Section 109 or
applicable Section of the Property Maintenance Code are posted on a
structure, the department shall attempt to contact the owner of record
and/or the lienholder of the affected property or the owner's agent as
provided in Section 107 or applicable Section of the Property
Maintenance Code and provide the owner or the owner's agent with
notice that the structure has been closed.
C. Such notice shall direct the owner to contact the department within
twenty (20) calendar days to establish a schedule for decontaminating
the structure.
D. Such notice shall also inform the owner that if the owner contact the
department within the time specified in the notice, the owner may
request to have the structure tested to establish that decontamination
of the structure is not necessary. Such testing must be performed as
follows:
Section
500.730
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.740
100:1261
Section 500.750. Decontamination. [Ord. No. 13-107 §1, 5-22-2013]
1. The owner must employ the services of a qualified company or
contractor to perform sampling and to analyze the samples;
2. Sampling and testing shall be performed in accordance with the
appropriate Sections of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Voluntary Guidelines for Methamphetamine Laboratory Cleanup
(August 2009); and
3. The qualified company or contractor engaged by the owner must
report the results of its analysis of the samples taken to the
Department of Community Development.
A. If testing confirms the presence of unsafe contamination in a structure,
the owner shall employ the services of a qualified company or
contractor to decontaminate the structure and shall advise the
department of the schedule for decontamination.
B. The schedule for decontamination and evidence that the company or
contractor meets the requirements of this Article must be submitted for
approval to the department within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date
of the notice. Approval will be based on the timeliness of the schedule
and the qualifications of the company or contractor. Approval or
rejection of the schedule will be provided within five (5) working days
from the date of receipt. If rejected, the owner will be informed in
writing of specific reasons for the rejection and will be required to
amend the schedule or the proposed qualified company or contractor.
Decontamination shall be performed in accordance with the
appropriate Sections of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Voluntary Guidelines for Methamphetamine Laboratory Cleanup
(August 2009).
C. If the owner of property determined to have unsafe contamination fails
to voluntarily abate that contamination, the department may serve a
summons to appear in St. Charles Municipal Court and proceed in
accordance with Sections 106 through 108 or applicable Sections of the
Property Maintenance Code. The department may also request to
disconnect utilities to the structure until the decontamination is
complete.
D. Following completion of the decontamination the owner shall notify the
department that the work is complete. The owner must provide written
test results as evidence that the property is compliant with this Article.
Sampling and testing must be done in accordance with the appropriate
Sections of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Voluntary
Guidelines for Methamphetamine Laboratory Cleanup (August 2009).
Section
500.740
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.760
100:1262
Section 500.760. Final Action — Inspection Fee — Owner
Responsibility For Utility Reconnection. [Ord. No. 13-107 §1,
5-22-2013]
After the property has been decontaminated and the department is in
possession of evidence that the pertinent chemical levels are below the
levels established for unsafe contamination by this Article, the structure will
be considered safe and suitable for performance of a full inspection for an
occupancy permit in accordance with the Property Maintenance Code. The
fee for a post-decontamination inspection shall be forty dollars ($40.00).
If utilities have been disconnected, the department shall notify the utility
companies that the unsafe conditions have been mitigated and service can
be restored. The property owner shall be responsible for any reconnection
fees.
Section
500.760
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.760
100:1263

ARTICLE XVII
Commercial Unit Inspections
Section 500.770. Statement of Purpose. [Ord. No. 13-259 §1,
12-17-2013]
The purpose of Sections 500.780 through 500.820 of the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Saint Charles, Missouri, as amended, is to provide
for the health, safety and general welfare of the employees and customers
of commercial establishments located in the City of Saint Charles through
the establishment of a commercial unit inspection program. The commercial
unit inspection program shall monitor the general condition of commercial
buildings and spaces within the City through the establishment of a
regularly scheduled inspection procedure. The occupancy inspection shall
review health and safety concerns to assure that all necessary utility
services are provided and functioning properly; all plumbing fixtures are in
proper working condition; no unsafe electrical hazards exist; the structure
is structurally sound; all windows are in place and unbroken; and there are
no insect or rodent infestations.
Section 500.780. Definitions. [Ord. No. 13-259 §1, 12-17-2013]
For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COMMERCIAL UNIT — A single unit occupied and used by a sole
proprietorship, joint venture, corporation or other business entity, either
for-profit or not-for-profit, including retail establishments where goods or
services are sold and professional corporations and other entities where
legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other professional
services are delivered. Commercial units include but are not limited to
customer service areas, display areas, work areas, private offices, employee
lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms and storage rooms.
CRIMINAL ACTIVITY — The commission, attempted commission,
conspiracy to commit or the solicitation, coercion or intimidation of another
person to commit any crime which is chargeable by indictment or
information under Missouri law, including, but not limited to:
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Community Development Department or
the Director's designee.
Section 500.790. Certificate of Compliance. [Ord. No. 13-259 §1,
12-17-2013]
A. Chapter 195, RSMo., relating to controlled substances;
B. Chapter 570, RSMo., relating to stealing and related offenses;
C. Chapter 567, RSMo., relating to prostitution; or
D. Chapter 571, RSMo., relating to weapons.
Section
500.770
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.790
100:1265
Section 500.800. Fees. [Ord. No. 13-259 §1, 12-17-2013]
The fee for the occupancy certificate shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
commercial unit inspected. A twenty-five-dollar fee shall be charged if a
private inspector conducts the inspection under Section 500.810(F). If a
unit must be reinspected, there shall be no reinspection fee.
Section 500.810. Commercial Unit Inspection. [Ord. No. 13-259 §1,
12-17-2013]
A. It shall be unlawful after the adoption of this Article for any person to
occupy or for any owner or agent thereof to rent or lease any
commercial unit, or any part thereof, for any purpose until the owner or
agent or tenant has applied for an occupancy certificate and a
certificate has been issued by the Department of Community
Development. A certificate shall be valid until such time as an
inspection is required pursuant to Sections 500.810(A) or 500.820.
B. The certificate shall state that the commercial unit has been inspected
and that the same is in compliance with the provisions of this Article.
The certificate shall also state the name and address of the owner.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false
statement in an application for an occupancy certificate.
D. By issuing an occupancy certificate, the City does not intend to and
does not warrant, insure or guarantee to the holder thereof, to his/her
assignee or to any other person that there are no violations of any
provision of this or any other ordinance. The City makes no warranty or
representation whatsoever as to the condition of the unit or building.
A. The Department of Community Development is authorized to and may
make inspections of commercial units upon any change in use, tenancy
or occupancy thereof after the adoption of this Article. Said inspection
shall occur prior to reoccupancy of the commercial unit. At the
discretion of the Director, an inspection upon a change in use, tenancy
or occupancy may be waived if it is found that the unit in question has at
least a one-year history of compliance with these regulations and a
limited period of time, generally not to exceed one (1) year, has expired
since the previous inspection of said unit.
B. The inspections shall be for the purpose of determining whether the
commercial unit conforms to the requirements of this Article.
C. For the purpose of making the inspection, the Director is authorized to
enter, examine and survey the premises by appointment with the
knowledge of the owner and tenant if occupied.
D. The inspection shall determine compliance with the basic health and
safety requirements of Section 500.770.
Section
500.790
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.810
100:1266
Section 500.820. Criminal Activity in Commercial Unit; Frequency
of Inspection. [Ord. No. 13-259 §1, 12-17-2013]
If a commercial unit is the site of criminal activity, then the following
procedure shall be used to inspect the commercial unit and to determine
frequency of reinspections:
E. If a violation is found, the owner shall be given a reasonable length of
time to make repairs prior to reinspection. A temporary certificate of
occupancy shall be issued while repairs are being made unless a
violation renders the premises unfit for human habitation as
determined in writing by the Department of Community Development.
No final certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the commercial
unit complies with the requirements of this Article.
F. For the purpose of issuing an occupancy certificate under this Article,
inspections may also be performed by private inspectors who are not
employed by the City of St. Charles. Such inspectors shall hold a
current, valid certification issued by the International Code Council
(ICC) in its Property Maintenance Code and shall utilize official
inspection forms provided by the City. The Department of Community
Development shall verify all inspection forms submitted by such
inspectors. The submission of a materially false inspection form by a
private inspector shall be a violation of this Chapter, and the City may
revoke the approval of any private inspector who fails to comply with
any provision of this Article or who fails to perform accurate
inspections.
A. The Chief of Police may request the Director to inspect a commercial
unit which was a site of criminal activity to determine compliance of the
property with Section 500.810(D).
B. The Director may immediately inspect the dwelling unit to determine
compliance of the property with Section 500.810(D).
C. After the initial inspection of a commercial unit, the Chief of Police and
Director are authorized to determine whether the premises shall be
reinspected, and the Director is authorized to reinspect the premises.
Section
500.810
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
500.820
100:1267
Chapter 505
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Cross References—As to street trees, ch. 225; as to excavation, grading and
storm water control, ch. 510; as to subdivisions—design and development
standards for streets and sidewalks, §§405.140 et seq.
Section
500.820
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
500.820
100:1268
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 505.010. Utility Stops Level With Sidewalk.459 [R.O. 2009
§54.002; CC 1981 §24-2]
All utility stop boxes or attachments or any other device in the sidewalks of
the City shall be at the same level of the sidewalk in which it is located. It
shall be unlawful for any person to own or control such device which is not
on the same level as the sidewalk.
Section 505.030. Attaching Signs, Posters and The Like To Poles
and Trees.460 [R.O. 2009 §54.004; CC 1981 §24-7]
It shall be unlawful for any person to attach in any way a sign, poster, bill,
banner or any other material or thing to any standard or any part of the
supports for the street lights along Main Street from First Capitol Drive
to Clark Street without first securing the permission of the City Engineer
by presenting a written petition stating in detail an exact description of
the sign, poster, bill, banner or other material or thing to be attached and
an explanation of the manner and place of attachment. Except as provided
above, it shall be unlawful to post any sign or advertisement of any nature
on any tree or public utility pole in or along any street or sidewalk in the
City.
Section 505.040. Damaging Bridges, Culverts or Crosswalks.461
[R.O. 2009 §54.005; CC 1981 §24-8]
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, tear up, deface or otherwise
destroy, injure or alter any bridge, culvert or crosswalk of the City without
having lawful authority to do so from the City Council.
Section 505.050. Ingress and Egress From Public Streets —
Compositions. [R.O. 2009 §54.006; CC 1981 §24-9; Ord. No. 3725,
2-26-1970; Ord. No. 3790, 9-23-1970; Ord. No. 72-49, 7-5-1972;
Ord. No. 89-72, 5-4-1989; Ord. No. 95-120, 5-2-1995]
A. Ingress and egress to property from public streets shall be made only
upon a properly constructed driveway. In accordance with the
specifications on file in the office of the Director of Public Works, curbs
shall be constructed of cast-in-place concrete and sidewalks and
driveways shall be constructed of cast-in-place concrete or concrete
pavers.
B. The City Engineer, upon the written application of a property owner,
may grant a temporary variance from the requirements of Section
505.280(A) pertaining to the width and fall of sidewalks.
459. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
460. Cross References—As to signs generally, §§400.1370 et seq.; as to penalty, §100.150.
461. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
505.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
505.050
100:1269
Section 505.060. Duty of Abutting Property Owner. [R.O. 2009
§54.007; CC 1981 §24-10; Ord. No. 3725, 2-26-1970]
It shall be the duty of the owner of any lot, tract or parcel of ground abutting
upon or laying adjacent to any public street within the City to level or fill the
space between the curbstone and the sidewalk with suitable soil or dirt to
grow grass. Such parkway shall be sowed in grass and shall be kept mowed
and in good condition by the abutting property owner.
Section 505.070. Authorization Required For Planting and
Resurfacing Parkway.462 [R.O. 2009 §54.008; CC 1981 §24-11; Ord.
No. 3725, 2-26-1970; Ord. No. 88-6, 1-20-1988]
It shall be unlawful to surface or pave any parkway within the City with
asphalt, seal-coat, concrete, rock, gravel or any similar material, except as
may be authorized by the Director of Public Works. Planting of trees and
shrubs in the parkway is regulated by Chapter 225 of this Code.
Section 505.080. Water From Downspouts and Drains.463 [R.O. 2009
§54.009; CC 1981 §24-12]
No water from any downspout or from any gutter or drain from any building
or premises shall be permitted to drain or run onto the surface of any
sidewalk or cross the same, unless it be made to pass through conduits,
drains or pipes placed beneath the surface of the sidewalk.
C. The City Engineer, upon the written application of a property owner,
may grant a temporary variance from the requirements of Subsection
(A) relative to driveways being constructed of concrete and permit a
temporary driveway constructed of asphalt when the subject property
does not have, and is not required to have, sidewalks and the abutting
property does not have sidewalks.
D. The temporary variances authorized in Subsections (B) and (C) of this
Section may be terminated by the City Engineer at such time as
sidewalks are planned or constructed on properties abutting the
property for which temporary variances were granted. When a
temporary variance is terminated, the property owner shall, within sixty
(60) days, construct sidewalks or driveways in accordance with Section
505.280(A) and Subsection (A) of this Section.
E. Properties which have asphalt driveways prior to September 23, 1970,
may be repaired, overlayed or seal-coated.
462. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
463. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
505.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
505.090
100:1270
Section 505.090. Erecting Signs, Lampposts and Awnings.464 [R.O.
2009 54.010; CC 1981 §24-13]
Every person who shall, within the City, erect or set up, or cause to be
erected or set up, or in case the same is already erected, upon due notice
by the Chief of Police or City Engineer, shall not remove within three (3)
days any lamppost, sign, pole or any other thing on any street or sidewalk,
or who shall suspend any awning, sign or other thing extending over any
sidewalk beyond the outline of such sidewalk, or less than eight (8) feet,
six (6) inches in height above the pavement without first having obtained
permission of the City Building Commissioner specifying the thing to be put
up or suspended shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Such permission
may be revoked by the City Council at any time and after due notice of
such action by the City Building Commissioner, any person violating any
of the provisions of this Section, or failing to remove any such obstruction
on notice of such revocation, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor as
if such permission had never been given; provided that movable awnings
made of cloth or canvas, put up or placed by permission of the City Building
Commissioner, shall, when lowered, be not less than seven and one-half
(7½) feet, in the clear, above the sidewalk. It shall be unlawful to erect or
maintain any awning which is less than seven (7) feet above the street or
sidewalk.
Section 505.100. Removal of Debris Left By Construction Work.
[R.O. 2009 §54.012; CC 1981 §24-14.1; Ord. No. 87-67, 4-18-1987;
Ord. No. 03-122, 5-27-2003]
A. Any person, firm or corporation to whom a building, demolition, or
grading permit has been issued shall remove at least twice each
working day any mud, dirt, sticky substance, litter or foreign matter of
any kind carried into or deposited upon any public street or public
sidewalk of the City by any vehicle or by the wheels of any vehicle
entering or leaving the site of the project for which the building,
demolition or grading permit was issued. The removal shall be
performed once prior to noon and once at the end of the working day.
B. Any landowner involved in building construction, demolition or grading
shall remove at least twice each working day any mud, dirt, sticky
substance, litter or foreign matter of any kind carried into or deposited
upon any public street or public sidewalk of the City by any vehicle or
by the wheels of any vehicle entering or leaving the site of the project of
building construction, demolition or grading. The removal shall be
performed once prior to noon and once at the end of the working day.
464. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
505.090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
505.110
100:1271
Section 505.110. Auction Sales.465 [R.O. 2009 §54.013; CC 1981
§24-19]
It shall be unlawful for any person to expose or offer any merchandise or
other property for show or sale by auction or otherwise upon any street,
sidewalk or public place without first having obtained permission of the City
Council upon written application therefor, specifying the purpose, location
and length of time for which such permission is requested.
Section 505.120. Throwing Stones, Glass or The Like On Streets.466
[R.O. 2009 §54.014; CC 1981 §24-20]
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or scatter any bottles, tacks,
scraps of iron or other metal, stones, glass or any other substance, likely
or liable to cause injury or damage to the tires of motor vehicles, upon the
streets of this City.
Section 505.130. Bonfires — Flying Kites — Playing Ball.467 [R.O.
2009 §54.015; CC 1981 §§24-21—24-22; Ord. No. 09-91, 5-15-2009]
Section 505.140. Underground Sprinkler System.468 [R.O. 2009
§54.016; CC 1981 §24-25; Ord. No. 89-17, 1-19-1989]
No underground sprinkler system or underground irrigation system shall be
installed on any street right-of-way.
Section 505.150. Annexation of Existing Streets. [Ord. No. 10-219
§1, 10-26-2010]
Upon annexation of property containing a street, such street shall be
petitioned for acceptance as a public street in accordance with Sections
505.330 and 505.340.
A. Bonfires On Streets And Sidewalks. It shall be unlawful for any person
to kindle or maintain any bonfire on any street or sidewalk in the City.
B. Flying Kites And The Like On Streets. It shall be unlawful for any
person to fly any balloon or kite in or along the streets and sidewalks of
the City except that a person may fly a balloon or kite in a cul-de-sac,
eyebrow or alley.
C. Playing Ball On Streets. It shall be unlawful for any person to play
baseball, football or any game of ball or engage in throwing and
catching balls on any streets of the City except that a person may play
baseball, football or any game of ball in a cul-de-sac, eyebrow or alley.
465. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
466. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
467. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
468. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
505.110
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
505.150
100:1272
ARTICLE II
Obstructions
Section 505.160. Obstructing Streets and Sidewalks; Easement
Encroachment; Exemptions.469 [R.O. 2009 §54.030; CC 1981 §24-3,
24-5; Ord. No. 09-91, 5-15-2009; Ord. No. 10-231 §1, 11-10-2010;
Ord. No. 13-178, 9-24-2013; Ord. No. 18-017, 2-6-2018; Ord. No.
18-082, 4-17-2018; Ord. No. 19-123, 6-4-2019]
A. Generally. It is declared a nuisance to encumber any square or street
within this City by placing or causing to be placed thereon any wood,
barrels, boxes, crates, lumber, brick, stone, iron or iron junk or other
articles, unless such articles are permitted to remain upon any such
square, street, alley or sidewalk in the construction of any new building
or in the removal, repair or alteration of any building or for the purpose
of piling building material or tools; provided that such persons shall
have first obtained a right-of-way usage permit from the Department of
Engineering to use such square or streets for such purposes. The fee for
a right-of-way usage permit shall be five dollars ($5.00). This Section
shall not apply to persons receiving or discharging any article in the
way of regular business. In the event a permittee fails to restore the
right-of-way or provide signage as required by Section 505.170 in the
manner and to the condition required by the City, or fails to
satisfactorily and timely complete the restoration work, the City, at its
option, may do such work. In the event the City provides signage or
performs restoration work, then the permittee shall reimburse the City,
within thirty (30) days of billing, the cost of signage, equipment,
materials, and labor to provide signage or restore the right-of-way.
Failure of a permittee to timely reimburse the City, shall result in
suspension of existing right-of-way usage permits and the further
issuance of right-of-way usage permits.
B. Obstruction Of Right-Of-Way; Security Required. Whenever a right-ofway
obstruction may alter the path of travel or result in a lane closure
of forty-eight (48) hours or greater, a permittee shall furnish security in
the form of cash deposit, letter of credit or bond, in a form approved by
the City Attorney, and in a minimum dollar amount as set forth below or
as determined by the Director of Public Works that is sufficient to pay
the cost of removal of the obstruction and to provide signage. Security
provided shall be used to reimburse the City for its actual incurred cost
of managing the rights-of-way. A permittee possessing a restoration of
public improvement permit bond is exempt from this Subsection. The
dollar amount of required security shall be as follows: [Ord. No.
19-207, 10-1-2019; Ord. No. 19-240, 11-19-2019]
1. For each cubic yard of rock, soil, and other construction material
staged on a right-of-way, the security shall be thirty-five dollars
($35.00);
469. Cross References—As to nuisances, §§220.020 et seq.; as to penalty, §100.150.
Section
505.160
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
505.160
100:1273
2. For dumpsters and portable storage units, the security shall be two
hundred dollars ($200.00); and
3. For all other obstructions, including, but not limited to, cranes,
scaffolding, and excavation equipment, the security shall be as
determined by the Director of Public Works.
C. Sidewalks To Be Kept Free From Obstructions. It shall be the duty of all
persons owning or occupying any property in this City to keep the
sidewalk in front of such property free from obstructions; provided,
however, that it shall not be unlawful for such owners or occupants to
obstruct sidewalks when receiving or discharging any article in the way
of regular business or with the placement of signage or barricade as
required by Section 505.170. Any object obstructing a sidewalk for
more than twenty-four (24) continuous hours may be removed by the
City and discarded. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the owner of an
automobile parked in a residential driveway that is less than twenty-two
(22) feet in length in such a manner that the automobile blocks the
sidewalk shall not be subject to enforcement of this restriction against
blocking sidewalks, provided, the automobile is parked no further than
five (5) feet from the front of the house. [Ord. No. 19-240,
11-19-2019]
D. Basketball Goals In Culs-De-Sac And Eyebrows Excepted Under Certain
Conditions. Notwithstanding the provisions contained in Subsections
(A) and (C) of this Section, a basketball goal may be situated on a rightof-
way that abuts private property located on the bulb of a cul-de-sac or
eyebrow; provided that the owner of each residence with frontage on
the bulb of the cul-de-sac or eyebrow signs a petition consenting to the
periodic use of the cul-de-sac or eyebrow for basketball and the
basketball goal can and shall be removed upon the direction of a Police
Officer or Code Enforcement Officer.
E. Improvements Within Easements. An improvement shall not be
installed or constructed so that it encroaches upon, over, under or into a
public utility easement. For purposes of this Section, the word
"improvement" includes, but is not limited to, fireplaces, window wells,
air conditioning units, retaining walls, generators or sheds, but shall
not include a fence. Roof eaves and overhangs may encroach into an
easement a distance not to exceed twelve (12) inches.
F. Exemptions. A request for an exemption from the requirements of
Section 505.160(E) shall be made in writing by the owner of the
property burdened by the public utility easement to the Director of
Public Works. The property owner shall submit the written request
along with a plan that identifies the proposed encroachment and an
executed easement encroachment license in the form as provided by
the City. The Director of Public Works shall investigate the exemption
request and shall approve, deny or modify the request. An easement
encroachment license shall not be for a period of time longer than the
condition at the property that justified the exemption exists. Changes in
Section
505.160
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
505.160
100:1274
Section 505.170. Barricades And Signage To Warn of Obstructions.
[R.O. 2009 §54.031; CC 1981 §24-4; Ord. No. 91-46, 3-8-1991; Ord.
No. 19-123, 6-4-2019]
Whenever any obstruction of any nature is necessarily left in or upon the
roadway of any street, except vehicles, or upon any sidewalk of the City, the
owner of or the person so leaving such obstruction shall at a minimum place
or cause to be placed a Type I or Type II barricade as defined in Section
6C-8 of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). A rightof-
way usage permit applicant shall provide with the permit application a
drawing of the work zone that depicts the proposed location of all traffic
control devices. The drawing shall be legible, is not required to be drawn
to scale, and is not required to be a sealed engineering quality document.
When a right-of-way obstruction reduces the number of lanes, results in
full street closure, alters the path of travel, changes traffic patterns, or
impedes the public use of the right-of-way, the permittee, owner of, or
the person so leaving the obstruction, shall provide signage in addition to
barricades. Traffic control devices shall be MUTCD conforming, possess
the most current engineering grade reflective sheeting, and be in good
maintained condition with 90% reflectivity.
Section 505.175. Administrative Approval of Right-of-Way
Encroachment Licenses. [Ord. No. 14-256 §1, 12-2-2014]
conditions at the property may result in the Director of Public Works
reviewing the exemption and may result in revocation or modification
of the exemption. A property owner may appeal the denial of a request
to the City Council. Said appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within
thirty (30) days of the date the denial is made. The City Council may
affirm, reverse or modify the Director of Public Works' denial. Nothing
in this Section shall be construed or interpreted to convey or provide
any property right, contract right or cause of action to a property owner
regarding an exemption.
A. The City may approve a right-of-way encroachment license
administratively in accordance with the following requirements:
1. A request to encroach on a City right-of-way shall be submitted to
the Director of Public Works with a plan that identities and
provides the dimensions of the proposed encroachment and an
executed right-of-way encroachment license in the form approved
by the City. Requests to establish a sidewalk café on a public rightof-
way shall comply with the procedures set forth in Code Sections
400.490 and 400.500.
2. The Director of Public Works shall investigate the request and shall
approve, deny or modify the request.
3. Denial of a right-of-way encroachment license may be appealed to
the City Council. Said appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk
within thirty (30) days of the date the denial is made. The City
Section
505.160
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
505.175
100:1275
Section 505.180. Temporary Closing of Streets — Altering of
Parking Restrictions and Speed Limits. [R.O. 2009 §54.032; CC 1981
§24-15; Ord. No. 94-135, 6-21-1994; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
The Mayor shall have the authority to temporarily close any street or part
thereof to vehicle traffic or to divert traffic thereon or to divert or direct
the course of pedestrian travel thereon or to alter parking restrictions and
speed limits in case of street work, street improvements or construction on
property adjoining the street.
Section 505.190. Obstructing The View of Fire Hydrants.470 [R.O.
2009 §54.034; CC 1981 §24-24; Ord. No. 86-17, 1-28-1986]
Council may affirm, reverse or modify the Director of Public Works'
denial.
4. Nothing in this Section shall be construed or interpreted to convey
or provide any property right, contract right or cause of action to a
right-of-way encroachment licensee.
A. No owner or person in possession of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall
permit any tree, shrub or other vegetative matter on that lot, tract or
parcel of land to grow within such close proximity to a fire hydrant so as
to prevent the viewing of the fire hydrant from any location on the
nearest street or public right-of-way within fifty (50) feet of the fire
hydrant.
B. In addition to other remedies, the City shall have the authority to
remove any vegetation which obstructs the view of a fire hydrant as
described in Subsection (A).
470. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
505.175
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
505.190
100:1276
ARTICLE III
Construction and Repair
Section 505.200. Street Construction To Conform With Subdivision
Regulations. [R.O. 2009 §54.045; CC 1981 §24-74]
All streets hereafter constructed which are not in a subdivision shall
conform to the requirements of Section 405.150 of this Code of Ordinances.
Section 505.210. Permit Required — Application.471 [R.O. 2009
§54.046; CC 1981 §§24-45—24-46; Ord. No. 3725, 2-26-1970]
Section 505.220. Filing and Inspection Fees.472 [R.O. 2009 §54.047;
CC 1981 §24-47; Ord. No. 3725, 2-26-1970; Ord. No. 92-255,
10-21-1992]
A. Required. No person shall begin to construct, reconstruct, repair, alter
or grade any sidewalk, curb, curb cut, driveway or street without first
obtaining a permit from the Director of Public Works or his/her
designee.
B. Application. An applicant for a permit hereunder shall file with the
Director of Public Works or his/her designee an application showing:
1. Name and address of owner or agent in charge of the property
abutting the proposed work area.
2. Name and address of party doing work.
3. Location of work area.
4. Attached plans showing details of the proposed alteration.
5. Estimated cost of the alteration.
6. Such other information as the Director of Public Works or his/her
designee shall find reasonably necessary to the determination of
whether a permit shall be issued.
A. The following fees shall accompany an application for a permit under
this Article:
1. The filing fees shall be ten dollars ($10.00) for each residential
property and fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each commercial property;
provided that when sidewalks, curbs, curb cuts, driveways or
streets are to be constructed, reconstructed, repaired or altered
simultaneously, only one (1) permit and fee shall be required. The
Director of Public Works or his/her designee shall issue a permit for
the construction of improvements, by a subdivider or developer, in
the development of a subdivision prior to the sale of the lot or lots
471. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
472. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
505.200
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
505.220
100:1277
Section 505.230. Findings Prerequisite To Issuance. [R.O. 2009
§54.048; CC 1981 §24-48; Ord. No. 3725, 2-26-1970]
Section 505.240. Driveway and Curb Cut Permits. [R.O. 2009
§54.049; CC 1981 §24-49—24-50; Ord. No. 3725, 2-26-1970; Ord. No.
3790, 9-23-1970; Ord. No. 3805, 1-21-1971; Ord. No. 88-99,
6-23-1988; Ord. No. 92-149, 7-8-1992; Ord. No. 94-250, 9-20-1994]
involved, at no cost, except for the inspection fees in the following
Subsection (2).
2. The Director of Public Works or his/her designee shall collect an
inspection fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per lot, for deposit into the
General Fund of the City, for the inspection of the construction of
improvements, by a subdivider or developer, in the development of
a subdivision.
A. The Director of Public Works or his/her designee shall issue a permit
hereunder when he/she finds:
1. The plans for the proposed operation are satisfactory.
2. The work shall be done according to the specifications of the City.
3. The operation will not unreasonably interfere with vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, the egress to and from the property affected and
adjacent properties.
4. The health, welfare and safety of the public will not be
unreasonably impaired.
A. Generally. The Director of Public Works or his/her designee may grant
permits for driveways and curb cuts for each parcel of land under one
(1) ownership as follows:
1. For driveways and curb cuts for properties used for school,
commercial or industrial purposes: Two (2) driveways and curb
cuts not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet in width for each driveway or
an aggregate total of seventy (70) feet as measured at the property
line; provided the City may require a six (6) inch vertical curb be
installed to properly delineate the driveways. For school,
commercial or industrial tracts where the lot fronts or abuts two (2)
or more streets, three (3) driveways and curb cuts, not to exceed
thirty-five (35) feet in width for each driveway or an aggregate total
of one hundred five (105) feet, as measured at the property line.
2. For driveways and curb cuts for single-family residences: Two (2)
driveways and curb cuts not to exceed an aggregate total of twentynine
(29) feet.
Section
505.220
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
505.240
100:1278
Section 505.250. Duration. [R.O. 2009 §54.050; CC 1981 §24-51;
Ord. No. 3725, 2-26-1970]
All work done under a permit issued under the provisions of this Article
shall be done at no cost to the City. Permit shall become void after six (6)
months from issue date.
Section 505.260. Sidewalk Construction Supervision. [R.O. 2009
§54.051; CC 1981 §24-54]
All sidewalks constructed in the City shall be constructed under the
supervision and direction of the Director of Public Works or his/her
designee within such time as the Mayor and Council shall, by ordinance,
direct and provide.
Section 505.270. Duty of Abutting Property Owner. [R.O. 2009
§54.052; CC 1981 §§24-55—24-56; Ord. No. 83-68, 9-8-1983; Ord.
No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
3. For driveways and curb cuts for properties used as duplex or
apartment dwellings: Two (2) driveways and curb cuts not to
exceed an aggregate total of thirty-two (32) feet.
4. For driveways and curb cuts for churches and institutional uses:
Two (2) driveways and curb cuts not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet
in width for each driveway or an aggregate total of seventy (70)
feet.
5. Where a street intersection radius is thirty-two (32) feet or less, the
minimum distance that a driveway shall be located from a street
intersection shall be thirty-five (35) feet. This measurement shall
commence from the intersection of the tangent lines of the curb
radius between the two (2) intersecting streets.
6. Where a street intersection radius exceeds thirty-two (32) feet, no
driveway or part thereof shall be located closer than three (3) feet
to curb radius.
B. Director Of Public Works Or His/Her Designee May Authorize Granting
Of Additional Permits. The Director of Public Works or his/her designee
may issue a permit for driveways and curb cuts in addition to the
numbers and widths specified in Subsection (A) of this Section. The
applicant must provide a plan of the proposed curb cuts and driveways
with a statement indicating the need to exceed the numbers and widths
specified in Subsection (A) of this Section.
A. To Be Constructed At Expense Of Abutting Property Owner. Sidewalks
shall, in all cases, be constructed at the expense of the owner of the
property fronting or abutting on the line thereof in the manner and form
by ordinance or otherwise prescribed.
Section
505.240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
505.270
100:1279
Section 505.280. Construction Specifications.473 [R.O. 2009 §54.053;
CC 1981 §§24-57—24-59]
B. Duty Of Owner/Occupant To Keep Sidewalk In Repair—Failure To
Repair After Notice.
1. Every owner or occupant of any premises fronting or abutting on
any sidewalk in the City shall keep the sidewalk in front of or
abutting on such premises in good repair. Every person, owner or
occupant of any such premises fronting or abutting on any such
sidewalk which shall be out of repair, failing, neglecting or refusing
to repair such sidewalk within thirty (30) days after notice to repair
the same given by the Mayor shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, on conviction thereof, shall be punished as
provided in Section 100.150.
2. During the interim of the thirty (30) day notice, such person, owner
or occupant may appeal to the City Council by reason of:
a. Hardship;
b. It should not be his/her responsibility to repair; or
c. The weather will prevent compliance.
3. The City Council may extend the time of compliance, direct that the
Mayor order additional persons to repair the sidewalk or direct that
the City bear a portion of the cost of such requested relief as it finds
fair and equitable. Should an appeal be filed to the City Council,
enforcement shall be abated pending their decision.
A. Width And Fall Generally. All sidewalks constructed in the City shall be
at least four (4) feet wide, except as may be otherwise ordered by the
City Council, and shall decline gradually or have a fall from the building
line of the lot to the top of the curbstone of one-fourth (¼) inch to the
foot. No sidewalk now constructed shall be diminished in width.
B. Grade To Be Given By Director Of Public Works Or His/Her
Designee—Width To Be Uniform In Block. Before any sidewalk is
constructed, the Director of Public Works or his/her designee shall give
the grade thereof. Whenever practicable, all sidewalks in the same
block shall be of uniform width with the edges of the same in a
continuous straight line as directed by the Director of Public Works or
his/her designee.
C. Materials And Specifications To Be In Accordance With Regulations Of
City. Except as provided in Section 505.290 in the case of temporary
sidewalks, all sidewalks in this City shall be constructed of materials
and in the manner as specified by regulations of the City.
473. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
505.270
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
505.290
100:1280
Section 505.290. Temporary Sidewalks. [R.O. 2009 §54.054; CC
1981 §24-60]
The Council may, upon application, permit the owner of property or the
occupant to construct a temporary sidewalk in front of his/her property;
provided that no such sidewalk shall be less than three (3) feet wide and
shall at all times be kept and maintained safe for travel thereon; provided
further, that such temporary sidewalk may be ordered removed at any time
the Council may deem it necessary.
Section 505.300. Construction Required Within Six Months of
Issuing Building Permit. [R.O. 2009 §54.055; CC 1981 §24-61; Ord.
No. 3446, 11-23-1966; Ord. No. 80-10, 1-30-1980]
Section 505.310. Exemptions. [R.O. 2009 §54.056; CC 1981 §24-62;
Ord. No. 3780, 8-19-1970; Ord. No. 75-17, 4-9-1975; Ord. No. 95-90,
4-13-1995; Ord. No. 15-175 §1, 8-4-2015]
A. Within six (6) months after the issuance of a building permit for any lot
which is vacant at the time of application for the building permit, the
owner of the property securing the building permit shall install a
concrete sidewalk along each and every street abutting the property in
accordance with the ordinances of the City relating to sidewalks.
B. Whenever a party seeks a building permit on a parcel of land within the
City, the party seeking the building permit shall also cause the strip of
land between the back of the curb and right-of-way abutting his/her
property to be landscaped so as to conform with City subdivision rightof-
way cross sections. This requirement shall be upheld even though a
variance to construct a sidewalk has been given. If the excavation of the
right-of-way should present an undue hardship, a variance to this
Section may be given by the City Council.
A. Exemptions from the requirements of Section 505.300 by owners of
properties where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary
hardship, other than financial, in the way of carrying out the
requirements of such Section by reason of natural contour of public
property at the lot or surrounding area, location of lot or future planned
street widening shall be requested in writing to the Director of Public
Works or his/her designee outside of the areas outlined in Section D
below.
B. The Director of Public Works or his/her designee shall investigate the
request and prepare a report his/her recommendations. The Director of
Public Works shall have the authority in granting an exemption.
C. Such request, if any, must be made at least ninety (90) days prior to the
expiration date for installation of the sidewalk.
D. Sidewalks located along outer roads to Interstate 70 within MoDOT
right-of-way, Blueston Drive, Ford Lane, Scherer Parkway, Exchange
Section
505.290
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
505.310
100:1281
Section 505.320. Cost-Sharing Sidewalk Replacement Program.474
[R.O. 2009 §54.057; CC 1981 §24-63; Ord. No. 85-171, 10-8-1985;
Ord. No. 11-155 §1, 8-3-2011; Ord. No. 12-82 §1, 5-24-2012]
Drive, Portwest Drive, Collier Corporate Parkway, Hemsath Road from
Missouri Highway 94 to South Property line of 936 Hemsath Road,
Bayonne Drive, Fleur Lane, Beau Court, Duclair Parkway, Avignon
Parkway, Avignon Court, Ami Court, Harry S. Truman Boulevard from
Premier Parkway South to Ehlmann Road, Hughes Lane, Little Hills
Expressway, Little Hills Parkway, Little Hills Industrial Boulevard,
Missouri Highway 94 from Missouri Highway 370 to South of 2701
North Highway 94, South Corporate Hills Drive, Corporate Hills Drive,
North Corporate Hills, Boschertown Road from Missouri Highway 370
to Fox Hill Road, Mueller Road, Elm Point Industrial Boulevard , Walsh
Court, Karydan Court, Teduke Court, Harmsted Court, North Rue
Street, North Overbrook Drive, South Overbrook Drive, South Rue
Street, Maquam Street, Lorenzo Court, Petra Court, Baden Street, Burr
Street, Rue Street, Brook Drive, Lazy Brook Drive, Elm Point Industrial
Drive from Elm Street to Mueller Road, North Drive, Huster Road, from
Missouri Highway 370 to Bethman Road are preapproved for exemption
and do not require specific Council approval.
E. Upon approval of the exemption set forth in this Section, whether
automatic or by direct action, and only where no public sidewalk exists
adjacent to the property, the owner will be required to, as an alternative
to constructing the sidewalk, pay to the City a sum of money equal to
the cost to construct the sidewalk which shall be assessed at twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) per linear foot of exempted sidewalk.
A. The City establishes a cost-sharing sidewalk replacement program with
the following guidelines:
1. The City may contribute fifty percent (50%) of the cost to repair a
defective sidewalk when a property owner requests the repair or
requests the acceleration of a scheduled sidewalk repair. The
property owner shall be responsible for payment of the other fifty
percent (50%) of the sidewalk repair cost. A sidewalk shall be
considered defective in only those situations where the sidewalk
contains deficiencies identified in the Public Works Department
Street Maintenance Policies and Procedures Manual. A sidewalk
containing only aesthetic deficiencies shall not be considered a
defective sidewalk.
2. The property owner will contract to have the repairs made. The
property owner shall submit at least three (3) bids to the Public
Works Department. The amount which the City shall reimburse the
property owner shall be fifty percent (50%) of the bid amount
submitted by the lowest responsible bidder. In determining "lowest
responsible bidder", in addition to price, the Public Works
474. Cross Reference—As to cost-sharing tree removal and tree trimming program, §225.110.
Section
505.310
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
505.320
100:1282
Department shall consider: the ability, capacity or skill of the
bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required;
whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service
promptly or within the time specified without delay or interference;
the character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder; the quality of performance of previous
contracts or services; the previous and existing compliance by
the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or
service; the sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of
the bidder to perform the contract or provide the services; the
quality, availability of the supplies or contractual services to the
particular use required; the ability of the bidder to provide future
maintenance and service for the use of the subject to the contract;
and the number and scope of conditions attached to the bid.
Reimbursement shall be processed by the City upon inspection and
approval of the repairs by the Public Works Department.
3. The Director of Public Works or his/her designee will be the final
judge as to whether the sidewalk, or any portion of the sidewalk,
needs to be repaired.
4. Sidewalks will be repaired on a first-come, first-served basis,
except where the costs may be reduced by making multiple repairs
in one (1) area.
5. The City's total share of the cost-sharing sidewalk replacement
program shall not exceed amounts budgeted for that purpose.
6. Cost participation by the property owner can be waived by the
Mayor when the income of the owner is substantially from Social
Security or other comparable restrictive sources, such as railroad
retirement, and when the total income of the family from all
sources does not exceed guidelines by HUD, Section 8 or other
Federal housing assistance plans as followed by the Mayor's office
for utility tax refunds.
7. If the damage to the sidewalk has been caused by the City, then the
City will pay the entire cost.
8. No variance to this policy shall be granted unless seven (7)
members of the City Council vote in favor of the variance.
Section
505.320
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
505.320
100:1283

ARTICLE IV
Provisional Streets
Section 505.330. Provisional Streets. [R.O. 2009 §54.060; Ord. No.
01-212, 9-21-2001; Ord. No. 10-219 §2, 10-26-2010]
A. The owners of any private street which is contiguous to property used
as single-family residential, multi-family residential, commercial or
industrial property may petition the City to accept the street as a
"provisional street". This Section does not apply to internal streets and
drives within mobile home parks or apartment complexes. Prior to
acceptance as a public street, all owners of property along the
petitioned private street shall annex into the City limits.
B. A petition or petitions must be received from each owner before the
City will consider accepting the street. The petitions shall state that the
owners understand that the City would not reconstruct or overlay the
provisional street until the City's public streets have been adequately
maintained to the City's satisfaction and until the City has adequate
excess funds to do so. The petitions shall also state that the owners
understand that when the City does overlay the provisional street, it
will do so only to the width of the existing pavement and that when the
City does reconstruct the provisional street, it will do so only to the
width and depth of the existing pavement. The petition shall further
state that the owners understand that any further upgrade shall be at
the owners' expense.
C. If a street has been accepted as a provisional street, then the street
shall be considered a public street for the purposes of traffic control,
repairs and maintenance. The owners shall remain responsible for
street lights, snow removal and street sweeping and, if the owners, at
the time the petitions are submitted, request that responsibility for
pothole repair or crack and seal type repairs to be retained by the
owners, then the City may authorize the owners to retain that
requested responsibility. The City may require the owners to provide
bonds and insurance applicable to the responsibilities not accepted by
the City.
Section
505.330
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
505.330
100:1285

ARTICLE V
Existing Private Streets
Section 505.340. Existing Private Streets. [R.O. 2009 §54.065; Ord.
No. 03-93, 4-23-2003; Ord. No. 10-219 §3, 10-26-2010]
A. The owners of any private street, drive or road may petition the City to
accept the street, drive or road as a public street. Prior to the City's
acceptance, the private street, drive or road shall meet, or be brought
up to, current City standards unless otherwise approved by the City
Council. Acceptable deviation from current City ordinance shall include
only the following:
1. Reduction in required right-of-way width to a forty (40) foot
minimum;
2. Reduction in required pavement width to a twenty-five (25) foot
minimum;
3. Reduction of sidewalk requirement to one (1) side of street;
4. Reduction of street light requirements to three hundred (300) foot
spacing;
5. Reduction of cul-de-sac or turnaround requirements; and
6. Elimination of concrete driveway aprons.
The Director of Public Works or his/her designee will inspect
the existing private street, drive, roadway, etc., and provide a
recommendation to the City Council pertaining to the existing
condition. The City Council will then make a determination
as to whether to accept the private street, drive or road as
a public street. Prior to acceptance by the City, the property
owners of the private street, drive or road will be responsible
for all repairs necessary to bring the street, drive or road up
to City standards (or provide an equivalent escrow amount).
This requirement may be waived by the City Council at the time
of acceptance by ordinance. If accepted, all necessary right-ofway
and easement documents will be provided by the private
owners and dedicated to the City in accordance with current
City standards. It is the responsibility of the private owners to
provide plans for the repair or upgrade of the private street,
drive or road in accordance with current City standards. The
plans shall be submitted to the Director of Public Works or his/
her designee for review and any repair or upgrade work must
be inspected and approved by the Director of Public Works
or his/her designee following the same procedures as a new
development.
B. A written and signed petition or petitions must be received from each
owner before the City will consider accepting the street, drive or road
Section
505.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
505.340
100:1287
as a public street. Prior to final acceptance, all owners of property along
the petitioned private street shall annex into the City limits.
Section
505.340
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
505.340
100:1288
ARTICLE VI
Driveway Approaches and Culverts
Section 505.350. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §54.070; CC 1981 §24-75;
Ord. No. 84-89, 8-1-1984]
For the purposes of this Article, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
DRIVEWAY APPROACH — Any area in which, because of topography,
elevation, position or location, it is necessary to enclose the gutter or road
ditch in a driveway culvert in order to have a proper and suitable entrance
to any property abutting on any public right-of-way. Driveway approaches
are private improvements.
DRIVEWAY CULVERT — A drain pipe or other structure of concrete,
masonry, metal, vitrified tile or other materials or combination thereof
approved by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee and used
to convey or carry surface water across, under or through any driveway
approach or road ditch and/or to connect two (2) or more sections of a
gutter or road ditch.
GUTTER OR ROAD DITCH — The part of the right-of-way which is shaped,
crowned, sloped or graded for drainage purposes.
Section 505.360. Permit Required.475 [R.O. 2009 §54.071; CC 1981
§24-76; Ord. No. 84-89, 8-1-1984]
It shall be unlawful for anyone to construct any driveway approach over,
in or through any gutter or road ditch or to install or construct a driveway
culvert through any road, street or public right-of-way without first having
obtained a permit from the Director of Public Works or his/her designee
hereinafter provided in Section 505.210.
Section 505.370. Application — Fee. [R.O. 2009 §54.072; CC 1981
§§24-77—24-78; Ord. No. 84-89, 8-1-1984]
A. Application. Applications for permits shall be made to the Public Works
Department and shall state the name of the applicant, the location of
the platted property upon which any driveway approach or culvert is
sought to be constructed and the size and type of construction needed.
Upon approval by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee, a
permit shall be granted. Within sixty (60) days thereafter, the Director
of Public Works or his/her designee shall cause the driveway culvert to
be installed by the Public Works Department or its authorized
representative in accordance with the terms of the permit.
B. Fee. A fee shall be charged for the issuance of the permit in such sum
equal to the cost of the driveway culvert material.
475. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
505.350
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
505.380
100:1289
Section 505.380. Obstructing Drain.476 [R.O. 2009 §54.073; CC 1981
§24-79; Ord. No. 84-89, 8-1-1984; Ord. No. 17-183 § 1, 9-20-2017]
It shall be unlawful for anyone to retard or obstruct the flow of storm or
surface water in or through any driveway culvert, gutter or road ditch in
or through any road, street or public right-of-way. If the existing concrete
curb immediately adjoining an entrance and concrete gutter do not meet
current City standards as set forth in Section 405.260, is located on a street
laid with asphalt pavement and does not allow for convenient ingress and
egress, then the property owner may petition to the Director of Public
Works for permission to alter the curb to allow for convenient ingress and
egress. The property owner shall be responsible for the construction and
maintenance of any alterations made to the gutter.
Section 505.390. Notice To Remove Obstruction. [R.O. 2009
§54.074; CC 1981 §24-80; Ord. No. 84-89, 8-1-1984]
The owner of platted property in front of which there is an obstructed
gutter or roadway ditch shall, within twenty (20) days after notification in
writing from the Director of Public Works or his/her designee, remove such
obstruction or interference or apply for permit to cause a new driveway
culvert to be installed so that the flow of the surface or storm water is not
obstructed or retarded. If the owner does not reside or maintain a mailing
address on the property, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the
property and shall be delivered by certified mail to the owner's last known
address.
Section 505.400. Surety Required.477 [R.O. 2009 §54.075; CC 1981
§24-81; Ord. No. 84-89, 8-1-1984]
No permit shall be issued by the Public Works Department for any
construction in or on any platted property where there is no driveway
approach or a new driveway approach is deemed necessary because of the
existing conditions, unless the applicant shall provide surety in such amount
as is reasonably necessary, based upon the current construction costs, as
established by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee.
Section 505.410. Removal By City. [R.O. 2009 §54.076; CC 1981
§24-82; Ord. No. 84-89, 8-1-1984]
If the property owner does not remove the obstruction or apply for a permit
as stated herein within twenty (20) days after notification, the City may
do the necessary work and the cost thereof shall be charged or assessed
against the property in the same manner as provided by the Statute for a
lien.
476. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
477. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
505.380
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
505.410
100:1290
ARTICLE VII
Utility Work in Rights-Of-Way
Section 505.420. Applicability.478 [R.O. 2009 §54.090; Ord. No. 3530,
10-25-1967; Ord. No. 02-50, 3-6-2002]
To the extent permitted by law, this Article shall apply to all persons desiring
to construct, operate or maintain facilities in, along, across, under or over
public rights-of-way within the City.
Section 505.430. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §54.091; Ord. No. 3530,
10-25-1967; Ord. No. 02-50, 3-6-2002]
For the purposes of this Article, the following terms, phrases, words and
abbreviations shall have the meanings given herein, unless otherwise
expressly stated. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future tense and vice versa, words in the plural
number include the singular number and vice versa, and the masculine
gender includes the feminine gender and vice versa. The words "shall" and
"will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Unless otherwise expressly
stated or clearly contrary to the context, terms, phrases, words and
abbreviations not defined herein shall be given their common and ordinary
meaning.
APPLICANT — The specific person applying for and receiving a permit
under this Article.
APPLICATION — That form designed by the Director of Public Works or his/
her designee which an applicant must use to obtain a permit to conduct
facilities work across, over or under the City's right-of-way.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, asphalt, concrete, sand, gravel,
rock or any other material in or on the ground is cut into, dug, uncovered,
removed, or otherwise displaced, by means of any tools, equipment or
explosives, except that the following shall not be deemed excavation:
FACILITIES — Any conduit, duct, line, pipe, wire, hose, cable, culvert, tube,
pole, receiver, transmitter, satellite dish, micro call, Pico cell, repeater,
amplifier or other device, material, apparatus or medium usable (whether
actually used for such purpose or not) for the transmission or distribution of
any service or commodity installed below or above ground within the public
Any de minimis displacement or movement of ground caused by
pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
1.
The replacement of utility poles and related equipment at the existing
general location that does not involve either a street or sidewalk cut; or
2.
Any other activity which does not disturb or displace surface conditions
of the earth, asphalt, concrete, sand, gravel, rock or any other material
in or on the ground.
3.
478. Cross Reference—As to excavation, grading and storm water control, ch. 510.
Section
505.420
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
505.430
100:1291
rights-of-way of the City, whether used privately or made available to the
public.
FACILITIES WORK — The installation of new facilities or any change,
replacement, relocation, removal, alteration or repair of existing facilities
that requires excavation within the public rights-of-way, except for the
occasional replacement of utility poles and related equipment at the
existing general location that does not involve either a street or sidewalk
cut.
MAYOR — The Mayor or designee.
PERMIT — A permit granted by the Director of Public Works or his/her
designee to do facilities work within the public rights-of-way.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, joint stock company,
trust, organization, limited liability company, corporation or other entity or
any lawful successor thereto or transferee thereof, but such term does not
include the City.
PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY — The area on, below or above a public roadway,
highway, street or alleyway in which the political subdivision has an
ownership interest, but not including:
Section 505.440. Permitting.479 [R.O. 2009 §54.092; Ord. No. 3530,
10-25-1967; Ord. No. 02-50, 3-6-2002; Ord. No. 06-114, 5-4-2006;
Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
The airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to cellular or
other non-wire telecommunications or broadcast service;
1.
Easements obtained by utilities or private easements in platted
subdivisions or tracts;
2.
Railroad rights-of-way and ground utilized or acquired for railroad
facilities; or
3.
Poles, pipes, cables, conduits, wires, optical cables, or other means of
transmission, collection or exchange of communications, information,
substances, data, or electronic or electrical current or impulses utilized
by a municipally owned or operated utility pursuant to Chapter 91 or
pursuant to a Charter form of Government.
4.
A. Permit Requirements. Any person desiring to conduct facilities work
within public rights-of-way must first apply for and obtain a permit, in
addition to any other building permit, license, easement, or
authorization required by law, unless such facilities work must be
performed on an emergency basis; then the person conducting the work
shall as soon as practicable notify the City of the location of the work
and apply for the required permit by the third (3rd) business day
following the commencement of the facilities work.
479. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
505.430
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
505.440
100:1292
1. All applications for permits shall be submitted to the Director of
Public Works or his/her designee.
2. The Director of Public Works or his/her designee shall design and
make available standard forms for such applications, requiring
such information as the Director of Public Works or his/her
designee determines to be necessary, consistent with the
provisions of this Article.
3. Each such application shall be accompanied by payment of fees as
designated in this Article.
4. The Director of Public Works or his/her designee shall review each
application for a permit and, upon determining that the applicant
has authority to perform the desired facilities work and that the
applicant has submitted all necessary information and has paid the
appropriate fee, shall issue the permit, except as provided in
Subsection (A)(8).
5. It is the intention of the City that disruption of the public rights-ofway
should be minimized. Upon receipt of an application for a
permit, the Director of Public Works or his/her designee shall do
the following:
a. Evaluate the degree of excavation necessary to perform the
facilities work in the rights-of-way and determine whether the
excavation will be more than minor in nature. If the applicant
can show to the Director of Public Works or his/her designee's
reasonable satisfaction that the facilities work involves any of
the following:
(1) No significant disruption or damage to the public rights-ofway,
or
(2) Time sensitive maintenance;
then the Director of Public Works or his/her designee
shall grant the permit without delay, provided that if the
permit is not issued in ten (10) business days, the
aggrieved party may appeal as provided in Subsection
(A)(8); and
b. For circumstances where the Director of Public Works or his/
her designee determines that there will be significant
excavation of the public rights-of-way and no exemption under
any provision applies, the Director of Public Works or his/her
designee may, consistent with the time requirements set forth
in Subsection (A)(5)(a) and in the permit, direct permit holders
performing facilities work in the same area to consult on how
they may schedule and coordinate their work to accomplish the
goal of this Section.
Section
505.440
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
505.440
100:1293
6. Each permit shall include projected commencement and
termination dates or, if such dates are unknown at the time the
permit is issued, a provision requiring the permit holder to provide
the Director of Public Works or his/her designee with reasonable
advance notice of such dates once they are determined; length of
public rights-of-way; number of road crossings; information
regarding scheduling and co-ordination of facilities work if
applicable; and location of facilities.
7. The Director of Public Works or his/her designee may include in
permits such conditions and requirements as are reasonably
necessary to protect structures and facilities in the public rights-ofway
from damage and for the proper restoration of such public
rights-of-way, structures and facilities and for the protection of the
public and the continuity of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
8. The Director of Public Works or his/her designee may deny a permit
application for the following reasons if deemed in the public's
interest:
a. Undisputed past-due fees from prior permits;
b. Failure to return the right-of-way to its previous condition
under previous permits;
c. Undue disruption to existing utilities, transportation or use;
d. Area is environmentally sensitive as defined by State or
Federal Statute;
e. Failure to provide required information; or
f. The applicant is in violation of the provisions of this Article.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsections
(A)(8)(c) and (A)(8)(d) above, the Director of Public
Works or his/her designee will cooperate with the
applicant to identify alternative routes which most
nearly match the routes requested by applicant for the
placement of facilities as long as use of the alternative
routes does not result in additional installation expense
exceeding ten percent (10%) to the applicant or a
declination of service quality.
9. Applicant may appeal any final decision of the Director of Public
Works or his/her designee to:
a. The Mayor, which appeal shall be acted upon by the Mayor
within five (5) business days; and
b. If denied by the Mayor, the applicant may then appeal to the
City Council which shall consider the appeal at its next regular
meeting.
Section
505.440
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
505.440
100:1294
10. Except as set forth in Paragraph (A)(11) of this Subsection (A), an
applicant shall pay the following fees: [Ord. No. 14-141 §1,
7-1-2014]
a. Non-refundable permit application fee: twenty-five dollars
($25.00).
b. For each cubic yard of flowable fill backfill, the fee shall be
thirty-five dollars ($35.00).
c. For each square yard of asphalt surface replaced, the fee shall
be twenty dollars ($20.00).
d. For each square yard of concrete surface replaced, the fee
shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
e. For each square foot of sidewalk replaced, the fee shall be
three dollars ($3.00).
f. For replacing the surface where no permanent surface is in
place: no charge.
11. A person performing services for purposes of making repairs
pursuant to the sewer lateral or water line repair programs is
exempt from the fees stated in Paragraph (A)(10) of this Subsection
A. [Ord. No. 14-141 §1, 7-1-2014]
B. Escrows collected pursuant to this Section will be used only to
reimburse the City for its actual incurred cost of managing the rightsof-
way and will not be used to generate revenue to the City above such
costs. Contractors having a restoration of public improvement permit
bond are exempt from such escrow requirement. Escrows shall be
based on the following: [Ord. No. 14-141 §1, 7-1-2014]
1. For each cubic yard of flowable fill backfill, the escrow shall be
thirty-five dollars ($35.00).
2. For each square yard of asphalt surface replaced, the escrow shall
be twenty dollars ($20.00).
3. For each square yard of concrete surface replaced, the escrow shall
be twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
4. For each square foot of sidewalk replaced, the escrow shall be
three dollars ($3.00).
5. For replacing the surface where no permanent surface is in place:
no escrow.
C. Fees/escrows are charged to recover the City's actual costs for an
applicant's facilities work in the rights-of-way including the costs of
processing permits, inspections and administration of this Article,
excluding legal fees relating to the interpretation or enforcement of this
Article including all appeals.
Section
505.440
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
505.440
100:1295
Section 505.450. Facilities Work.480 [R.O. 2009 §54.093; Ord. No.
3530, 10-25-1967; Ord. No. 02-50, 3-6-2002]
D. Applicant Subject To Other Laws, Police Power.
1. An applicant shall at all times be subject to all lawful exercise of the
police powers of the City, including, but not limited to, all powers
regarding zoning, platting, building codes, supervision of
construction and control of public rights-of-way. [Ord. No. 14-141
§1, 7-1-2014]
2. No action or omission of the City shall operate as a future waiver of
any rights of the City under this Article.
3. The City shall have the maximum plenary authority to regulate
applicants, permits and facilities work as may now or hereafter be
lawfully permissible. Except where rights are expressly granted or
waived by a permit, they are reserved, whether or not expressly
enumerated. This Article may be amended from time to time and in
no event shall this Article be considered a contract between the
City and an applicant such that the City would be prohibited from
amending any provision hereof.
A. Oversight Of Facilities Work.
1. An applicant shall construct, operate and maintain facilities subject
to the supervision of the City and in strict compliance with this
Article, all applicable zoning and construction permitting
ordinances, departmental rules and regulations.
2. Facilities work shall be subject to periodic inspection by the City.
3. The Director of Public Works or his/her designee shall have full
access to all portions of facilities work and may issue stop work
orders and corrective orders to prevent unauthorized work. Such
corrective or stop work orders shall state that work not authorized
by the permit is being carried out, summarize the unauthorized
work and provide a period of time to cure the problem, which cure
period may be immediate if certain activities must be ceased to
protect the public safety, and may be delivered personally or by
certified mail to the address listed on the application for permit or
to the person in charge of the construction site at the time of
delivery.
4. Any person who engages in facilities work in the public rights-ofway
and who has not received a valid permit from the City shall be
subject to all requirements of this Article. Except in those instances
where facilities work must be performed on an emergency basis,
the City may, in its discretion, at any time until a permit is secured,
order the facilities work stopped and do any of the following:
480. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
505.440
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
505.450
100:1296
Section 505.460. Performance Guarantees and Remedies. [R.O.
2009 §54.094; Ord. No. 3530, 10-25-1967; Ord. No. 97-268,
8-25-1997; Ord. No. 02-50, 3-6-2002]
require such person to apply for a permit within ten (10) days of
receipt of a written notice from the City that a permit is required;
require such person to remove its property and restore the affected
area to a condition satisfactory to the City; or take any other action
it is entitled to take under applicable law including, but not limited
to, filing for and seeking damages.
B. Construction Standards.
1. The construction, operation, maintenance and repair of facilities
shall be in accordance with all applicable health, safety and
building codes.
2. All facilities shall be installed and located with due regard for
minimizing interference with the public and with other utility users
of the rights-of-way, including the City.
3. An applicant shall not place facilities where they will damage or
interfere with the use or operation of previously installed facilities
or obstruct or hinder the various utilities serving the residents and
businesses in the City of their use of any public rights-of-way.
4. Any and all public rights-of-way disturbed or damaged during the
facilities work shall be promptly repaired or replaced by the
applicant to their previous condition.
5. Any contractor or subcontractor used for facilities work must be
properly licensed under the laws of the State and all applicable
local ordinances and each contractor or subcontractor shall have
the same obligations with respect to its work as an applicant would
have hereunder and applicable laws if the work were performed by
the applicant. The applicant shall be responsible for ensuring that
the work of contractors and subcontractors is performed consistent
with its permits and applicable law, shall be fully responsible for all
acts or omissions of contractors or subcontractors and shall be
responsible for promptly correcting acts or omissions by any
contractor or subcontractor.
A. Performance Bond.
1. Prior to any facilities work in the public rights-of-way, an applicant
shall establish in the City's favor a performance bond in any
amount determined by non-discriminatory regulations promulgated
by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee as necessary to
ensure the applicant's faithful performance of the facilities work.
Differences in bond requirements, including provisions for selfinsurance
or provisions for a single continuing bond where
facilities work is conducted by the same applicant under numerous
Section
505.450
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
505.460
100:1297
permits, may be established by regulation based on the extent
or nature of the facilities work and the past performance of the
applicant. In lieu of a performance bond, an applicant may provide
an acceptable substitute with the approval of the Director of Public
Works or his/her designee. However, an applicant which has
twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00) in net assets and does
not have a history of non-compliance with permits shall not be
required to provide the performance bond.
2. In the event an applicant fails to complete the facilities work in a
safe, timely and competent manner, there shall be recoverable,
jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the bond, any
damages or loss suffered by the City as a result up to the full
amount of the bond.
3. Upon completion of the facilities work to the satisfaction of the
Director of Public Works or his/her designee, the Director of Public
Works or his/her designee shall eliminate the bond or reduce its
amount after a time appropriate to determine whether the work
performed was satisfactory, which time shall be established by the
Director of Public Works or his/her designee considering the nature
of the work performed.
4. A performance bond shall be issued by a surety acceptable to the
City and shall contain the following endorsement:
"This bond may not be canceled or allowed to lapse until sixty
(60) days after receipt by the City, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, of a written notice from the issuer of the bond of intent
to cancel or not to renew."
5. Applicant shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold
harmless and defend the City, its officials, boards, board members,
commissions, commissioners, agents and employees against any
and all claims, suits, causes of action or proceedings and judgments
for damages or equitable relief which are caused by the acts, errors
or omissions of applicant arising out of the construction and
maintenance of its facilities.
6. Recovery by the City of any amounts under the performance bond
or otherwise does not limit an applicant's duty to indemnify the City
in any way, nor shall such recovery relieve an applicant of its
obligations under a permit or reduce the amounts owed to the City
other than by the amounts recovered by the City under the
performance bond or in any respect prevent the City from
exercising any other right or remedy it may have.
B. Penalties. For each violation of the provisions of this Article or a permit
granted pursuant to this Article as to which the City has given notice to
applicant as provided in this Article, penalties may be chargeable to the
applicant at a rate not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day
for so long as the violation continues.
Section
505.460
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
505.470
100:1298
Section 505.470. Miscellaneous Provisions. [R.O. 2009 §54.095;
Ord. No. 3530, 10-25-1967; Ord. No. 02-50, 3-6-2002]
Section 505.480. Relocation of Facilities. [R.O. 2009 §54.096; Ord.
No. 3530, 10-25-1967; Ord. No. 02-50, 3-6-2002]
Whenever, by reason of changes in the grade or widening of a street or
in the location or manner of constructing a water pipe, drainage channel,
sewer or other City-owned underground or above ground structure, it is
deemed necessary by the City to move, alter change, adapt, or conform the
underground or above ground facilities of a utility, the utility shall make the
alterations or changes on alternative right-of-way provided by the City, if
A. Compliance With Laws. Each applicant shall comply with all applicable
City ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations heretofore and
hereafter adopted or established.
B. Franchises Not Superseded. Nothing herein relieves the applicant or
the City from any obligations under an existing franchise. Nothing
herein shall be deemed to relieve an applicant of the provisions of an
existing franchise, license or other agreement or permit.
C. Rights And Remedies.
1. The exercise of one (1) remedy under this Article shall not foreclose
use of another, nor shall the exercise of a remedy of the payment of
damages or penalties relieve an applicant of its obligations to
comply with its permits. Remedies may be used alone or in
combinations. In addition, the City may exercise any rights it has at
law or equity.
2. The City hereby reserves to itself the right to intervene in any suit,
action or proceeding involving any provisions of this Article.
3. No applicant shall be relieved of the obligation to comply with any
of the provisions of this Article by reason of any failure of the City
to enforce prompt compliance.
D. Incorporation By Reference. Any permit granted pursuant to this
Article shall by implication incorporate this Article into such permit as
fully as if set forth therein.
E. Force Majeure. An applicant shall not be deemed in violation of
provisions of this Article where performance was rendered impossible
by war or riots, civil disturbances, floods or other natural catastrophes
beyond the applicant's control and a permit shall not be revoked or an
applicant penalized for such non-compliance, provided that the
applicant takes immediate and diligent steps to bring itself back into
compliance as soon as possible under the circumstances with its permit
without unduly endangering the health, safety and integrity of the
applicant's employees or property, the public, public rights-of-way,
public property or private property.
Section
505.470
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
505.480
100:1299
available, as soon as practicable after being so ordered in writing by the
City without claim for reimbursement or damages against the City.
Section 505.490. Standards Applicable To City. [R.O. 2009 §54.097;
Ord. No. 3530, 10-25-1967; Ord. No. 95-119, 5-2-1995; Ord. No.
02-50, 3-6-2002]
Any standards in this Article relating to facilities work shall be fully
applicable to work performed by the City and its departments.
Section
505.480
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
505.490
100:1300
ARTICLE VIII
Grades
Section 505.500. Adoption of Original Grades and Surveys. [R.O.
2009 §54.110; CC 1981 §24-109]
A. The survey and grades of the streets and parts of streets as made and
reported to the City Council by Carl C. Ertz, City Engineer, with
Washington Gill and Frederick Melkersmann, engineers, aiding him/her
in the years 1871 and 1872, which survey and grades so made and
reported, were thereupon by ordinance adopted, fixed and established
as the official survey and grades of and for the streets and parts of
streets covered by and included in such survey and report, the maps,
plats, profiles and tables of grades so made being on file or of record in
the office of the City Clerk (the profiles of such survey being recorded in
City Profile Record Book Number One and the tables of grade so
established being of record in City Journal Book "E", pages 549—559)
and which survey and grades so made and established as aforesaid,
together with the changes and alterations therein and thereto made by
ordinances subsequently passed, have been, are and shall be the official
survey and grades of and for all the streets and parts of streets covered
by and included in the Ertz-Gill-Melkersmann survey and report.
B. The survey and grades of the streets and parts of streets lying west of
the area covered by the Ertz-Gill-Melkersmann survey, made and
reported to the City Council by Carr Edwards, City Engineer, in the
years 1898 and 1899, which survey and grades so made and reported
were thereupon by ordinance adopted, fixed and established as the
official survey and grades of and for the streets and parts of streets
covered by and included in such survey and report, the profiles and
bench marks thereof being recorded in Profile Book Number One and
the table of grades accompanying such report being recorded in City
Journal Book "M", page 127, which survey and grades so made and
established as aforesaid, together with such changes and alterations
therein and thereto made by ordinances subsequently passed, were, are
and shall be the official survey and grades of and for all the streets and
parts of streets covered by and included in the Edwards survey and
report.
C. The survey and grades of the streets and parts of streets of the City
lying outside of the area mentioned or referred to in Subsections (A)
and (B) of this Section, as made and reported to the City Council and by
ordinances adopted, fixed and established as and for the official grades
of and for the streets and parts of streets, including the streets in all
additions to the City not included in the Edwards survey and as
recorded in the records of the City and Profile Book Number One and in
Profile Book Number Two in the City Clerk's office, together with such
changes and alterations therein and thereto as were made by
ordinances subsequently passed, were, are and shall be the official
grades of and for such streets and parts of streets respectively.
Section
505.500
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
505.510
100:1301
Section 505.510. Method of Establishing. [R.O. 2009 §54.111; CC
1981 §24-110]
The grades of the streets in this City shall be established by recording the
elevations at the inter-sections of streets and alleys in a book to be kept
for that purpose, which book shall also contain a record or reference to the
record of all acts or ordinances of the Council in relation to or in any way
affecting the established grade of any street.
Section 505.520. Uniformity of Street Elevations. [R.O. 2009
§54.112; CC 1981 §§24-111—24-112]
Section 505.530. Grades To Be Recorded. [R.O. 2009 §54.113; CC
1981 §24-113]
All grade elevations shall be recorded in figures, designating the whole
number of feet, tenths (.0) and hundredths (.00) of a foot, which manner
of designating the grade elevations of the City shall be used in all returns,
certificates and other papers or acts relating to the grade of any street in
the City. A grade record in the City profile book or grade record shall be
made and entered by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee.
Section 505.540. City Directrix or Datum Line. [R.O. 2009 §54.114;
CC 1981 §24-114]
The high water mark of the Missouri River in this City in 1844 as fixed
and established by the Ertz-Gill-Melkersmann survey at an elevation of one
hundred fifteen (115) feet, with reference and in relation to which all bench
marks and grades reported by them and by the Council adopted, established
and determined, shall be the City datum line or directrix, until otherwise
provided by ordinance.
Section 505.550. Evidence of True Grades. [R.O. 2009 §54.115; CC
1981 §24-115]
A. Elevation At Street Intersections. All the corners at any intersecting
streets, embracing the full width of the sidewalks thereof, shall bear a
uniform elevation, except when the contour of the streets or other
conditions necessarily require otherwise. Whenever it shall be deemed
expedient not to bring all the corners of any intersection to the same
level, then the elevation at each corner of such intersection shall be
given.
B. To Be Uniform. So far as practical and expedient, all grades shall extend
in unbroken uniformity from intersection to intersection and whenever
the grade of any street shall be broken between street intersections,
the elevation at such break shall be given, together with the exact
distance thereof from one or the other of the relative intersections.
A. The measurements, grades, plats, drawings, diagrams, profiles and
field notes and tables of grades heretofore or hereafter accepted and
Section
505.510
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
505.550
100:1302
Section 505.560. Removal of Engineer's Stakes.481 [R.O. 2009
§54.116; CC 1981 §24-116]
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or otherwise interfere with
the stakes or other markers set by the Director of Public Works or his/
her designee to designate the grade or line of any sidewalk, curb, gutter
or other street improvement or for any person to construct or cause to be
constructed in the City any sidewalk, curb or gutter, on a grade other than
the grade designated by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee,
after the same shall have been properly designated by him/her.
adopted by ordinance shall be received and taken as evidence of the
true grades of all the streets and parts of streets within the City.
B. In case of the loss of all or any part of such plats, drawings, diagrams,
profiles, field notes and tables of grades, the record thereof shall be
received and taken and held as evidence of the true grades of the
several streets and parts of streets mentioned therein and all plats,
drawings, diagrams, profiles, field notes and tables of grades shall be
kept on file and preserved in the City Clerk's office.
481. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
505.550
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
505.560
100:1303

ARTICLE IX
Numbering of Buildings
Section 505.570. Division of City Into Districts. [R.O. 2009 §54.130;
CC 1981 §24-128]
For convenience in numbering, the City is divided into two (2) districts,
as follows: All that part of the City lying south and southwest of Jefferson
Street and of Watson Street or of an extension thereof shall be known as the
"southern district" of the City and the remaining part of the City shall be
known as the "northern district" thereof.
Section 505.580. Designation of Streets in Southern and Northern
Districts. [R.O. 2009 §54.131; CC 1981 §§24-129—24-130]
Section 505.590. Space Allotted Number — Odd and Even
Numbering. [R.O. 2009 §54.132; CC 1981 §§24-131—24-132]
Section 505.600. System of Numbering. [R.O. 2009 §54.133; CC
1981 §§24-133—24-135]
A. Designation Of Streets In Southern District. In the southern district of
the City, Main Street and all streets running parallel with it and
Kingshighway and all streets running parallel with it shall be known as
"South Main Street", "South Second Street", and in the same manner
the word "South" shall be prefixed to the name of Kingshighway and of
each of such parallel streets respectively, unless such parallel streets lie
entirely within such district, in which case the prefix "South" shall be
omitted.
B. Designation Of Streets In Northern District. In the northern district of
the City, Main Street and all streets running parallel with it and
Kingshighway and all streets running parallel with it shall be known as
"North Main Street", "North Second Street", and in the same manner
the word "North" shall be prefixed to the name of Kingshighway and of
each of such parallel streets respectively, unless such parallel streets lie
entirely within such district in which case the prefix "North" shall be
omitted.
A. Space Allotted Number. For the purpose of a proper distribution of
numbers, to each space of twenty (20) feet frontage, or fractional part
thereof, there shall be allotted one (1) number.
B. Even Numbers On East And North Side—Odd Numbers On West And
South. The even numbers shall be on the east and north side of the
streets respectively and the odd numbers shall be on the west and south
side of the streets respectively.
A. Streets Running North And South. In numbering the buildings fronting
on streets running north and south, the numbering shall begin at
Jefferson and at Watson Streets, the dividing streets as provided in
Section
505.570
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
505.600
100:1305
Section 505.610. Map of Street Numbering. [R.O. 2009 §54.134; CC
1981 §24-136]
The Director of Public Works or his/her designee shall prepare a map of
the City with the numbers plainly written thereon in conformity with the
provisions of this Article so as to expedite the numbering of buildings in the
City and in preparing such map he/she shall also provide numbers for the
irregular streets of the City, such as Boone's Lick Road and the streets north
of Tecumseh Street, according to the general scheme herein provided. The
map, when completed, shall be placed in the custody of the City Clerk and
shall be open to the inspection of the inhabitants of the City.
Section 505.620. Duty of Property Owner To Maintain Street
Number. [R.O. 2009 §54.135; CC 1981 §24-137]
It is hereby made the duty of each property owner in this City to place,
maintain and display on every building owned by him/her the street number
of such building in plain, legible numerals, so that the same shall be legible
from the street or sidewalk abutting such property.
Section 505.630. City May Number Upon Owner's Failure — Costs
and Collections. [R.O. 2009 §54.136; CC 1981 §24-138]
Section 505.570, beginning with 100 and 101 respectively, the
numbering in the second (2nd) blocks from the dividing streets to begin
with 200 and 201 respectively and so on, the hundreds in each number
designating the number of the respective block as counted from the
dividing street. In numbering buildings fronting on Kingshighway or on
streets parallel with it, the distance between Blocks No. 284, 285 and
298 on one (1) side and Blocks No. 299, 300, 301 and 302 on the other
side shall be considered as one (1) block.
B. Streets Extending East And West. In numbering buildings fronting on
streets extending east and west between the Missouri River and
Kingshighway, the beginning street shall be Main Street and running
thence westwardly and the same rule shall govern the numbering as is
provided in the preceding Section, giving to each block 100 numbers
and beginning at Main Street with the numbers 100 and 101
respectively; except that the distance between Fifth Street and Sixth
Street shall be treated as one (1) block only; and except that buildings
fronting on streets east of Main Street shall be numbered eastwardly
from Main Street beginning with the numbers 1 and 2 respectively.
C. Streets Running Westwardly Or Northwestwardly. In numbering the
buildings fronting on streets running westwardly or northwestwardly
from Kingshighway, the beginning street shall be Kingshighway and the
same rule shall govern the numbering as is provided in Subsection (A)
of this Section; except that the beginning numbers shall be 1500 and
1501 respectively and giving to each block 100 numbers as in other
parts of the City.
Section
505.600
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
505.630
100:1306
Section 505.640. Interference With Numbering.482 [R.O. 2009
§54.137; CC 1981 §24-139]
Any person who shall interfere with the work of numbering buildings as
provided for in this Article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction thereof shall be subject to punishment as provided in
Section 100.150.
A. Any building not numbered pursuant to this Article within three (3)
days after written notice from the City to do so may be numbered by the
City or its agents.
B. The cost of numbering buildings as provided for in Subsection (A) of
this Section shall be not less than the actual cost to the City.
C. The cost of numbering of buildings performed by the City, as provided
in Subsection (A) of this Section, shall be assessed against the property
or buildings so numbered unless the cost thereof shall be paid by the
owner, lessee or tenant of such property to the City within thirty (30)
days after such numbering shall have been done. The cost of such
numbering work shall be assessed against the property and collected as
provided by law.
482. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
505.630
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
505.640
100:1307

ARTICLE X
Poles and Wires
Section 505.650. Minimum Height of Wires.483 [R.O. 2009 §54.153;
CC 1981 §24-154]
All telephone or telegraph wires shall be run and placed so that the lowest
wire at the lowest point shall be at least twenty (20) feet above the surface
of the street or alley or the curbstone of the sidewalk, as the case may be.
Section 505.660. City's Right To Make Alterations — Notice To
Company.484 [R.O. 2009 §54.154; CC 1981 §24-155]
The right is reserved by the City Council at any time to direct any alteration
in the location of poles now erected or hereafter to be erected and also
in the height at which the wires shall run; provided that before any such
alteration is made, at least five (5) days' notice in writing shall be given
to the President or local officer in charge of the company affected by
the proposed alteration and reasonable opportunity shall be afforded the
representatives of such company or any citizen interested to be heard
therein. When any such alteration shall be ordered, the company shall,
within five (5) days thereafter, commence such alterations and complete the
same as soon as practicable thereafter and upon failure so to do, it shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Section 505.670. Lines, Cables and The Like To Be Kept in
Repair.485 [R.O. 2009 §54.155; CC 1981 §24-156]
All telephone and telegraph companies doing business in this City shall at
all times keep and maintain their telephone and telegraph poles, guy poles,
wires, cables and other fixtures in the streets, alleys or public places in
good repair and shall not permit their wires or cable to unnecessarily sag
between poles or other fixtures, nor to in any manner interfere with the City
electric light or fire alarm or other electric wires of the City. Any company
or local officer in charge, failing or refusing to make alterations or repairs
immediately upon receiving notice from the Director of Public Works or his/
her designee to do so, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
483. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
484. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
485. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
505.650
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
505.670
100:1309

ARTICLE XI
Structure Moving Permit
Section 505.680. Structure Moving Permit. [R.O. 2009 §54.170;
Ord. No. 99-274, 8-11-1999]
A. No person shall move any structure within the City of St. Charles on
City right-of-way without first securing a permit from the Department of
Public Works. Before issuance of the permit, the applicant shall supply:
1. Hold harmless agreement executed by the owner of the building;
2. Certificate of insurance naming the City as additionally insured for
an amount not less than two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for
bodily injury and property damage;
3. A route map together with the date and time of the proposed move;
4. Name, address and phone number of the person, firm or
corporation engaged to move the structure together with a resume
of moves made by said person, firm or corporation in the St. Louis
metropolitan area in the last three (3) years;
5. The name and phone number of the person supervising the move;
6. Height, width and load of the structure during move.
B. The fee for the permit shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per one thousand
(1,000) linear feet moved. The permit shall specify the date and hours
during which the move may occur.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this Section shall be subject to
the penalty set forth in Section 100.150.
Section
505.680
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
505.680
100:1311
Chapter 510
EXCAVATION, GRADING AND STORM WATER CONTROL
Section
505.680
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
505.680
100:1312
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 510.010. Purpose — Scope. [R.O. 2009 §151.01; CC 1981
§§10-1— 10-2; Ord. No. 73-47, 7-25-1973]
Section 510.020. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §151.02; CC 1981 §10-3;
Ord. No. 73-47, 7-25-1973]
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
DEBRIS OR SILTING BASIN — A barrier or dam built across a waterway
or at other suitable locations to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt or other
materials.
DIVERSION — A channel with or without a supporting ridge on the lower
side constructed across or at the bottom of a slope.
EROSION — The wearing away of the land surface by the action of wind,
water or gravity.
EXCAVATION OR CUT — The removal, stripping or disturbance of soil,
earth, sand, rock, gravel or other similar substances from the ground.
EXISTING GRADE — The vertical location of the existing ground surface
prior to excavation or filling.
FILL OR FILLING — The placing of any soil, earth, sand, rock, gravel or
other substance on the ground.
FINISHED GRADE — The final grade or elevation of the ground surface
conforming to the proposed design.
GRADING — Any excavation or filling or combination thereof.
GRASSED WATERWAY — A natural or constructed waterway, usually broad
and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to conduct
surface water from a field, diversion or other site features.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to control storm water runoff on
land that is undergoing development for non-agricultural uses and to
preserve the natural terrain and waterways of land within the City. The
provisions in this Chapter are intended to provide a natural community
environment and to prevent soil erosion which makes necessary costly
repairs to gullies, washed out fills, roads and embankments. The
resulting sediment of soil erosion clogs storm sewers, road ditches and
chokes streams and creates silt lakes, all of which pose a threat to
public health and safety. Interpretation and application of the
provisions of this Chapter shall be pursuant to these purposes.
B. Scope. This Chapter amends and supplements Chapters 505, Streets
and Sidewalks and 405, Subdivisions of this Code of Ordinances. In all
cases where this Chapter conflicts with other ordinances of the City, the
provisions herein shall govern.
Section
510.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
510.020
100:1313
GROUND — Including, but not limited to, the banks and beds of any river
or waterway.
Section 510.030. Commercial Operations. [R.O. 2009 §151.03; CC
1981 §10-4; Ord. No. 73-47, 7-25-1973]
The provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed as permitting the
applicant for a permit under the Article set forth in Sections 510.050 et
seq. to carry on any commercial operation or business or use any premises
for buildings or structures thereon for any purpose not permitted by other
provisions of this Chapter or Chapter 400, Zoning Code. For the purpose
of this Section, grading shall not be considered a commercial operation or
business if the grading is incidental to and necessary for the establishment
or operation of a use permitted in the applicable zoning district.
Section 510.040. Retroactive Provisions. [R.O. 2009 §151.04; CC
1981 §10-5; Ord. No. 73-47, 7-25-1973]
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all excavations, grading or
filling operations of exposed ground which were being worked as of July 24,
1973; except that any then existing operation shall have been completed
within one (1) year from July 24, 1973; provided that written notice of
intention to continue such operation for such time was filed with the
Director of Public Works or his/her designee within thirty (30) days after
July 24, 1973. No then existing operation shall be extended in area or any
new operation commenced after such date without first securing a permit
therefor as herein provided and such operation shall be subject to all of the
provisions of this Chapter.
Section 510.045. Duty of Property Owner To Control Runoff
Water.486 [R.O. 2009 §54.011; CC 1981 §24-14; Ord. No. 3575,
6-5-1968]
It shall be unlawful for any person in this City to fail, neglect or refuse to
control the runoff of water from land possessed by him/her, or under his/her
management or control, so that an amount of soil, dirt, gravel, rock, sand,
trash, filth or similar material detrimental to or causing a hazard to public
users is carried upon a public sidewalk or a paved public street.
486. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
510.020
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
510.045
100:1314
ARTICLE II
Grading Permits
Section 510.050. Permits — Exceptions.487 [R.O. 2009 §151.15; CC
1981 §§10-17—10-18; Ord. No. 73-47, 7-25-1973; Ord. No. 10-174
§3, 7-18-2010; Ord. No. 18-198, 9-4-2018]
A. Required. No grading in access of one (1) acre shall be commenced in
the City, except as hereinafter provided, without first obtaining from the
Director of Engineering or his/her designee a grading permit.
B. Not Required In Certain Cases. No grading permit shall be required for
the following classes of grading operations:
1. Building permit. Under provisions of a duly issued building permit
where no grading is involved except excavation for the basement or
footings and the backfilling thereof and there is no filling in excess
of fifty (50) cubic yards.
2. Incidental excavations, grading or filling. Excavation and removal
of excavated material and filling provided such operation is clearly
incidental to the improvement of the property, consists of not more
than fifty (50) cubic yards of material and the area is graded and
covered by revegetation or other suitable means immediately
thereafter.
3. Excavation for streets and drains. Necessary grading or removal or
excavation of soil or other material within the limits of the right-ofway
or slope rights of any existing street or for the purpose of
constructing streets and other related improvements within the
area of new subdivisions when made in accordance with approved
subdivision plans and for which the appropriate permits have been
issued for street and drain construction. A developer achieving Tier
1 status under the Green Point Rating System Guide established in
Section 400.920 may make application to the Department of
Engineering for the use of a Green Point Rating System Alternative
to the requirements of this Subsection as set forth in the
"Development Guide: Infrastructure Alternatives for St. Charles
GPRS Projects" on file with the City Clerk.
4. Other construction work. Construction work relating to drains,
utilities or sanitary sewer systems for which a street opening or
other necessary permit has been issued by the City. A developer
achieving Tier 1 status under the Green Point Rating System Guide
established in Section 400.920 may make application to the
Department of Engineering for the use of a Green Point Rating
System Alternative to the requirements of this Subsection as set
forth in the "Development Guide: Infrastructure Alternatives for St.
Charles GPRS Projects" on file with the City Clerk.
487. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §510.340.
Section
510.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
510.050
100:1315
Section 510.060. Application Procedure.488 [R.O. 2009 §151.16; CC
1981 §10-19; Ord. No. 73-47, 7-25-1973; Ord. No. 92-254,
10-21-1992; Ord. No. 95-233, 9-6-1995; Ord. No. 18-198, 9-4-2018]
5. Farming. The lawful use of land for farming, nurseries or gardening
or similar agricultural or horticultural use whenever there is
substantial compliance with recommendations or standards of the
local soil conservation authority.
A. Application for a grading permit shall be made by the property owner or
his/her authorized agent and shall be made to the Director of
Engineering or his/her designee on forms provided by him/her and shall
be accompanied by a detailed statement of proposed work, the purpose
thereof and why the excavation, grading or filling is clearly incidental to
the improvement of the property. An application shall be accompanied
by the following:
1. Two (2) sets of maps and plans with specifications showing
proposed excavation, grading or filling. Such plans shall be
prepared by and shall bear the seal of a licensed engineer, except
when the engineering design for excavation or construction is
unnecessary to assure compliance with the standards established
by this regulation, in which event, such plans may be prepared by a
licensed surveyor. All such plans shall be drawn to a scale of not
less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet and shall show
the following:
a. Full name and address of owner of property;
b. Designation of property by street address;
c. The location of the premises and its geographic relation to
neighboring properties showing all buildings and roads within
one hundred (100) feet of the boundaries of the plot on which
the excavation, grading or filling is proposed;
d. The portion of the property that is to be excavated, graded or
filled with excavated material;
e. The estimated maximum quantity of material to be excavated,
graded or filled and the estimated part thereof that will be
used for grading or filling;
f. The location of any sewerage disposal system or underground
utility line, any part of which is within fifty (50) feet of the
proposed excavation, grading or filling area and the location of
any gas transmission pipe line operated at a maximum service
pressure in excess of two hundred (200) pounds per square
inch gauge, any part of which is within one hundred (100) feet
of the proposed excavation, grading or filling area;
488. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §510.340.
Section
510.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
510.060
100:1316
g. Existing topography and grade of the premises at a contour
interval of not more than two (2) feet and the proposed final
contour and finished grade elevation at intervals of not more
than two (2) feet; except that whenever the existing grade is
extremely steep and hilly, the contour intervals may be not
more than five (5) feet if approval is first secured from the
Director of Engineering or his/her designee;
h. The location and present status of any previous permitted
grading operations on the property;
i. The details of any drainage system proposed to be installed
and maintained by the applicant, designed to provide for
proper surface drainage for land, both during the performance
of the work applied for and after the completion thereof;
j. If the proposed excavation or filling is for the purpose of
constructing a lake or pond, the details of the proposed dam or
other structures and the embankments intended to impound
the water, together with the details and locations of the
proposed discharge to a valved outlet for drainage purposes
and the proposed level of any impounded water;
k. Details of soil preparation and of revegetation of the finished
grade or of other methods of soil erosion control;
l. The proposed truck and equipment access ways to the work
site;
m. The flow lines of surface water drainage, streams and any
existing farm drains, inlets and outfalls, springs or other
flowing wells and width of stream beds or flowage lines;
n. A comprehensive drainage plan designed to handle safely the
surface water, streams or other natural drains following heavy
rain storms during grading operations;
o. Proposed debris/siltation basins, grass waterways and
diversions; and
p. A statement from the property owner or his/her agent
assuming full responsibility for the performance of the
operation as stated in the application. This statement shall also
contain an assurance that all City property or City roads will be
protected adequately.
2. A complete stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) based
on the EPA SWPPP Template, and complying with "Protecting
Water Quality" as published by the Missouri Department of Natural
Resources, January, 2011.
3. For excavations, grading or filling of more than three thousand
(3,000) cubic yards of material, a performance bond in form and
Section
510.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
510.060
100:1317
Section 510.070. Issuance. [R.O. 2009 §151.17; CC 1981 §10-20;
Ord. No. 73-47, 7-25-1973; Ord. No. 18-198, 9-4-2018]
with surety approved by the Director of Engineering or his/her
designee in such amount as the Director of Engineering or his/
her designee shall deem sufficient to insure completion of all work
following excavation, grading or filling pursuant to the conditions
of approval; provided, the City may accept a letter of credit, a
certified bank officer's check or other surety from a bank or
financial institution in lieu of a bond. The Director of Engineering
or his/her designee shall annually submit to the City Council for
approval, a schedule of bond requirements and rates. All
governmental entities, comprehensive colleges and universities
(not including single-purpose institutions) and schools offering
basic education to any grade (K through 12) shall be exempt from
the requirement imposed by this Subsection to provide a bond.
This exemption from the bond requirement does not provide an
exemption from the obligation to insure completion of all work
following excavation, grading or filling.
4. An application fee to cover the costs of permit and inspection based
upon a rate of ten dollars ($10.00) per one thousand (1,000) cubic
yards of material or fraction thereof to be excavated, graded or fill,
with a minimum fee as follows:
a. Twenty dollars ($20.00) for projects fifty (50) to one thousand
(1,000) cubic yards.
b. Fifty dollars ($50.00) for projects over one thousand (1,000)
cubic yards; and a maximum fee of fifteen hundred dollars
($1,500.00).
5. The applicant shall submit with the application a statement
showing estimated time lapse of rough grading, finished grading
and revegetation.
A. The Director of Engineering or his/her designee shall establish the
amount of the performance bond, if any, and if the application and plan
comply with the standards contained in this Chapter, he/she shall issue
a permit in accordance therewith. In acting upon such an application
and plan, the Director of Engineering or his/her designee shall be
guided by and shall take into consideration the public health, safety and
general welfare and particular consideration shall be given as to
whether the plan will create any of the following conditions:
1. Interference with surface water flow and drainage;
2. Interference with lateral supports and slopes;
3. Excessive erosion, alteration of the natural topography and grade
of land, depletion of natural deposits of topsoil and other natural
materials, disturbance of the plant and wildlife, creation of
Section
510.060
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
510.070
100:1318
Section 510.080. Expiration. [R.O. 2009 §151.18; CC 1981 §10-21;
Ord. No. 73-47, 7-25-1973; Ord. No. 18-198, 9-4-2018]
A permit issued under this Article shall expire one (1) year from the date
of issuance; except that the Director of Engineering or his/her designee
may, for due cause shown, extend any permit for one (1) year periods after
complete review of all plans and examination of work accomplished and
proposed; provided application is made at least thirty (30) days prior to the
expiration date of such permit. In no case shall a permit be extended if the
provisions of this regulation have not been complied with; provided that
in connection with continuing operations, the Director of Engineering or
his/her designee may waive, for a one (1) year period, those requirements
which would make continuing operations impractical.
nuisance and dangerous open pits and creation of stagnant water
pools.
B. The Director of Engineering or his/her designee may impose such
conditions or requirements upon the issuance of a permit as he/she
deems necessary or proper to assure faithful compliance with the
Chapter.
Section
510.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
510.080
100:1319

ARTICLE III
Standards
Section 510.090. Excavations and Grading Operations. [R.O. 2009
§151.30; CC 1981 §10-33(1—7); Ord. No. 73-47, 7-25-1973; Ord. No.
93-117, 6-2-1993; Ord. No. 98-339, 8-20-1998; Ord. No. 10-174 §3,
7-18-2010]
A. All excavations and grading operations, whether or not a permit is
required, shall comply with the following standards:
1. All excavations, grading or filling shall have a finished grade not to
exceed 3:1; except that embankments less than three (3) feet in
height shall be exempt therefrom if properly mulched and seeded.
Steeper grades are allowed if the excavation is through rock or the
excavation head wall or toe wall approved by the Director of Public
Works or his/her designee. If such walls exceed a height of six (6)
feet, a protective fence or barrier shall be required.
2. Grading plans for sites that exceed one (1) acre of grading shall
provide for sediment or debris basins, silt traps or filters, staked
straw bales or other approved measures to remove sediment from
runoff waters and avoid damage to adjoining properties, roads,
ditches and storm sewers. The design is to be approved by the
Director of Public Works or his/her designee. Temporary siltation
control measures (structural) shall be maintained until vegetative
cover is established at a sufficient density to provide erosion
control on the site. (Refer to Section 510.100.)
3. Time schedules for grading operations shall be categorized as six
(6) months or less, twelve (12) months or less and twelve (12)
months or more, depending upon the amount of time that the soil
shall be exposed or subjected to erosion under normal weather
conditions for the season.
4. a. When grading operations are completed or suspended for more
than thirty (30) days, permanent grass must be established at
sufficient density to provide erosion control on the site.
Between permanent grass seeding periods, temporary cover
shall be provided according to the Director of Public Works or
his/her designee's recommendation. (Refer to Section 510.100)
b. All finished grades (areas not to be disturbed by future
improvement) in excess of twenty percent (20%) slopes (5:1)
shall be mulched and tacked at the rate of one hundred (100)
pounds per one thousand (1,000) square feet when seeded.
5. Truck and equipment access ways to the site of the operation shall
be located so as to minimize danger to traffic and nuisance to
surrounding properties. Such access shall be kept either wet or
oiled or treated with a chemical dust deterrent or paved to the
Section
510.090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
510.090
100:1321
Section 510.100. Vegetative Establishment For Urban Development
Sites. [R.O. 2009 §151.31; CC 1981 §10-33(8), App. A; Ord. No.
73-47, 7-25-1973; Ord. No. 93-117, 6-1-1993]
extent necessary to prevent any dust nuisance to surrounding
properties. All such access ways shall be clearly marked with signs
and shall be posted approximately two hundred (200) feet distant
from such access ways or other traveled areas. Such signs shall
read "caution trucks entering" and be of size, type, coloring,
lettering and format used by the City Street Department. Debris,
soil and other materials shall be removed daily from public streets
and sidewalks.
6. Provisions shall be made to accommodate the increased runoff
caused by changed soil and surface conditions during the after
grading. Unvegetated open channels shall be designed so that
gradients result in velocities of two (2) fps (feet per second) or less.
Open channels with velocities more than two (2) fps and less than
five (5) fps shall be established in permanent vegetation by use of
commercial erosion control blankets or lined with rock rip-rap or
concrete or other suitable materials as approved by the designated
official. Detention basins, diversions or other appropriate
structures shall be constructed to prevent velocities above five (5)
fps. (Refer to Sections 510.110 through 510.150.)
7. The adjoining ground to the concerned plot shall be provided with
protection from accelerated and increased surface water, silt from
erosion and any other consequences of erosion. Where it is
necessary for the protection of such property to enter upon private
property for the purpose of taking appropriate protecting
measures, the owner shall obtain consent from the owner of such
adjoining property for such purpose. The applicant shall, at its own
expense, shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences or other
property likely to be damaged during the progress of the grading
and shall be responsible for all damage to public or private
property or highways resulting from its failure to properly protect
and carry out such grading.
8. All lots shall be seeded and mulched or sodded before an
occupancy permit shall be issued except that an occupancy permit
may be issued by the Building Official in cases of undue hardship
because of unfavorable ground conditions.
9. A developer achieving Tier 1 status under the Green Point Rating
System Guide established in Section 400.920 may make application
to the Department of Public Works for the use of a Green Point
Rating System Alternative to the requirements of this Section as
set forth in the "Development Guide: Infrastructure Alternatives for
St. Charles GPRS Projects" on file with the City Clerk.
A. Seeding Rates.
Section
510.090
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
510.100
100:1322
Section 510.110. Diversions For Urban Development Sites. [R.O.
2009 §151.32; CC 1981 §10-33(8), App. B; Ord. No. 73-47,
7-25-1973; Ord. No. 93-117, 6-1-1993]
1. Permanent.
a. Tall Fescue: 30 lbs./ac.
b. Smooth Brome: 20 lbs./ac.
c. Combined: Fescue @ 15 lbs./ac. and Brome @ 10 lbs./ac.
2. Temporary.
a. Wheat or Rye: 150 lbs./ac. (3.5 lbs. per square foot).
b. Oats: 120 lbs./ac. (2.75 lbs. per square foot).
B. Seeding Periods.
1. Fescue or Brome: March first (1st) through June first (1st).
2. Fescue or Brome: August first (1st) through October first (1st).
3. Wheat or Rye: March fifteenth (15th) through November first (1st).
4. Oats: March fifteenth (15th) through September fifteenth (15th).
C. Mulch Rates. 100 lbs. per 1,000 square feet (4,356 lbs. per acre).
D. Fertilizer Rates.
1. Nitrogen: 30 lbs./ac.
2. Phosphate: 30 lbs./ac.
3. Potassium: 30 lbs./ac.
4. Lime: 600 lbs./ac. ENM*
*ENM = effective neutralizing material as per State evaluation
of quarried rock.
A. Outlets for diversions must be stable. Stable outlets consist of grass
waterways, earthen channels with capacity adequate to prevent gully
erosion, grade stabilization structures or other practices as approved
by the designated official.
1. Combination diversion. Used at the top of a fill slope.
Section
510.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
510.110
100:1323
Section 510.120. Straw Bale Barriers For Urban Development Sites.
[R.O. 2009 §151.33; CC 1981 §10-33(8), App. C; Ord. No. 73-47,
7-25-1973; Ord. No. 93-117, 6-1-1993]
Placement and construction of a straw bale barrier:
2. Earth ridge diversion. Used around the perimeter of a construction
site.
3. Combination diversion. General use.
4. Gravel ridge diversion. General use.
Section
510.110
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
510.120
100:1324
Section 510.130. Synthetic Filter Barriers For Urban Development
Sites. [R.O. 2009 §151.34; CC 1981 §10-33(8), App. D; Ord. No.
73-47, 7-25-1973; Ord. No. 93-117, 6-1-1993; Ord. No. 09-119,
6-18-2009]
A. Maintenance.
Section
510.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
510.130
100:1325
1. Filter barriers shall be inspected immediately after each rainfall
and at least daily during prolonged rainfall. Any required repairs
shall be made immediately.
2. Should the fabric decompose or become ineffective prior to the end
of the expected usable life and the barrier still be necessary, the
fabric shall be replaced promptly.
3. Sediment deposits should be removed after each storm event. They
must be removed when deposits reach approximately half the
height of the barrier.
4. Any sediment deposits remaining in place after the silt fence or
filter barrier is no longer required shall be dressed to conform with
the existing grade, prepared and seeded.
B. Placement And Construction Of A Synthetic Filter Barrier.
Section
510.130
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
510.140
100:1326
Section 510.140. Sediment Basin For Urban Development Sites.
[R.O. 2009 §151.35; CC 1981 §10-33(8), App. E; Ord. No. 73-47,
7-25-1973; Ord. No. 93-117, 6-1-1993]
Section
510.140
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
510.150
100:1327
Section 510.150. Outlet Protection For Urban Development Sites.
[R.O. 2009 §151.36; CC 1981 §10-33(8), App. F; Ord. No. 73-47,
7-25-1973; Ord. No. 93-117, 6-1-1993]
Section 510.160. Grading Operations.489 [R.O. 2009 §151.37; CC
1981 §10-34; Ord. No. 73-47, 7-25-1973]
A. All grading operations shall be restricted as follows:
489. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §510.340.
Section
510.150
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
510.160
100:1328
1. Processing of any kind on the excavation site or the erection or use
of any structure thereon such as, but not limited to, hoppers,
washers, crushers or sheds; except simple screens to remove
oversize aggregates during loading shall be deemed a commercial
use and are prohibited except upon the issuance of a special permit
by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee.
2. Except as otherwise provided in Section 510.030, no storage area
may be created or maintained in connection with an excavation,
grading or filling operation; except that under a duly issued permit,
an owner or his/her contractor shall be allowed temporarily to store
such material incidental to the operation, but such storage shall not
be for a longer term than the term of the permit issued.
3. It shall be unlawful to keep or store any trucks, machinery or
equipment on any property or street after completion of the
grading operation. All such trucks, machinery or equipment shall
be removed from such property within ten (10) days after
completion of the work or expiration of the permit, whichever
occurs first.
4. Notification.
a. The applicant shall notify the Director of Public Works or his/
her designee of the following, when and as completed:
(1) Rough grading.
(2) Finished grading before seeding.
(3) All re-establishment and construction work.
b. The Director of Public Works or his/her designee, upon such
notification, shall make field inspections on the site before
rough grading, after final grading, before seeding and at
completion to determine if work in progress and the completed
operation have been performed in accordance with this
Chapter.
5. All pits, quarries, holes or other excavated areas shall be refilled
with and no new filling operation shall be conducted with any
material except clear, non-burnable fill containing no trash, refuse
or harmful matter and such excavated areas and new filling
operations shall be graded to the level of adjoining property or to
an elevation from which all surface and other waters collected
therein may find natural drainage therefrom. Stumps and logs may
be used for fill material but only in accordance with standards and
the requirements established by the Director of Public Works or
his/her designee. Excess material shall either be removed from the
premises or leveled with top soil and seeded as provided in Section
510.090(7).
Section
510.160
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
510.160
100:1329
6. It shall be unlawful to change, modify, abolish or alter any of the
debris basins, grass waterways, diversions and other soil erosion
control structures as permitted in a grading permit; except with the
prior consent and written approval of the Director of Public Works
or his/her designee.
Section
510.160
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
510.160
100:1330
ARTICLE IV
Administration and Enforcement
Section 510.170. Consent To Inspect. [R.O. 2009 §151.50; CC 1981
§10-46; Ord. No. 73-47, 7-25-1973]
By applying for a grading permit, the applicant consents to inspection by
the City of the proposed graded plot and all work in process.
Section 510.180. Correction of Violations — Failure To Comply With
Notice. [R.O. 2009 §151.51; CC 1981 §10-47; Ord. No. 73-47,
7-25-1973]
All violations shall be corrected within the time limit set forth by the
Director of Public Works or his/her designee specified in the issuance of a
written notice to correct. All persons failing to comply with such notice shall
be deemed in violation of this Chapter.
Section 510.190. Appeals. [R.O. 2009 §151.52; CC 1981 §10-49; Ord.
No. 73-47, 7-25-1973]
Any person denied a grading permit as herein provided shall have the right
to appeal such denial to the Board of Adjustment or other board established
by the City within forty-five (45) days of the date of such denial.
Section
510.170
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
510.190
100:1331

ARTICLE V
Storm Water
Section 510.200. Purpose. [R.O. 2009 §151.60; Ord. No. 02-175,
7-19-2002; Ord. No. 18-198, 9-4-2018]
Two (2) consequences of construction and development are the increased
runoff created by the changed properties of the ground surface and the
rate of discharge of this increased runoff. These are both of great relevance
to storm water management. The natural condition of the land before
development is in relative balance with the natural capacity of the receiving
creeks. Normally, the undeveloped conditions provide greater permeability
and longer times of concentration. By modification of the ground surface
from the irregular, pervious and vegetation-covered, the areas are changed
to more impervious, more quickly drained and, in some cases, denuded of
vegetation. It is the policy of the City to protect and promote the public
health, safety and general welfare. The management of storm water will
reduce the erosion on land and creek channels, will reduce the possibility
of damage to public and private property, will assist in the attainment
and maintenance of water quality standards and will preserve the
environmental quality of the watercourses in the City.
Section 510.210. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §151.61; Ord. No. 02-175,
7-19-2002; Ord. No. 18-198, 9-4-2018]
For the purposes of this Article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein.
2-YEAR PEAK FLOW — The peak rate of flow of water at a given point in a
channel, watercourse or conduit resulting from the 2-year storm.
2-YEAR STORM — Rainstorm of a specific duration having a fifty percent
(50%) probability of occurrence in any given year.
15-YEAR PEAK FLOW — The peak rate of flow of water at a given point in a
channel, watercourse or conduit resulting from the 15-year storm.
15-YEAR STORM — Rainstorm of a specific duration having a six and
six hundred sixty-seven thousandths percent (6.667%) probability of
occurrence in any given year.
25-YEAR FLOOD — A flood having a four percent (4%) probability of
occurrence in a given year.
25-YEAR PEAK FLOW — The peak rate of flow of water at a given point in a
channel, watercourse or conduit resulting from the 25-year storm.
25-YEAR STORM — Rainstorm of a specific duration having a four percent
(4%) probability of occurrence in an given year.
50-YEAR FLOOD — A flood having a two percent (2%) probability of
occurrence in a given year.
50-YEAR PEAK FLOW — The peak rate of flow of water at a given point in a
channel, watercourse or conduit resulting from the 50-year storm.
Section
510.200
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
510.210
100:1333
50-YEAR STORM — Rainstorm of a specific duration having a two percent
(2%) probability of occurrence in any given year.
100-YEAR FLOOD — A flood having a one percent (1%) probability of
occurrence in a given year.
100-YEAR PEAK FLOW — The peak rate of flow of water at a given point in
a channel, watercourse or conduit resulting from the 100-year storm.
100-YEAR STORM — Rainstorms of a specific duration having a one percent
(1%) probability of occurrence in any given year.
ALLOWABLE RELEASE RATE — The pre-development or existing condition
peak flow corresponding to a selected rainfall frequency event.
APPLICANT — The specific person applying for the permit for an approved
storm water management system.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year, i.e., the 100-year flood.
BOND — Any form of security for the completion or performance of a storm
water management plan or the maintenance of drainage improvements,
including surety bond, collateral, property or instrument of credit, or
escrow deposit in an amount and form satisfactory to the Governing Body.
DETENTION BASIN — Any manmade area or facility designed to detain
(hold) storm water temporarily during and immediately after a runoff event.
DIFFERENTIAL RUNOFF — The difference between the calculated
developed runoff rate and the calculated pre-developed runoff rate.
DRAINAGE FACILITY — Any system of artificially constructed drains,
including open channels and sewers, used to convey storm water, surface or
ground water either continuously or intermittently to natural watercourses.
FLOOD PLAIN — A geographic area susceptible to periodic inundation from
the overflow of natural waterways during the base 100-year flood.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
(1) foot and so delineated in the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) Flood Insurance Study.
FREEBOARD — The difference in elevation between the hydraulic grade
line elevation and:
HYDRAULIC GRADE LINE — A line coinciding with the level of flowing
water at any given point along an open channel; or the level to which water
1. The inlet sill elevation; or
2. The top of structure elevation; or
3. The top of channel bank elevation; or
4. The top of wall elevation.
Section
510.210
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
510.210
100:1334
would rise in a vertical tube connected to any point along a pipe or closed
conduit flowing under pressure.
LOW SILL ELEVATION — The lowest finished floor elevation, basement
window sill elevation, or basement walk-out door threshold elevation,
whichever is lower, of any structure or building.
MAINTENANCE — The act of maintaining or preserving including, but not
limited to, operation construction and re-construction.
MSD — Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District.
OUTFALL — The point location or structure where drainage discharges.
PERMIT — A permit granted by the City to a person to construct a storm
water management system.
PERMITTEE — Any person to whom a permit has been granted by the City
under this Chapter.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership and/or unincorporated
association of persons.
POST-DEVELOPED FLOW — The peak flow corresponding to a selected
rainfall event as a result of site conditions after development.
PRE-DEVELOPED FLOW — The amount of flow from an existing site prior
to new development or improvements as computed using the Rational
Formula.
RATIONAL METHOD — An empirical formula for calculating peak rates of
runoff resulting from rainfall.
SITE — The area to be developed or improved.
SOIL CONSERVATION SERVICE METHOD — A technique for calculating
storm water runoff volume and peak flow described in Soil Conservation
Service (SCS) Technical Release 55.
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The drawings, computations,
data, reports, etc., which identify how storm water runoff is to be handled.
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM — All means, natural or
manmade, used for conducting storm water runoff to, through or from a
drainage area to the point of outlet.
STORM WATER RUNOFF — Water that results from precipitation which is
not absorbed by the soil, evaporated into the atmosphere, or entrapped by
ground surface depressions and vegetation.
STORM WATER SEWER — A pipe or closed conduit that carries surface
runoff and subsurface waters.
STRUCTURE — Any object constructed above or below ground.
TR-55 — See "SOIL CONSERVATION SERVICE METHOD".
Section
510.210
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
510.220
100:1335
Section 510.220. Permit Required.490 [R.O. 2009 §151.62; Ord. No.
02-175, 7-19-2002; Ord. No. 18-198, 9-4-2018]
No person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use,
alter or disturb any public or private storm sewer, storm water facility
or storm water structure without first obtaining a written permit from
the Director of Engineering or his/her designee. All plans for storm water
construction or alteration shall be approved by the Director of Engineering
or his/her designee or the Director of Engineering or his/her designee's
authorized agent prior to the beginning of any such work. A permit
application form will be provided by the City and be made available through
the Engineering Department. The permit application shall be supplemented
by plans, specifications and other information as required in this Article
or by the Director of Engineering or his/her designee. A permit cannot
be issued without the completed application form, permit fees and all the
supplemental plans, specifications and other information as required.
Section 510.230. Permit Fees, Escrow and Bond. [R.O. 2009
§151.63; Ord. No. 02-175, 7-19-2002; Ord. No. 18-198, 9-4-2018]
Section 510.240. Permit Application Procedure. [R.O. 2009 §151.64;
Ord. No. 02-175, 7-19-2002; Ord. No. 18-198, 9-4-2018]
In advance of any planned storm sewer work, the owner of the site or his/
her agent shall cause to have submitted preliminary construction plans on
the project to the Director of Engineering or his/her designee for review
and comment. After approval of said preliminary plans, the owner or his/
A. The permit fee for storm sewers shall be a combination of a one
hundred dollar ($100.00) storm sewer construction permit fee plus a
storm sewer inspection fee of eighty dollars ($80.00) for every three
hundred (300) lineal feet of proposed storm sewer. This charge is not
refundable.
B. Upon approval of the final plans for any storm water management
system, but before the issuance of any permits, the Director of
Engineering or his/her designee shall require the applicant to post a
performance bond, cash escrow, certified check, or other acceptable
form of performance security for the amount of the work to be done
pursuant to the approved storm water management plans. This
performance security shall not be fully released by the Director of
Engineering or his/her designee except in conformance with State
Statutes. A one (1) year guarantee against defects in workmanship will
be required by the Director of Engineering or his/her designee for any
storm water management system accepted by the City.
C. The Director of Engineering or his/her designee shall establish the
amount of the performance bond or escrow, if any, required as part of
the permit application.
490. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §510.340.
Section
510.220
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
510.240
100:1336
her agent shall submit final plans, specifications, calculations, all required
additional information, a permit application form, all bonds and/or escrows
and the permit fee to the Director of Engineering or his/her designee for
approval. These submitted materials will be reviewed for compliance with
the ordinances and standards of the City. Any and all errors or omissions
on any part of the submitted material shall be corrected by the owner or
the owner's agent prior to issuance of a permit for the work. A separate
excavation permit will be required for any portion of the work within City
rights-of-way.
Section 510.250. Permit Issuance. [R.O. 2009 §151.65; Ord. No.
02-175, 7-19-2002; Ord. No. 18-198, 9-4-2018]
Section 510.260. Permit Expiration. [R.O. 2009 §151.66; Ord. No.
02-175, 7-19-2002; Ord. No. 18-198, 9-4-2018]
A permit issued under this Article shall expire one (1) year from the date of
issuance; except that the Director of Engineering or his/her designee may,
for due cause shown, extend any permit for additional one (1) year periods
after complete review of all plans and examination of work accomplished
and proposed; provided application is made at least thirty (30) days prior to
the expiration date of such permit. In no case shall permit be extended if
the provisions of this Article have not been complied with.
Section 510.270. General.491 [R.O. 2009 §151.67; Ord. No. 02-175,
7-19-2002; Ord. No. 04-194, 8-13-2004; Ord. No. 07-158, 6-8-2007;
Ord. No. 18-198, 9-4-2018]
A. Only after review and approval by the Director of Engineering or his/
her designee of all the required documents as detailed in this Article
and payment of all fees, bonds and escrows, a permit will be issued for
the proposed work.
B. The Director of Engineering or his/her designee may impose such
conditions or requirements upon the issuance of a permit as the
Director of Engineering or his/her designee deems necessary or proper
to assure the safety of the public and faithful compliance with City
ordinances and standards.
C. All appropriate approvals from the United States Army Corps of
Engineers and Missouri Department of Natural Resources must be
acquired and submitted to the Director of Engineering or his/her
designee prior to issuance of a storm water permit.
A. No owner of property regulated by this Article shall permit storm water
to be discharged in any manner that injures the property of adjacent
property owners.
491. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §510.340.
Section
510.240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
510.270
100:1337
Section 510.280. Storm Water Construction Standards. [R.O. 2009
§151.68; Ord. No. 02-175, 7-19-2002; Ord. No. 09-119, 6-18-2009;
Ord. No. 10-174 §3, 7-18-2010; Ord. No. 18-198, 9-4-2018]
B. Detention basins shall be maintained by the owner or owners of the
property. No modifications can be made to the facility without a permit
from the City and, in some situations, the Missouri Department of
Natural Resources.
C. Beyond the scope of this Section, the Director of Engineering shall
maintain storm water construction and design specifications for the
City. These storm water construction and design specifications shall be
approved by the Board of Public Works and the City Council. Once
approved, the storm water construction and design specifications shall
be followed by all persons planning or constructing any storm water
management system within the City.
D. Development along natural watercourses shall have residential lot
lines, commercial or industrial improvements, parking areas and
driveways set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the top of
the existing stream bank. The section of land between a natural
watercourse and lot lines shall be designated as common ground and
drainage easement to be maintained by the trustees of the subdivision
within all types of residential developments. All developments shall
maintain a setback minimum of fifty (50) feet from the top of the
existing stream bank and any building or structure. Commercial and
industrial areas shall have creek areas dedicated as drainage
easements.
E. All storm water design work and calculations shall be prepared by a
registered professional engineer in the State of Missouri and stamped
with a valid stamp and signed representing that the professional
engineer is certifying the responsibility for the design.
F. Prior to acceptance of improvement plans, the Director of Engineering
or his/her designee may request that a flood study be performed by the
permit applicant in the area of the improvements and, if necessary,
require that a letter of map revision be filed with the United States
Army Corps of Engineers.
A. The Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District (MSD) Standard
Construction Specifications for Sewers and Drainage Facilities, 2009, is
hereby adopted for the City's standard construction specifications for
storm water facilities with the following exceptions:
1. Maintenance of backfilled areas. Backfilled areas shall be
maintained to the grade of the surrounding terrain by the
developer or contractor for a period of one (1) year after
completion of the respective contract/project.
2. Storm pipes.
Section
510.270
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
510.280
100:1338
a. R.C.P. pipe. Reinforced concrete pipe shall be installed and
inspected per City of St. Charles standards.
b. P.P. pipe. Polypropylene pipe meeting the requirements of
ASTM F2736 or F2764 shall be installed and inspected per City
of St. Charles standards. [Ord. No. 16-042 §1, 2-16-2016]
c. A developer achieving Tier 1 status under the Green Point
Rating System Guide established in Section 400.920 may make
application to the Department of Engineering for the use of a
Green Point Rating System Alternative to the requirements of
this Subsection as set forth in the "Development Guide:
Infrastructure Alternatives for St. Charles GPRS Projects" on
file with the City Clerk.
3. Bedding under and around the pipe. All pipe shall be bedded in
MSD 1 or 2 bedding unless otherwise directed by the City.
4. Earth backfill, flowable fill and jetting. The permissible trench
backfill materials and compaction methods and criteria are
subdivided into those associated with sewer maintenance and new
construction of sewers. All trenches not considered part of new
construction as defined below will be backfilled according to the
maintenance standards and at the direction of the Director of
Engineering or his/her designee.
a. Maintenance. Where maintenance/repairs require excavation
to existing sewers.
(1) Flowable fill (inside paved areas). Where maintenance is
required to existing sewers in paved areas, flowable fill
will be used as backfill (except as approved by the City)
from the top of the bedding material six (6) inches above
the pipe to the surface or to within one (1) foot of grade in
landscaped areas.
(2) Earth backfill (outside paved areas). As an alternative to
flowable fill, earth backfill (meeting MSD standards) may
be used outside paved areas, from the top of the bedding
material six (6) inches above the pipe to the surface. Earth
backfill should be placed in maximum eight (8) inch loose
lifts and shall be mechanically compacted to a minimum
density equal to that of the adjacent, undisturbed earth.
b. New construction. To include sewer construction in new
residential subdivisions, new residential lots and new
commercial developments with the exception that any
excavations within existing paved areas or any off-site
construction excavations are to be treated as a maintenance
excavation as stated above.
Section
510.280
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
510.280
100:1339
(1) Earth backfill (outside paved areas). Earth backfill for new
construction may be used outside paved areas and must be
properly jetted to achieve proper compaction. (See Jetting
in Subdivision (4) below)
(2) Earth backfill (inside proposed paved areas). Earth
backfills inside paved areas shall be placed in maximum
eight (8) inch loose lifts and shall be mechanically
compacted to a minimum density equal to that of the
adjacent undisturbed earth. Prior to paving operations,
subgrade must be prepared and compacted to City
standards per Chapter 405 of this Code.
(3) Granular backfill (inside proposed paved areas). Granular
backfill under proposed paved areas and two (2) feet
beyond proposed edge of pavement shall consist of well
graded three-fourth (¾) inch minus crushed limestone.
Granular materials shall be free from organic, deleterious
or earth materials such as silt or clay. Granular materials
must be properly jetted to achieve proper compaction.
(See Jetting in Subdivision (4) below)
(4) Jetting. Granular materials and earth materials associated
with new construction outside of pavements may be jetted,
taking care to avoid damage to the newly laid sewers. The
jetting shall be performed with a probe route on not
greater than seven and one-half (7½) foot centers with the
jetting probe centered over and parallel with the direction
of the pipe. Trench widths greater than ten (10) feet will
require multiple probes every seven and one-half (7½) foot
centers.
(a) Depth. Trench backfill less than eight (8) feet in depth
shall be probed to a depth extending to half the depth
of the trench backfill, but not less than three (3) feet.
Trench backfill greater than eight (8) feet in depth
shall be probed to half the depth of the trench backfill
but not greater than eight (8) feet.
(b) Equipment. The jetting probe shall be a metal pipe
with an exterior diameter of one and one-half (1½) to
two (2) inches.
(c) Method. Jetting shall be performed from the low
surface topographic point and proceed toward the
high point and from the bottom of the trench backfill
towards the surface. The flooding of each jetting
probe shall be started slowly allowing slow saturation
of the soil. Water is not to be allowed to flow away
from the ditch without first saturating the trench.
Section
510.280
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
510.280
100:1340
Section 510.290. Rules and Regulations For Engineering Design.
[R.O. 2009 §151.69; Ord. No. No. 02-175, 7-19-2002; Ord. No.
04-178, 8-4-2004; Ord. No. 05-49, 2-4-2005; Ord. No. 05-70,
3-8-2005; Ord. No. 10-136 §1, 6-16-2010; Ord. No. 18-198,
9-4-2018]
(d) Surface bridging. The contractor shall identify the
locations of surface bridging (the tendency for the
upper backfill crust to arch over the trench rather
than collapse and consolidate during the jetting
process). The contractor shall break down the bridged
areas using an appropriate method such as the wheels
or bucket of a backhoe. When the surface crust is
collapsed, the void shall be backfilled with the same
material used as trench backfill and re-jetted.
Compaction of the materials within the sunken/jetted
area shall be compacted such that no further surface
subsidence occurs.
5. Cast-iron covers. Concrete covers on structures will not be allowed.
Only cast-iron covers are permitted.
6. Joints. All pipe joints and joints on new structures shall use City
approved rubber compression type joints. Water stops are required
at all points of connection not using rubber compression type joints
such as connections to existing structures.
A. The following standards are to be used for the rules and regulations for
engineering design of storm water management systems within the
City:
1. Storm sewer design.
a. On-site sewers. Sized to meet the 15-year, 20-minute storm
peak flows.
b. Calculation method. Rational Method (Q=API).
c. Sewers downstream of detention basins. 15-year, 20-minute
storm calculated on the area served by the detention basin.
d. Maximum discharge velocity at outlets. Three (3) feet per
second after the use of energy dissipaters.
e. Maximum flow requiring a piped system or designed channel.
Three (3) cubic foot per second.
f. Creeks. Creeks to be piped under any public road shall be sized
to account for a fifty percent (50%) blockage of the pipe for
pipes and boxes with a design size (including the percent
blocked) up to six (6) feet in diameter. For pipes and boxes six
Section
510.280
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
510.290
100:1341
(6) feet and larger, the percent blocked may be reduced at the
direction of the Director of Engineering or his/her designee.
2. Storm water overflow systems.
a. Definition. The purpose of the overflow system is to provide a
drainage path to safely pass flows which cannot be
accommodated by the design system without causing flooding
of adjacent structures.
b. 100-year storm events. Flood areas shall be evaluated and
shown on the plans so that if the designed storm sewers are
exceeded by a storm event, the flooded area will contain the
100-year, 20-minute and 100-year, 24-hour event. The depth in
parking lots may not exceed eight (8) inches and no part of any
flooded area may be within thirty (30) feet of a building. A
permanent drainage easement is required for all areas within
the flood area of a 100-year storm event and must be recorded
on the subdivision plat.
c. 100-year flood elevation. One (1) vertical foot of freeboard
shall be maintained between the 100-year high water elevation
and the low sill elevation of any adjacent structure or building.
d. Overflow facilities. Sewers or structures designed as part of an
overflow system for flood areas shall be designed for the
100-year, 20-minute peak flows. Where conditions do not allow
this, the overflow system shall be considered on a site specific
basis by the City Engineer.
3. Stormwater Detention And Stormwater Quality. [Ord. No. 18-252,
11-20-2018492]
a. There is hereby adopted by the City Council of the City of St.
Charles, Missouri, for the purpose of regulating stormwater
detention and stormwater quality within the City of St.
Charles, a document to be known as:
(1) Detention and Stormwater Quality Engineering Design
Criteria.
b. The most recent edition of the Detention and Stormwater
Quality Engineering Design Criteria, listed above and
incorporated by reference herein, along with any amendments,
insertions, and deletions as may be approved by the City
Council by ordinance from time to time, shall be maintained by
the Director of Engineering. This document shall be posted on
the City's website, and shall be kept on file with the Director of
Engineering and the City Clerk.
492. Editor's Note: Section 1 of this ordinance repealed former Subsection (A)(3), Detention
facility design, as amended.
Section
510.290
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
510.290
100:1342
Section 510.300. Storm Water Management Plans.493 [R.O. 2009
§151.70; Ord. No. 02-175, 7-19-2002; Ord. No. 18-198, 9-4-2018]
Section 510.310. Required Documents. [R.O. 2009 §151.71; Ord.
No. 02-175, 7-19-2002; Ord. No. 18-198, 9-4-2018]
4. Storm water detention easements. Storm water detention
easements are required for all detention facilities. These
easements must be recorded on the subdivision plat and must note
that maintenance of the facility or facilities are the responsibility of
the property owner or owners.
5. Drainage facility surface material. All drainage facilities including,
but not limited to, detention basins, ditches and swales must be
sodded or stabilized with rip-rap or other erosion control materials.
All newly placed sod shall be maintained following the
requirements of Section 405.260. Seed and mulch alone may not be
installed in the portions of a drainage facility intended to convey or
store the applicable design flow.
A. Anyone contemplating any construction work within the City shall
prepare, or cause to be prepared, for review and approval by the
Director of Engineering or his/her designee, a storm water
management plan for each site being developed, re-developed or
maintained. This plan shall follow the guidelines presented in the
manual "Protecting Water Quality", January 2011 by the Missouri
Department of Natural Resources and be stamped by a registered
professional engineer within the State of Missouri. The plan shall
contain, among other things, recommendations for potential locations
and sizes of on-site or off-site storm water management facilities and an
evaluation of the existing streams and creeks within the site for
stabilization and grade (erosion) control issues. If approved by the
Director of Engineering or his/her designee, sites under one (1) acre
may be exempted from this rule and be given a written exemption from
the Director of Engineering or his/her designee.
B. The plan shall be designed to minimize the amount of erosion of the site
during the construction of the project. Failure to have adequate erosion
protection on the site or failure to maintain erosion protection
throughout the construction of the project shall be considered a
violation of this Article and will result in penalties per Sections 510.330
and 510.340.
A. As part of the review process for the permitting of construction
activities, the following items will have to be submitted to the Director
of Engineering or his/her designee for review. These items will have to
be adjusted by the applicant as necessary to meet the requirements of
the City prior to the issuance of a permit for the work.
493. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §510.340.
Section
510.290
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
510.310
100:1343
Section 510.320. Inspection, Maintenance, Acceptance and
Variance By City. [R.O. 2009 §151.72; Ord. No. 02-175, 7-19-2002;
Ord. No. 05-102, 4-13-2005; Ord. No. 15-125 §1, 6-2-2015; Ord. No.
18-198, 9-4-2018]
1. Calculations showing current (pre-developed) and post-developed
flows for each required storm event in each drainage area.
2. Storm Water Management Plan and Erosion/Sedimentation Control
Plan stamped by a professional engineer per Chapter 3 of
"Protecting Water Quality", January 2011 by the Missouri
Department of Natural Resources.
3. Elevation vs. discharge tables or curves for all storm frequencies
(detention facilities).
4. Elevation vs. storage tables or curves for all storm frequencies
(detention facilities).
5. Inflow calculations and data for all storm frequencies (detention
facilities).
6. Hydraulic gradeline computations for pipes entering and leaving
basins for all frequencies.
7. Geotechnical report for design of detention basin earth fills (if
required by the Director of Engineering or his/her designee).
8. Site plan of detention facilities.
9. Site plans showing flood areas and elevations on 100-year,
20-minute and 100-year, 24-hour storm events.
10. Cross sections of detention facility adequate to determine volume.
11. All necessary easements.
12. Approvals from the United States Army Corps of Engineers and
Missouri Department of Natural Resources.
13. Flood and creek bank studies.
A. The Director of Engineering or his/her designee shall inspect, or cause
to be inspected, all storm water management systems constructed
within the City. Contractors are required to notify the City prior to
beginning any storm water work on each site to be worked or each
phase of the site on larger projects.
B. Each owner of the property or site being developed, re-developed or
maintained has the responsibility and duty to properly operate and
maintain any storm water detention facility. The responsibility of
maintenance of the facility in subdivision projects shall remain with the
developer until such time as the escrow for such development has been
released. Upon release of escrow, the maintenance responsibility shall
Section
510.310
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
510.320
100:1344
Section 510.330. Violation. [R.O. 2009 §151.98; Ord. No. 02-175,
7-19-2002; Ord. No. 18-198, 9-4-2018]
be vested in the trustees of the subdivision by virtue of a trust
indenture. The indenture of trust shall clearly indicate resident
responsibility for maintenance. The responsibility for maintenance in
single lot development shall remain with the general contractor and
owner until final inspection of the development is approved and an
occupancy permit is issued. After occupancy, the maintenance of the
detention facility shall be vested in the owner of the property. All such
privately owned and maintained facilities shall be subject to periodic
inspection by the Director of Engineering or his/her designee.
C. If, after an inspection by the Director of Engineering or his/her
designee, the Director of Engineering or his/her designee determines
that the condition of a privately owned storm water management
system is an immediate danger to the public health or safety because of
an unsafe condition, or if the trustees or owner fail to provide a
reasonable degree of maintenance, the Director of Engineering or his/
her designee shall take such action as may be necessary to protect the
public health and safety and make the system safe and correct. The
Director of Engineering or his/her designee shall follow the abatement
procedures set forth in Sections 220.040 through 220.120 of this Code.
Any costs incurred by the City, as a result of the Director of Engineering
or his/her designee's actions, shall be assessed against the owner(s) of
the system.
D. Upon a finding by the City Council by clear and convincing evidence
that an extreme hardship exists, there is no adverse impact to the
public health, safety and welfare and that any and all impacted property
owners consent to the grant of a variance in writing, then the City
Council may grant a variance to the requirements of Section 510.270 or
510.290.
A. Any person, company or organization found to be violating any
provision of this Chapter shall be served written notice by the Director
of Engineering or his/her designee. This notice will require the person,
company or organization to appear in front of the Municipal Court for
the City of St. Charles to adjudicate the violation.
B. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a
separate offense.
C. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall become
liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the City by
reason of such violation.
D. If remedial action is required by the Director of Engineering or his/her
designee and the remedial action is not taken, the City Engineer may
then issue a stop work order. This stop work order shall direct all
parties involved to cease and desist all or any portion of the work on the
Section
510.320
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
510.330
100:1345
Section 510.340. Penalty. [R.O. 2009 §151.99; CC 1981 §10-48; Ord.
No. 73-47, 7-25-1973; Ord. No. 02-175, 7-19-2002; Ord. No. 18-198,
9-4-2018]
Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter and is found guilty in
Municipal Court shall be subject to the penalties administered by the courts
with a minimum fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each violation.
development except such work necessary to bring the project into
compliance. If such stop work order is ignored, the parties shall be in
violation of this Chapter and subject to the penalties contained herein.
Section
510.330
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
510.340
100:1346
Chapter 515
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT
Section
510.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
510.340
100:1347

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 515.010. Title. [R.O. 2009 §155.01; CC 1981 §26.5-1.1; Ord.
No. 93-259, 11-2-1993]
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as "The
Urban Redevelopment Ordinance".
Section 515.020. Relocation Assistance.494 [R.O. 2009 §155.02; CC
1981 §26.5-1.2; Ord. No. 93-259, 11-2-1993; Ord. No. 06-356,
12-20-2006]
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
BUSINESS — Any lawful activity that is conducted:
DECENT, SAFE AND SANITARY DWELLING — A dwelling which meets
applicable housing and occupancy codes. The dwelling shall:
DISPLACED PERSONS — Persons that move from the real property
or move their personal property from the real property permanently
and voluntarily as a direct result of the acquisition, rehabilitation or
demolition of, or the written notice of intent to acquire such real
property, in whole or in part, for a public purpose.
HANDICAPPED PERSON — Any person who is deaf, legally blind or
orthopedically disabled to the extent that acquisition of another
Primarily for the purchase, sale or use of personal or real property
or for the manufacture, processing or marketing of products or
commodities;
1.
2. Primarily for the sale of services to the public; or
On a not-for-profit basis by any organization that has obtained an
exemption from the payment of Federal income taxes as provided
in Section 501(c)(3) of Title 26, U.S.C., as amended, and veterans
organizations.
3.
1. Be structurally sound, weather-tight and in good repair;
2. Contain a safe electrical wiring system;
3. Contain an adequate heating system;
Be adequate in size with respect to the number of rooms needed to
accommodate the displaced person; and
4.
For a handicapped person, be free of any barriers which would
preclude reasonable ingress, egress or use of the dwelling.
5.
494. Cross References—As to fair housing, §§240.010 et seq.
Section
515.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
515.020
100:1349
residence presents a greater burden than other persons would
encounter or to the extent that modifications to the replacement
residence would be necessary.
PERSON — Any individual, family, partnership, corporation, or
association, that has a legal right to occupy the property, including, but
not limited to, month-to-month tenants.
B. Every urban redevelopment corporation acquiring property within a
redevelopment area shall submit a relocation plan as part of the
redevelopment plan.
C. Unless the property acquisition under the operation of Chapters 99 and
100 or 353, RSMo., is subject to Federal relocation standards, the
relocation plan shall provide for the following:
1. Payments to all eligible displaced persons who occupied the
property to be acquired for not less than ninety (90) days prior to
the initiation of negotiations who are required to vacate the
premises;
2. A program for identifying special needs of displaced persons with
specific consideration given to income, age, size of family, nature of
business, availability of suitable replacement facilities and vacancy
rates of affordable facilities;
3. A program for providing proper and timely notice to all displaced
persons, including a general description of their potential rights
and benefits if they are displaced, their eligibility for relocation
assistance and the nature of that assistance. The notices required
for compliance with this Section are as follows:
a. A general information notice that shall be issued at the
approval and selection of a designated redeveloper and shall
inform residential and non-residential owners and occupants of
a potential project, including the potential acquisition of the
property;
b. A notice of relocation eligibility that shall be issued as soon as
feasible after the execution of the redevelopment agreement
and shall inform residential and non-residential occupants
within the project area who will be displaced of their relocation
assistance and nature of that assistance, including ninety (90)
days' advance notice of the date the occupants must vacate;
4. A program for referrals of displaced persons with provisions for a
minimum of three (3) decent, safe and sanitary housing referrals
for residential persons or suitable referral sites for displaced
businesses, a minimum of ninety (90) days' notice of referral sites
for handicapped displaced persons and sixty (60) days' notice of
referral sites for all other displaced persons prior to the date such
Section
515.020
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
515.020
100:1350
displaced persons are required to vacate the premises and
arrangements for transportation to inspect referral sites; and
5. Every displaced person shall be given a ninety (90) day notice to
vacate, prior to the date such displaced person is required to
vacate the premises.
D. All displaced residential persons eligible for payments shall be provided
with relocation payments based upon one (1) of the following, at the
option of the person:
1. A one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) fixed moving expense payment;
or
2. Actual reasonable costs of relocation including, but not limited to,
actual moving costs, utility deposits, key deposits, storage of
personal property up to one (1) month, utility transfer and
connection fees and other initial rehousing deposits including first
(1st) and last month's rent and security deposit. Such costs of
relocation shall not include the cost of a replacement property or
any capital improvement thereto.
E. All displaced businesses eligible for payments shall be provided with
relocation payments based upon the following, at the option of the
business:
1. A three thousand dollar ($3,000.00) fixed moving expense payment
and up to an additional ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for reestablishment
expenses. Re-establishment expenses are limited to
costs incurred for physical improvements to the replacement
property to accommodate the particular businesses at issue; or
2. Actual costs of moving including costs for packing, crating,
disconnection, dismantling, reassembling and installing all
personal equipment and costs for relettering similar signs and
similar replacement stationery and up to an additional ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for re-establishment expenses. Reestablishment
expenses are limited to costs incurred for physical
improvements to the replacement property to accommodate the
particular business at issue.
F. If a displaced person demonstrates the need for an advance relocation
payment in order to avoid or reduce a hardship, the developer or public
agency shall issue the payment subject to such safeguards as are
appropriate to ensure that the objective of the payment is
accomplished. Payment for a satisfactory claim shall be made within
thirty (30) days following receipt of sufficient documentation to support
the claim. All claims for relocation payment shall be filed with the
displacing agency within six (6) months after:
1. For tenants, the date of displacement;
Section
515.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
515.020
100:1351
2. For owners, the date of displacement or the final payment for the
acquisition of the real property, whichever is later.
G. Any displaced person, who is also the owner of the premises, may waive
relocation payments as part of the negotiations for acquisition of the
interest held by such person. Such waiver shall be in writing, shall
disclose the person's knowledge of the provisions of this Section and
his/her entitlement to payment and shall be filed with the acquiring
public agency. However, any such waiver shall not include a waiver of
any notice provisions of this Section and a displaced person shall
remain entitled to all of the provisions regarding programs which are
contained in Section 523.205(5)(2) and (3), RSMo., as amended.
H. All persons eligible for relocation benefits shall be notified in writing of
the availability of such relocation payments and assistance, with such
notice to be given concurrently with the notice of referral sites as
required in Subsection (C)(3) above.
I. Any urban redevelopment corporation, its assigns or transferees, which
have been provided any assistance under the operation of Chapters 99
and 100 or Chapter 353, RSMo., with land acquisition by the City, shall
be required to make a report to the City Council, which shall include,
but not be limited to, the addresses of all occupied residential buildings
and structures within the redevelopment area and the names and
addresses of persons displaced by the redeveloper and specific
relocation benefits provided to each person, as well as a sample notice
provided to each person.
J. An urban redevelopment corporation which fails to comply with the
relocation requirements provided in this Section shall not be eligible for
tax abatement as provided for in Chapter 353, RSMo.
K. The requirements set out in this Section shall be considered minimum
standards. In reviewing any proposed relocation plan under the
operation of Chapters 99 and 100 or Chapter 353, RSMo., the City
Council shall determine the adequacy of the proposal and may require
additional elements to be provided.
L. Relocation assistance shall not be provided to any person who
purposely resides or locates a business in a redevelopment area solely
for the purpose of obtaining relocation benefits.
Section
515.020
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
515.020
100:1352
ARTICLE II
Urban Redevelopment Under Chapter 353, RSMo.
Section 515.030. Authority. [R.O. 2009 §155.15; CC 1981
§26.5-1.10; Ord. No. 93-259, 11-2-1993]
The City obtains its authority to enact this Article through Article VI,
Section 19(a) and Article VI, Section 21 of the Missouri Constitution, from
Chapter 353, RSMo., and from the City Charter.
Section 515.040. Determination of Necessity For Legislation. [R.O.
2009 §155.16; CC 1981 §26.5-2; Ord. No. 89-170, 8-15-1989]
It is determined and declared by the City Council that in certain portions of
the City obsolete, deteriorating, substandard, insanitary or blighted areas
exist, occasioned by inadequate planning, excessive land coverage, lack
of proper light, air or open space, defective design or arrangement of
buildings, lack of proper sanitary facilities, or the existence of buildings
which, by reason of age, obsolescence, inadequate or outmoded design, or
physical deterioration, have impaired the economic value of areas, infecting
them with blight; and such areas are characterized by depreciated values,
impaired investments, reduced or negligible income and consequent tax
delinquencies; that such conditions exist in areas where obsolete,
deteriorating, substandard, insanitary, outworn or outmoded industrial,
commercial or residential buildings prevail and the same are conducive to
economic and social liabilities, ill health, transmission of disease, infant
mortality, juvenile delinquency and crime; that such conditions occur chiefly
in areas which are subdivided into small parcels with multiple ownership
and frequently with confusion as to titles; that their assembly for purposes
of clearance, replanning, rehabilitation, reconstruction and redevelopment
is difficult and costly; that the existence of such conditions and the failure
to clear, replan, rehabilitate, reconstruct or redevelop these areas results
in progressive deterioration, results in a loss of population by the areas,
causes a wasteful expenditure of public funds for policing and occasions
large outlays for the creation of public facilities and services elsewhere; that
it is impossible and uneconomical for individual owners to independently
undertake to remedy such conditions; such conditions require the
employment of capital on an investment basis, allowing, however, the widest
latitude in the amortization of any indebtedness created thereby; that such
conditions further require the acquisition of adequate areas at fair prices,
the clearance of such areas through demolition of existing obsolete,
deteriorating, inadequate, unsafe or insanitary buildings and the
redevelopment of such areas under proper supervision with appropriate
planning as to land use, traffic circulation and construction policies; that the
clearance, replanning, rehabilitation, reconstruction and redevelopment of
such areas on a large scale basis are necessary for the public welfare and
are public uses and purposes for which private property may be acquired
by purchase of eminent domain; and that such obsolete, deteriorating,
substandard, insanitary and blighted areas constitute a menace to the
health, safety, morals and welfare of the citizens of the City. Therefore,
Section
515.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
515.040
100:1353
the necessity for the provisions herein enacted is declared as a matter of
legislative determination to be in the public interest.
Section 515.050. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §155.17; CC 1981 §26.5-3;
Ord. No. 89-170, 8-15-1989]
For the purposes of this Article, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
AREA — The portion of the City which the City Council has found or
shall find to be blighted, so that the clearance, replanning rehabilitation
or reconstruction thereof is necessary to effectuate the purposes of this
Article. Any such area may include buildings or improvements not in
themselves blighted and any real property, whether improved or
unimproved, the inclusion of which is deemed necessary for the effective
clearance, replanning, reconstruction or rehabilitation of the area of which
such buildings, improvements or real property form a part.
BLIGHTED AREA — The portion of the City which the City Council
determines that by reason of age, obsolescence, inadequate or outmoded
design or physical deterioration have become economic and social liabilities
and that such conditions are conducive of ill health, transmission of disease,
crime or inability to pay reasonable taxes.
CONSTRUCTION WORK — The taking of possession of land, clearance
of the area, erection of improvements and all other related matters to
effectuate an approved development plan causing the physical
rehabilitation, construction, reconstruction and redevelopment of the area.
CORPORATION — An urban redevelopment corporation organized and
existing under and pursuant to the provisions of the "Urban Redevelopment
Corporation Law".
COST — The cost of the redevelopment project and shall include, among
other expenses, the cost of land, interest during construction, the expense
of demolition of existing structures, the expense of utilities, landscaping
and roadways, the expense of construction, equipping and furnishing of
buildings and improvements, including architectural, engineering and
builders' fees, the expense of reconstruction, rehabilitation, redevelopment,
remodeling or initial repair of existing buildings and improvements,
brokers' fees, attorneys' fees, realtors' fees, planners' fees, preliminary
costs for planning, surveys, title insurance, bonding, preopening expenses,
reasonable management and operation expenses until the project is ready
for its proposed use as provided for in the approved development plan
and the expense of improving those portions of the area which are to
remain open spaces, together with additional expense incurred as a result
of additions to or changes in the development plan where such additions or
changes are approved by ordinance.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A plan, together with any amendments thereto,
for the redevelopment of all or any part of a blighted area.
Section
515.040
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
515.050
100:1354
REAL PROPERTY — Includes lands, buildings, improvements, land under
water, waterfront property and any and all easements, franchises and
hereditaments, corporeal or incorporeal, and every estate, interest,
privilege, easement, franchise and right therein, or appurtenant thereof,
legal or equitable, including restrictions of record created by plat, covenant
or otherwise, rights-of-way and terms for years.
REDEVELOPMENT — The clearance, replanning, reconstruction or
rehabilitation of any blighted area and the provision for such industrial,
commercial, residential or public structures and spaces as may be
appropriate, including recreational and other facilities incidental or
appurtenant thereto.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT CORPORATIONS LAW — Chapter 353, RSMo.,
as amended.
Section 515.060. Initiation of Urban Renewal Review. [R.O. 2009
§155.18; CC 1981 §26.5-4; Ord. No. 89-170, 8-15-1989]
Section 515.070. Community Development Department
Recommendation of Blighting Bill. [R.O. 2009 §155.19; CC 1981
§26.5-5; Ord. No. 89-170, 8-15-1989]
The Community Development Department shall send its recommendation
to the City Council within thirty (30) days after receipt of a proposed
ordinance pertaining only to blighting. A recommendation to declare the
area blighted shall contain a determination that the area is blighted and
that redevelopment of the area is necessary and in the public interest.
A. The process of urban renewal review under this Article can be initiated
by the introduction of a Council bill declaring an area to be blighted or
by the submission of a proposed development plan by a developer.
B. If a Council bill is introduced to declare an area to be blighted, then the
bill shall be referred by the City Clerk to the Community Development
Department for study and for recommendation to the Council.
C. If a proposed development plan is submitted by a developer, then the
plan shall be filed with the Community Development Department and
the Mayor and City Council shall be notified that the proposed
development plan has been filed. If the plan has been submitted prior to
a declaration that the area is blighted, then the Community
Development Department shall consider the question of blight at the
same time it considers the plan. The Community Development
Department shall study the plan and submit its recommendation to the
Council.
Section
515.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
515.080
100:1355
Section 515.080. Council Declaration of Blight. [R.O. 2009 §155.20;
CC 1981 §26.5-6; Ord. No. 89-170, 8-15-1989]
Any ordinance declaring that an area is blighted shall contain a finding that
the area is in fact blighted and that redevelopment of the area is necessary
and in the public interest.
Section 515.090. Preliminary Approval of Application Form. [R.O.
2009 §155.21; CC 1981 §26.5-7; Ord. No. 89-170, 8-15-1989]
Any corporation proposing to file a development plan for approval by the
City Council shall first submit the proposed plan and supporting information
to the Community Development Department. No proposed development
plan shall be accepted for filing unless it is accompanied by a nonrefundable
filing fee to the City of five hundred dollars ($500.00) to be used
by the City to defray expenses connected with the evaluation and review of
the proposed development plan. The corporation shall pay, when due and
payable, all other fees, licenses and charges required by the ordinances of
the City applicable to the corporation or the redevelopment project to be
undertaken.
Section 515.100. Content of Development Plan. [R.O. 2009 §155.22;
CC 1981 §26.5-8; Ord. No. 89-170, 8-15-1989]
A. A development plan shall contain:
1. General description. A general description and preliminary design
plan of the proposed project showing the proposed land use and
traffic circulation.
2. Legal description. A legal description of the development area by
metes and bounds or other definite designation.
3. Supporting evidence of blight. Identification of the facts which
demonstrate that the area is a blighted area.
4. Stages of project. A statement of the various stages, if more than
one (1) is intended, by which the development is proposed to be
constructed or undertaken and the approximate time limit for the
commencement and completion of each stage, together with a legal
description by metes and bounds or other definite designation of
the real property to be included in each stage.
5. Property to be demolished immediately. A statement of existing
buildings or improvements in the development area to be
demolished immediately, if any.
6. Property not to be demolished immediately. A statement of existing
buildings or improvements in the development area not to be
demolished immediately, if any, and the approximate period of time
during which the demolition of each such building or improvement
is to take place.
Section
515.080
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
515.100
100:1356
7. Building renovation. A statement of the proposed improvements, if
any, to each building not to be demolished immediately, any
proposed repairs or alterations to such buildings and the
approximate period of time during which such improvements,
repairs or alterations are to be made.
8. New construction. A statement of the type, number and character
of each new industrial, commercial, residential or other building or
improvements to be erected or constructed.
9. Open space. A statement of those portions, if any, of the blighted
area which may be permitted or will be required to be left as open
space, the use to which each open space is to be put, the period of
time each such open space will be required to remain an open
space and the manner in which it will be improved and maintained,
if at all.
10. Property for public agencies. A statement of those portions, if any,
of the blighted area which are proposed to be sold, donated,
exchanged or leased to the School Board, Library Board or any
other public agency and an outline of the terms of such proposed
sale, donation, exchange or lease.
11. Zoning changes. A statement of the proposed changes, if any, in
zoning ordinances or maps necessary or desirable for the
redevelopment and its protection against blighting influences.
12. Street changes. A statement of the proposed changes, if any, in
existing easements in streets or street levels and any proposed
street closings and any changes which would have to be made to
streets or alleys adjoining or near the redevelopment project,
including the plan for financing these changes.
13. Utility changes. A statement of the changes, if any, which will be
required in utility sources to accommodate the redevelopment
project and changes, if any, in utility lines, easements, or locations.
14. Dwelling accommodations. A statement of the character of the
existing dwelling accommodations, if any, in the blighted area, the
approximate number of families residing therein.
15. Existing businesses. A statement of the character of the existing
businesses, if any, in the blighted area and the number of
businesses.
16. Housing and business relocation. If the developer is requesting the
power of eminent domain, a relocation plan in accordance with
Section 515.110 hereof.
17. Proposed housing. A statement of the character, type and quality of
construction, approximate number of units, approximate rentals
and approximate date of availability of the proposed dwelling
Section
515.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
515.100
100:1357
accommodations, if any, to be offered to displaced residents during
the construction, by each stage of development, and upon
completion of the redevelopment.
18. Tax abatement. A statement providing:
a. The proposed tax abatement, if any, for the corporation
undertaking the redevelopment project and the reasons and
justification for such requested tax abatement and any
payments in lieu of taxes;
b. The assessed valuation of the land and the time improvements
thereon, respectively, before development;
c. The estimated assessed valuation of the land and the
improvements thereon, respectively, after redevelopment;
d. The impact, including an estimate of the amount of ad valorem
revenues to be affected by the grant of tax abatement, such tax
abatement will have on each taxing authority whose
boundaries include any portion of the redevelopment area; and
e. The conditions upon which tax abatement, if any, will pass to or
inure to the benefit of a subsequent owner of the
redevelopment project or be lost.
19. Financing. A statement of the proposed method of financing the
costs of the development plan. Included as a part of the financing
statement shall be reasonable estimates of the costs of acquisition,
demolition, construction and rehabilitation, if any, as well as
proposed sources and amounts of equity capital and other
financing expected to be used in such development. Further, the
financing statement shall identify the amount of equity capital
which shall be required and the sources of that equity.
20. Qualifications. A statement detailing the experience and
qualifications of the person or corporation, including any
principals, submitting the proposed development plan and
proposed to be actively involved in the overall direction and
implementation of the redevelopment project.
21. Eminent domain. A statement giving the legal description of the
real property owned or under option or contract of purchase, if any,
or proposed to be purchased or to be acquired by eminent domain
by the corporation and the reasons why acquisition by
condemnation is proposed.
22. Eminent domain, exercised by the City. A statement giving the legal
description of the real property, if any, proposed to be purchased or
acquired by eminent domain by the City in behalf of the proponents
of the development plan, the reasons why the aid of the City is
Section
515.100
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
515.100
100:1358
Section 515.110. Relocation Plan. [R.O. 2009 §155.23; CC 1981
§26.5-9; Ord. No. 89-170, 8-15-1989; Ord. No. 93-259, 11-2-1993]
Relocation plans shall be submitted as required by Section 515.020.
Section 515.120. Notification By Community Development
Department. [R.O. 2009 §155.24; CC 1981 §26.5-10; Ord. No.
89-170, 8-15-1989]
Within fifteen (15) days after a development plan has been filed, the
Community Development Department shall give written notice of the filing
of the development plan with the department by depositing such notice in
the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to each mailing address
within the project area, if the property is improved, or if the property is
unimproved, then to the address of each person or entity having a property
interest in the property as shown on the records of the Assessor. The notice
shall contain a statement that notices of public hearings concerning the
plan will be inserted in a newspaper of general circulation within the City.
The notice shall also contain a statement that any person or entity having
an interest of record may file a request with the City Clerk that the person
or entity is to be notified by mail of all public hearings concerning the plan;
provided however, for purposes of determining whether or not the person
was notified, the publication shall be deemed to be sufficient.
sought for this purpose, and the estimated cost of acquisition of the
property.
23. Acquisition of public property. A statement listing any real property
in public use and belonging to the City, County, State or any
political subdivision thereof, together with the consent of such
authority to the acquisition of such property or the plan for
obtaining the consent.
24. Affirmative action. A statement that the developer and its heirs,
assigns and successors will, at all times, make all facilities in the
developed area available to the general public without regard to
race, religion, color, national origin, sex or age.
25. Certificates. A certificate from the Secretary of State that the
corporation submitting the development plan is a lawfully
organized and existing Missouri urban redevelopment corporation
under and pursuant to the Urban Redevelopment Corporation Law.
26. Miscellaneous. The Community Development Department and the
City Council may each require the corporation to submit additional
information.
Section
515.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
515.130
100:1359
Section 515.130. Community Development Department
Recommendation. [R.O. 2009 §155.25; CC 1981 §26.5-11; Ord. No.
89-170, 8-15-1989]
The recommendation of the Community Development Department shall be
transmitted to the City Council within forty-five (45) days from the last
date on which a development plan for the particular area is submitted. In
the event more than one (1) development plan covering the same common
land area, in whole or in part, is transmitted to the Department, then the
analysis, reports and recommendations concerning all development plans
shall be submitted on the same date. If the Department fails to make a
recommendation within the forty-five (45) day period, then the failure to
recommend shall be treated as a recommendation to not approve the plan.
Section 515.140. Contents of Recommendation. [R.O. 2009 §155.26;
CC 1981 §26.5-12; Ord. No. 89-170, 8-15-1989]
A. The recommendation of the Community Development Department
concerning a development plan shall contain comments on the
following conditions and state the reasons and facts supporting each
such comment:
1. Whether the public purpose as declared by this Article will be
effectuated by the development plans;
2. Whether the development plan is in the public interest;
3. Whether the development plan will be in accord with the overall
redevelopment of the blighted area;
4. Whether the development plan is consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan for the City;
5. Whether the size of the area proposed by the development plan will
allow a practical and economically viable development and whether
alternative boundaries are appropriate;
6. Whether the stages, if any, by which reconstruction of the area as
proposed by the development plan will allow a practical and
economically viable development;
7. Whether housing accommodations are or will soon be elsewhere
available for all families who will be displaced by the
redevelopment project;
8. Whether alternate locations for businesses which will be displaced
by the development plan are or will soon be available;
9. Whether public facilities, including, but not limited to, school, fire,
water, sewer, police, transportation, parks, playgrounds and
recreation and other utilities, private or public, are presently
adequate, or will be adequate, at the time the redevelopment is
ready for use to service the area;
Section
515.130
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
515.140
100:1360
Section 515.150. Multiple Plans Submitted. [R.O. 2009 §155.27; CC
1981 §26.5-13; Ord. No. 89-170, 8-15-1989]
Section 515.160. Time Limit For Development Bill. [R.O. 2009
§155.28; CC 1981 §26.5-14; Ord. No. 89-170, 8-15-1989]
Any bill approving a development plan shall be either approved or denied
by the City Council within six (6) months from the date the plan was filed
with the City. Any bill approving a development plan which has not been
10. Whether the proposed changes, if any, in zoning ordinances or
maps are necessary or desirable for the redevelopment of the area
and its protection against blighting influences and for the City as a
whole;
11. Whether the proposed changes, if any, in streets and street levels
or any proposed street closings are necessary or desirable for the
redevelopment of the area and its protection against blighting
influences and for the City as a whole;
12. The estimated cost of acquisition of real property, if any, which it is
proposed the City will acquire for proponents of the development
plan, by the exercise of the power of eminent domain.
B. In preparing the recommendations required by Subsection (A) of this
Section, the Department may require the developer proposing the plan
to prepare such recommendations or be responsible for payment of all
or a part of the costs associated with preparation of the
recommendations.
A. No other development plan which proposes the acquisition of all or any
part of the real property in the area described in any development plan
then on file with the Community Development Department shall be
considered by the Council or the Department, unless such plan shall
also be filed with the Department within thirty (30) days following the
date the first (1st) plan was filed with the Department.
B. In the event more than one (1) development plan concerning the same
common land area, in whole or in part, are properly submitted to the
Department, then the recommendation shall:
1. Include for each plan the determinations listed in the preceding
Section;
2. Contain a comparative analysis of the development plans based on
the required determinations;
3. Discuss in detail the conclusions drawn from the said comparative
analysis;
4. Recommend which development plan, if any, is best suited to the
public interest.
Section
515.140
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
515.160
100:1361
approved or denied by the City Council within the six (6) month period shall
be considered to be denied by the City Council. The six (6) month limitation
may be extended by the mutual agreement of the developer and the City
Council.
Section 515.170. Tax Relief For Redevelopment Corporations.495
[R.O. 2009 §155.29; CC 1981 §26.5-15; Ord. No. 89-170, 8-15-1989]
A. Full Exemption. The real property of a corporation acquired pursuant to
this Article shall not be subject to assessment or payment of general ad
valorem taxes imposed by the City for a period not in excess of ten (10)
years after the date upon which such corporation became owner of such
real property, except to such extent and in such amount as may be
imposed upon such real property during such period measured solely
by the amount the assessed valuation of the land, exclusive of
improvements, acquired pursuant to this Article and owned by such
corporation, as was determined by the Assessor of St. Charles County,
for taxes due and payable thereon during the calendar year preceding
the calendar year during which the corporation acquired title to such
real property; and the amounts of such tax assessments shall not be
increased during such period so long as the real property is owned by a
corporation and used in accordance with a development plan
authorized by the Council.
B. Property Already Exempt. In the event, however, that any such real
property was tax exempt immediately prior to ownership by any such
corporation, the City shall immediately request the Assessor to
promptly assess such land, exclusive of improvements, in accordance
with the provisions of Section 353.110, RSMo. The amount of such
assessed valuation so fixed by the Assessor shall not be increased
during the period determined by Council, not to exceed ten (10) years
next following the date upon which such corporation acquired
ownership thereof, so long as such property is owned by such
corporation and used in accordance with the development plan
authorized and approved by the Council.
C. Partial Exemption. For the next ensuing period not in excess of fifteen
(15) years, City ad valorem taxes upon such real property shall be
measured by the assessed valuation thereof as determined upon the
basis of fifty percent (50%) of the true value of the real property,
including any improvements thereon, nor shall such valuations be
increased over fifty percent (50%) of the true value of such real
property from year to year during the period not in excess of fifteen (15)
years, so long as such real property is owned by such corporation and
used in accordance with an authorized development plan.
D. Determination Of Specific Percent Of Tax Exemptions. The specific
percent of tax exemptions and the specific length of time during which
495. Cross References—As to property tax, §§140.250 et seq.
Section
515.160
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
515.170
100:1362
Section 515.180. Notification of Taxing Authorities — Public
Hearing. [R.O. 2009 §155.30; CC 1981 §26.5-16; Ord. No. 89-170,
8-15-1989]
the exemptions shall apply shall be determined by the City Council and
made a part of the agreement between the City and the corporation.
E. Full Assessment. After such periods totaling not more than twenty-five
(25) years, the real property shall be subject to assessment by the City
and payment of all ad valorem taxes based on the full true value of the
real property and shall be owned and operated by the urban
redevelopment corporation free from the conditions, restrictions and
provisions of this Chapter.
F. Contract Between City And Corporation.
1. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Section to the
contrary, after appropriate notice and hearings as hereafter set out,
the contract between the City and the corporation shall provide
that with respect to all property subject to the development plan,
with the exception of institutional property and property otherwise
tax exempt, which is owned by the corporation, its subsidiaries,
assigns or nominees and is tax abated pursuant to Section 353.110,
RSMo., and this Section, the corporation, its subsidiaries, assigns
or nominees shall with respect to all such property, in addition to
the ad valorem taxes computed under Section 353.110, RSMo., pay
to the City during the years in which tax abatement applies an
annual payment in lieu of taxes which equals the amount by which
the actual tax on such property computed pursuant to Section
353.110, RSMo., is less than the taxes which were imposed on such
property in the year immediately prior to the year in which the
abatement begins.
2. The contract with the corporation shall provide that the obligation
to make the foregoing payments shall constitute a lien against each
parcel for which such payment is required enforceable by the City
in the same manner as general real estate taxes.
3. The City shall furnish the Collector of Revenue a copy of the
contract requiring payment in lieu of taxes. The Collector shall
allocate all revenues received from such payments in lieu of taxes
among all taxing authorities whose property tax revenues are
affected by the exemption or abatement on the same pro rata basis
and in the same manner as the ad valorem property tax revenues
received by each taxing authority from such property in the year
such payments are due.
A. Prior to declaring any area of the City to be a blighted area and
approving therefor a development plan and authorizing the execution of
a redevelopment agreement which grants to any urban redevelopment
corporation rights, powers, duties, immunities and obligations not
Section
515.170
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
515.180
100:1363
inconsistent with the provisions of the Urban Redevelopment
Corporation Law, the City Council shall hold a public hearing for the
stimulation of comment by those to be affected by any such grant.
Notice of such public hearing shall be given by publication in a
newspaper of general circulation within the City at least once not less
than ten (10) days prior to the public hearing. The notice shall generally
describe the property affected by the proposed development plan and
designation of blight, give the time, date and place of the hearing and
state that all persons interested or affected by the proposed designation
of blight and redevelopment plan approval are invited to attend the
public hearing.
B. Whenever the City Council shall propose to grant an urban
development corporation tax abatement, or to receive payments in lieu
of taxes pursuant to Chapter 353, RSMo., the City shall:
1. Conduct a public hearing regarding such tax abatement exemption
or payments in lieu of taxes, at which hearing all political
subdivisions whose boundaries for ad valorem taxation purposes
include any portion of the real property to be affected by such tax
abatement, exemption or payments in lieu of taxes shall have the
right to be heard on such grant of tax abatement, exemption or
payments in lieu of taxes.
2. Written statement.
a. Furnish each political subdivision described in Subsection (B)
above within fifteen (15) days after a development plan has
been filed with a written statement of the impact on ad valorem
taxes such tax abatement, exemption or payments in lieu of
taxes will have on such political subdivisions along with a
written notice of the hearing to be held pursuant to Subsection
(B)(1) above, which statement and notice shall include:
(1) The time, date and place of the public hearing;
(2) An estimate of the amount of ad valorem tax revenues of
each political subdivision which will be affected by the
proposed tax abatement, exemption or payments in lieu of
taxes based upon the estimated assessed valuation of the
real property involved as such property would exist before
and after it is redeveloped; and
(3) A statement that each political subdivision, or any other
interested party, will be allowed to comment at such public
hearing.
b. The notice and statement required by this Subsection (B) shall
be given by certified or registered mail and delivered for
mailing to the post office at least ten (10) days prior to the date
of the public hearing.
Section
515.180
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
515.180
100:1364
Section 515.190. Contents of Ordinance Approving Development
Plan. [R.O. 2009 §155.31; CC 1981 §26.5-17; Ord. No. 89-170,
8-15-1989]
C. The public hearings of the City Council called for by this Section may be
combined into one (1) public hearing provided that the notices required
for each hearing are given prior to the date of the combined hearing.
A. Every ordinance approving a development plan shall contain:
1. A finding and declaration that the development plan is in the public
interest;
2. A provision for liquidated damages to be assessed in favor of the
City upon the failure of the urban redevelopment corporation to
complete the development project within the time agreed upon by
parties;
3. A provision setting forth any performance bond or surety
requirements for completion of public improvements and setting
forth any completion assurance agreement or other security
requirements as the City Council may determine to be appropriate
in respect of the feasibility of the particular project, taking into
account the proposed financing arrangements therefor and the
interest or involvement therein, directly or indirectly, of the City, of
any Federal, State or local agency, department, bureau, authority,
commission or similar public entity. The references to discharge of
the surety on the performance bond shall be deemed to mean and
shall include such other or alternative surety or security
requirements as may be provided for under this Subsection in any
ordinance approving a development plan or in any amendment to
an existing ordinance as herein provided;
4. A provision limiting the use of the area included in the development
plan to that use described for a period of not less than the period of
tax exemptions granted to the corporation and not more than
twenty-five (25) years;
5. An acceptable relocation plan for the families and businesses
displaced by the development plan;
6. A provision that the developer and its heirs, assigns and successors
will, at all times, make all facilities in the developed area available
to the general public without regard to race, religion, color,
national origin, age or sex;
7. A provision determining the necessity for the granting of the power
of eminent domain and, in the event such necessity is found to
exist, the granting of such power in the form of a certificate of
public convenience and necessity to the corporation authorizing
and empowering the corporation to acquire by eminent domain or
otherwise all or any part of the real property for the purpose
Section
515.180
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
515.190
100:1365
Section 515.200. Eminent Domain — Determination. [R.O. 2009
§155.32; CC 1981 §26.5-18; Ord. No. 89-170, 8-15-1989]
The Council may determine that it is in the public interest and serves the
public purpose as expressed in this Chapter that the power of eminent
domain be used by the City or by the urban redevelopment corporation, or
by both, in the acquisition of all or part of the real property included in a
development plan.
Section 515.210. Escrow For Land To Be Obtained. [R.O. 2009
§155.33; CC 1981 §26.5-19; Ord. No. 89-170, 8-15-1989]
If the City Council determines it is in the public interest that the City
acquire by eminent domain or otherwise all or part of the real property in
the area included in the development plan and for the purpose expressed
in the development plan, then the Council may require the corporation to
deposit in escrow with the Director of Finance a sum of money in cash,
a negotiable cashier's check or checks equal to the estimated cost as
determined in the ordinance approving the development plan within ten
(10) days after the ordinance is in effect. The term "cost", as used in this
Section and as herein defined, includes all expenditures made by the City
under this Section, including services of the City Legal Department, the
amount paid for such real property, appraisals, abstract, title and recording
fees, court costs, witness fees and all other expenses of acquiring such
property.
Section 515.220. Recovery of Costs For Acquisition of Property.
[R.O. 2009 §155.34; CC 1981 §26.5-20; Ord. No. 89-170, 8-15-1989]
expressed in the development plan in the area included in the
development plan. The corporation shall have the authority and
powers of eminent domain as set forth in Section 353.130, RSMo.,
subject to such conditions as may be imposed by the City Council;
8. Other matters which are required by this Article or deemed
necessary by the City Council and in the public interest as
determined by the City Council in its sole discretion.
A. If the deposit of the estimated costs exceeds the final actual cost of
acquisition as defined herein, then the balance of the deposit shall be
used to satisfy in part or in full any legal obligation which the urban
redevelopment corporation may owe the City. Any balance thereafter
remaining shall be returned to the urban redevelopment corporation
within thirty (30) days after a final determination, judicial or otherwise,
and payment thereof of the price to be paid for the real property. Upon
payment of all costs to the City by the urban redevelopment
corporation, the City shall by quitclaim deed convey all real property
acquired by it for the project through eminent domain or otherwise to
the urban redevelopment corporation.
Section
515.190
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
515.220
100:1366
Section 515.230. Agreement For Redevelopment. [R.O. 2009
§155.35; CC 1981 §26.5-21; Ord. No. 89-170, 8-15-1989]
B. If the deposit should prove to be insufficient to equal the actual cost to
the City of such real property, when such cost is determined after
purchase or by action of a condemnation jury or otherwise, then the
corporation shall make an additional deposit with the Director of
Finance, upon ten (10) days' written notice from the Director of
Finance, of a sum of money in cash equal to such additional acquisition
cost as so determined. If the corporation fails to make the additional
deposit, the City may, at its option, thereupon sell the property. If the
City sells the property and if the sales price does not recover the City's
acquisition costs and the costs of sale, then the excess costs shall be
charged to and paid by the corporation making the deposit and the
amount thereof shall be withheld by the Director of Finance from the
funds deposited in escrow and applied to the payment of such expenses.
The balance of the funds deposited in escrow shall then be returned to
the owner thereof.
A. Upon enactment into law of an ordinance approving a development
plan:
1. The City shall enter into an agreement with the urban
redevelopment corporation pursuant to the terms and conditions
set forth in this Article and the ordinance approving the
development plan. The contract between the City and the
corporation shall incorporate the provisions of the development
plan and, in addition to such other terms as are appropriate, may
include the following provisions:
a. A provision which prohibits assignment of the corporation's
rights under the development plan except on the terms and
conditions set forth in the contract;
b. A provision which requires the corporation to comply with the
negotiation provisions of Chapter 523, RSMo.;
c. A provision setting forth the amount and terms of any tax
abatement for the real property to which the development plan
pertains;
d. Provisions setting forth the property, if any, the corporation will
dedicate to the City or other public agencies for public use;
e. Provisions setting forth any improvements the City will provide
or construct in conjunction with the development plan;
f. Provisions requiring the corporation to submit periodic reports
to the City regarding the progress of the project, the financial
condition of the corporation and the availability of equity or
loan financing for future stages of the development plan;
Section
515.220
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
515.230
100:1367
Section 515.240. Financial Reporting. [R.O. 2009 §155.36; CC 1981
§26.5-22; Ord. No. 89-170, 8-15-1989]
Section 515.250. Progress Reports. [R.O. 2009 §155.37; CC 1981
§26.5-23; Ord. No. 89-170, 8-15-1989; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
g. A provision limiting the net earnings of the corporation in the
manner specified in the Urban Redevelopment Corporations
Law and specifying the disposition of any excess earnings;
h. Provisions setting forth the remedies for failure of the
corporation to complete development in the time and manner
specified in the contract and final development plan.
2. The urban development corporation shall obtain all necessary
permits as prescribed by law and perform other necessary acts as
required by this Article or the ordinance approving the
development plan.
A. An urban redevelopment corporation whose development plan has been
approved by ordinance and which desires to obtain the benefits of tax
exemption status contained in Section 353.110, RSMo., shall file with
the Director of Finance a financial statement prepared by an
independent certified public accountant, as follows:
1. Such statement shall be filed annually within one hundred twenty
(120) days following the close of the corporation's fiscal year and
the first (1st) such statement shall be filed for such corporation's
fiscal year ending in the calendar year next following the calendar
year in which the ordinance approving the development plan
became law.
2. The financial statement shall:
a. Follow generally an accepted accounting practice;
b. Contain a balance sheet and an operating profit and loss
statement;
c. Contain other information the Director of Finance by rule or
regulation shall require;
d. Be duly attested to by the President and the Treasurer of the
corporation as an accurate and truthful representation of the
corporations's financial condition;
e. Contain a statement of the accountant's opinion as to the
accuracy and reliability of the financial statements.
A. The Mayor shall make a written report to the City Council, which shall
contain the following:
1. General description of the progress and type of work surveyed;
Section
515.230
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
515.250
100:1368
Section 515.260. Analysis of Financial Statements. [R.O. 2009
§155.38; CC 1981 §26.5-24; Ord. No. 89-170, 8-15-1989]
Section 515.270. Completion of Project. [R.O. 2009 §155.39; CC
1981 §26.5-25; Ord. No. 89-170, 8-15-1989; Ord. No. 07-162,
6-11-2007]
2. The stages of the development plan which have been completed
and whether construction work in progress will meet the time
limits of the stages set forth in the agreement;
3. Such other information as the Mayor may deem pertinent.
B. The reports shall be filed six (6) months from the date of the agreement
and every six (6) months thereafter. The Mayor may file interim reports.
A copy of all reports shall be filed with the City Clerk. The urban
redevelopment corporation may, from time to time, request certification
of completion for a stage of construction and development. The Mayor
may recommend that the amount of the performance bond or such
other surety or security as may be required under Section 515.190 be
reduced proportionately to the remaining cost.
A. The Director of Finance shall review all financial statements submitted,
shall determine the net income of the urban redevelopment corporation
and shall determine whether the accumulation of surplus net earnings
as defined by law, if any, is being handled as provided by law and by
agreement.
B. In the event such corporation's net income is not more than the
maximum allowed by law or in the event the corporation's net income
during any year is more than the maximum allowed by law and the
accumulation of surplus net earnings is being handled as provided by
law and by agreement, then the Director of Finance shall certify to the
Assessor within sixty (60) days after receipt of the financial statement
that the urban redevelopment corporation is eligible for the tax
exemption provisions contained in the "Urban Redevelopment
Corporation Law" and found in Section 353.110, RSMo., as amended.
C. In the event the corporation's net income is more than the maximum
allowed by law and the surplus is not being handled as provided by law
and by the agreement, then the Director of Finance shall certify to the
Assessor within sixty (60) days after receipt of the financial statement
that such corporation is not eligible under the tax exemption provisions
contained in Section 353.110, RSMo., of the "Urban Redevelopment
Corporation Law".
A. Upon the written request of the urban redevelopment corporation for
the issuance of a certificate of completion of the project, the Mayor
shall review all inspection reports submitted and may make any
additional investigation deemed necessary.
Section
515.250
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
515.270
100:1369
Section 515.280. Reassessment. [R.O. 2009 §155.40; CC 1981
§26.5-26; Ord. No. 89-170, 8-15-1989]
In the event that the certification grants tax exemption status, in whole or
in part, to property owned by the urban redevelopment corporation under
Section 353.110, RSMo., the Assessor shall forthwith reassess, in whole or
in part, the property of the urban redevelopment corporation.
Section 515.290. Remedies For Failure To Follow Plan. [R.O. 2009
§155.41; CC 1981 §26.5-27; Ord. No. 89-170, 8-15-1989; Ord. No.
07-162, 6-11-2007]
B. In the event that the Mayor determines the project has been completed
in substantial compliance with the approved development plan and the
agreement, then the Mayor shall notify the Director of Finance of this
decision within thirty (30) days. The Director of Finance shall then
discharge the surety on the performance bond.
C. In the event that the Mayor determines that the project has not been
completed, then the Mayor shall transmit notice by registered mail,
return receipt requested, to the corporation stating the reasons for the
finding that there has not been substantial completion.
D. If the Mayor fails to notify the urban redevelopment corporation within
thirty (30) days after receipt of the written request that the project has
not been completed, then the failure shall be deemed a certification of
completion. Upon presentation of such evidence to the Director of
Finance, the Director of Finance shall discharge the surety on the
performance bond.
A. Proceedings. Whenever any corporation operating under an approved
development plan does not substantially comply with the development
plan within the time limits and in the manner for the completion of each
stage thereof as therein stated, or any contract entered into pursuant
thereto, reasonable delays caused by unforeseen circumstances beyond
its control alone excepted, or shall do, permit to be done, or fail, or omit
or do anything contrary to or required of it by this Article, or shall be
about so to do, permit to be done, or fail or omit to have done, then any
such fact shall immediately be certified by the Mayor to the City
Council. The Council may authorize any one (1) or more of the
following:
1. A proceeding in the Circuit Court in the name of the City to have
such action, failure, omission, or threatened action or omission
stopped, prevented or rectified by injunction or otherwise;
2. An action for damages against the corporation or its successors or
assigns for breach of any of the provisions of the redevelopment
plan;
Section
515.270
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
515.290
100:1370
Section 515.300. Forfeiture of Tax Exemptions. [R.O. 2009 §155.42;
CC 1981 §26.5-28; Ord. No. 89-170, 8-15-1989]
In the event the certification states that tax exempt status cannot be
granted to the urban redevelopment corporation, then the Assessor shall
assess all property of the urban redevelopment corporation at its true value
as provided by law.
Section 515.310. Building Permits. [R.O. 2009 §155.43; CC 1981
§26.5-29; Ord. No. 89-170, 8-15-1989]
In the event an ordinance approves a development plan for an area, then the
Building Inspector shall not issue a building permit for construction in the
area on land obtained in compliance with the development plan unless the
building plans are in substantial compliance with the approved development
plan as amended, modified or changed by ordinance for the period during
which the plan is in effect.
Section 515.320. Certifications Required By Corporations. [R.O.
2009 §155.44; CC 1981 §26.5-30; Ord. No. 89-170, 8-15-1989]
3. Forfeiture of any escrow being held to insure completion of the
project and execution of the provisions of the plan and the
agreement;
4. An action to enforce any bond which insures completion of the
project or execution of the provisions of the plan and the
agreement;
5. Any other action deemed appropriate by the Council.
B. Exception. If any person or corporation shall propose more than one (1)
plan and such plans are approved as provided in this Article, the failure
to comply with one (1) or more of such plans within the time limits and
in the manner for the completion of each stage thereof is therein stated,
shall not give the City any right of action with respect to the plans
which have been fully complied with within the time limits and in the
manner for the completion of each stage thereof as therein stated; and
the real property included in such plans which have been fully complied
with shall be entitled to the tax relief provided for in this Chapter.
A. Certification To Be Made With Application And Prior To Approval. At the
time of filing a development plan which provides for the acquisition of
property by eminent domain, the corporation shall certify that the
corporation, as a consideration of or approval of the plan, after approval
of the plan, shall comply with the negotiation provisions of Chapter 523,
RSMo. The certification shall be filed with the City Clerk.
B. Certifications To Be Filed After Approval. After approval of a
development plan by the Council, the corporation shall file an annual
report providing the following information:
Section
515.290
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
515.320
100:1371
Section 515.330. Disposal of Property.496 [R.O. 2009 §155.45; CC
1981 §26.5-31; Ord. No. 89-170, 8-15-1989]
An urban redevelopment corporation may sell or otherwise dispose of any
or all of the real property acquired by it for the purpose of a redevelopment
project. The ordinance approving any development plan and any contract
entered into pursuant thereto may provide that in the event of the sale or
other disposition of real property of any urban redevelopment corporation
by reason of the foreclosure of any mortgage or other lien through
insolvency or bankruptcy proceedings, or by order of any court of
competent jurisdiction, or by voluntary transfer or otherwise, the partial
tax relief provided under Section 515.170 of this Chapter shall inure to any
purchaser of such real property so long as such purchaser shall continue
to use, operate and maintain such real property in accordance with the
provisions of the development plan. If such ordinance and contract do
not so provide and the purchaser of such real property shall continue
to use, operate and maintain such real property in accordance with the
provisions of the redevelopment plan, the Council may grant the partial
tax relief provided in Section 515.170. If such real property shall be used
for a purpose different than that described in the redevelopment plan,
1. Availability of equity financing as provided for in this Article or
some other acceptable alternative financing.
2. Financial statement indicating compliance with provisions of this
Article.
3. Names and addresses of occupants and businesses displaced by the
corporation and specific relocation benefits provided to each
occupant and business as well as a sample notice provided each
occupant and business within the past year.
4. Legal description of property acquired and name in which property
was acquired.
5. Addresses of all occupied residential buildings and structures
within the project area owned or under the control of the
corporation and the status of compliance of such buildings and
structures with the provisions of the Property Maintenance Code
set forth in Sections 500.110 et seq. and the nuisance provisions
set forth in Sections 220.020 et seq.
6. Status of the redevelopment project as to permits applied for,
permits issued, certificates of occupancy issued and any other
appropriate documentation.
C. Filing. The certifications required by Subsection (B) herein shall be
filed with the Director of Finance and the Director of Community
Development.
496. Cross References—As to financing public improvements, §§140.090 et seq.
Section
515.320
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
515.330
100:1372
or if the purchaser does not desire the property to continue under the
redevelopment plan, or if the ordinance approving the plan does not provide
for continuing tax relief and the City Council shall refuse to grant the
purchaser continuing tax relief, the real property shall be assessed for
ad valorem taxes upon the full true value of the real property and may
be owned and operated free from any of the conditions, restrictions or
provisions of this Article.
Section 515.340. Plan Approval Not Substitute For Zoning Action.
[R.O. 2009 §155.46; CC 1981 §26.5-32; Ord. No. 89-170, 8-15-1989]
Approval of a development plan does not constitute rezoning, subdividing,
or any other act requiring action under the provisions of Chapter 89, RSMo.,
or under the provisions of any ordinance enacted pursuant to Chapter 89,
RSMo.
Section 515.350. Amendment of The Final Plan.497 [R.O. 2009
§155.47; CC 1981 §26.5-33; Ord. No. 89-170, 8-15-1989]
The Community Development Department shall review any proposed
amendment to a final development plan previously approved by ordinance
and make its recommendation to the City Council. No amendment shall be
reviewed by the department unless and until an application for amendment
has been filed with the department by the corporation or its assignee
containing those portions of the statements and information required by
Section 515.100 relevant to the proposed amendment and unless and until
the department shall make the determinations required by Section 515.140
relevant to the proposed amendment. The notice and hearing requirements
of Sections 515.030 and 515.180 shall also apply.
Section 515.360. Acceptance of State Enabling Act. [R.O. 2009
§155.48; CC 1981 §26.5-34; Ord. No. 89-170, 8-15-1989]
The provisions of the "Urban Redevelopment Corporations Law" found at
Chapter 353, RSMo., are hereby accepted and shall apply to all persons
and corporations operating under this Article, insofar as the same may be
applicable thereto.
497. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
515.330
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
515.360
100:1373
Chapter 600
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Cross References—As to alcohol prohibited in parks, §255.170; as to
consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages, §215.450; as to lewd
dancing, loss of license, §215.730.
Section
515.360
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
515.360
100:1374
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 600.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §115.01; CC 1981 §3-1;
Ord. No. 87-116, 6-5-1987; Ord. No. 08-21, 1-24-2008; Ord. No.
11-097 §1, 5-20-2011]
When used in this Chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Alcohol for beverage purposes including
intoxicating liquor and malt liquor.
AMUSEMENT PLACE — Any establishment whose business building
contains a square footage of at least six thousand (6,000) square feet, and
where games of skill commonly known as billiards, volleyball, indoor golf,
bowling or soccer are usually played, or has a dance floor of at least two
thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, or any outdoor golf course with
a minimum of nine (9) holes, and which has annual gross receipts of at least
one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) of which at least fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000.00) of such gross receipts is in non-alcoholic sales.
ANNUAL GROSS RECEIPTS — The gross receipts for the period January 1
through December 31 from the sale of prepared meals or food consumed
on the premises and the sale of alcoholic beverages.[Ord. No. 18-201,
9-25-2018; Ord. No. 18-273, 12-18-2018]
BUSINESS — Any lawful vocation, profession, establishment or enterprise
conducted, either directly or indirectly, for private profit or benefit on
any premises within the corporate limits of the City; and which is an
occupation and use of the premises which is permanent and continuous in
its character as distinguished from a single act or business transaction or
an occasional use of the premises for a business purpose; provided that any
package store, bar, tavern, cocktail lounge or other establishment wherein
intoxicating liquor is sold, either wholesale or retail, shall not be counted
as a business for the purpose of determining the number of businesses
required for the granting of a liquor license.
CLUB — Any duly organized branch or local unit of a fraternal society which
shall have a national organization and an affiliated State organization and
which branch or local unit shall have a permanent meeting place within the
City and the purposes of which are purely religious, charitable, benevolent
or philanthropic.
COMMISSION — The Chief of Police or his/her designee as designated
by the Chief of Police, the Director of Finance or his/her designee as
designated by the Director of Finance, and the Director of Community
Development or his/her designee as designated by the Director of
Community Development shall constitute the Liquor Commission of the City
of Saint Charles, Missouri (Commission).[Ord. No. 18-201, 9-25-2018]
GOOD MORAL CHARACTER — [Ord. No. 18-201, 9-25-2018]
Section
600.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
600.010
100:1375
GROSS RECEIPTS — The receipts from the sale of prepared meals or
food consumed on the premises and the sale of alcoholic beverages. Gross
receipts shall not include sales taxes, gross receipts license tax pursuant
to Section 620.020, other taxes, discounts, coupons, complimentary meals,
or promotions.[Ord. No. 18-201, 9-25-2018; Ord. No. 18-273,
12-18-2018]
INTOXICATED or INTOXICATED CONDITION — When a person is under
the influence of alcoholic beverages, a controlled substance, or drug, or any
combination thereof.[Ord. No. 18-201, 9-25-2018]
INTOXICATING LIQUOR — Alcohol for beverage purposes, including
alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented, malt, or other liquors, or
combination of liquors, a part of which is spirituous, vinous, or fermented,
and all preparations or mixtures for beverage purposes containing in excess
of one-half of one percent (0.5%) by volume. All beverages having an
Honesty, fairness, and respect for the rights of others and obedience for
the laws of the State of Missouri and the United States. The following
factors shall be considered when making a determination of whether an
applicant or licensee under this Chapter has good moral character:
The nature and character of the business for which the license is
sought;
a.
The manner in which the person has conducted his/her/its
business; and
b.
c. The manner in which the person has obeyed or violated the law.
1.
If a person has been convicted of a crime in any State or country that
would have been a crime under the laws of the State of Missouri, or
an offense of this City, the following factors should be considered in
determining if the person has good moral character:
The type of crime(s) or offense(s) for which a person has been
convicted;
a.
The circumstances surrounding the crime(s) or offense(s) for which
a person has been convicted;
b.
The proximity in time of the conviction(s) to the application for a
license;
c.
d. The conduct of the person since the date of conviction; and
Whether the crime the person is convicted of is reasonably related
to the competency of the person to exercise the licensed business.
e.
2.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a conviction cannot be the sole grounds
on which a person is determined to lack good moral character. If a
person is pardoned from a conviction, the underlying guilt for the crime
or offense may still be evidence of such person's good moral character.
3.
Section
600.010
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
600.010
100:1376
alcoholic content of less than one-half of one percent (0.5%) by volume shall
be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter.
LICENSE YEAR — The one (1) year period starting on July 1 and ending on
June 30 of the succeeding calendar year.[Ord. No. 18-201, 9-25-2018]
LICENSED PREMISES OR PREMISES — The location where alcoholic
beverages may be sold or consumed pursuant to a license granted by this
Chapter and it may be one (1) room, a building comprising several rooms or
a building with adjacent or surrounding land such as a lot or garden.
LICENSEE — A person issued a license pursuant to this Chapter.
LIQUOR LICENSE — A license granted for the sale at retail of all kinds of
intoxicating liquor, except those permits issued under Section 600.210(B)
for picnics, bazaars, fairs and festivals.
MALT LIQUOR — An intoxicating liquor manufactured from pure hops or
barley malt or wholesome grains or cereals and wholesome yeast and pure
water, containing alcohol in excess of three and two-tenths percent (3.2%)
by weight and not in excess of five percent (5%) alcohol by weight.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE — Any package containing fifty (50) milliliters or more
of intoxicating liquor, excepting malt liquor, or any package containing
one (1) or more standard bottles, cans or pouches of malt liquor or any
package containing three (3), six (6), twelve (12), fifteen (15) or twenty-four
(24) small standard beer bottles, cans or pouches.[Ord. No. 15-121 §4,
6-2-2015]
PERSON — Any individual, association, joint stock company, syndicate,
general partnership, limited partnership, limited liability company, copartnership,
corporation, receiver, trust, trustee, conservator or other
officer appointed by any State or Federal court. Clubs are also included
within the meaning of this term.
PUB CRAWL — An activity involving the organized travel of twenty (20) or
more persons between two (2) or more licensed premises. The following
shall be prima facie indicia of a pub crawl:[Ord. No. 16-171 §1, 9-6-2016]
The existence of an advertisement, flyer, ticket or other printed or
electronic material promoting or describing an event that will occur on
a date certain, include more than one (1) licensed premises and identify
the opportunity to travel between two (2) or more licensed premises
with the opportunity to consume alcoholic beverages at more than one
(1) licensed premise;
1.
A vehicle or group of vehicles for hire that transports twenty (20)
or more persons from one (1) licensed premise to another licensed
premise for the opportunity to consume alcoholic beverages at more
than one (1) premise; or
2.
The payment of anything of value by one (1) person to another person
for the opportunity to travel between two (2) or more licensed premises
for the opportunity to consume alcoholic beverages at more than one
(1) premise.
3.
Section
600.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
600.010
100:1377
RECEIPTS — All monies received, including cash, checks, credit card and
debit card sales.[Ord. No. 18-273, 12-18-2018]
RESTAURANT BAR — Effective January 1, 2019, any establishment having
a restaurant or similar facility on the premises where greater than fifty
percent (50%) of the annual gross receipts are derived from the sale of
prepared meals or food consumed on such premises.[Ord. No. 18-201,
9-25-2018]
SALE OF PREPARED MEALS OR FOOD CONSUMED ON THE PREMISES
— The sale of meals that are prepared on the premises or are consumed
on the premises, which includes meals delivered or consumed off
premises.[Ord. No. 18-201, 9-25-2018]
WINE — An intoxicating liquor consisting of wine containing not in excess of
fourteen percent (14%) of alcohol by weight made exclusively from grapes,
berries and other fruits and vegetables.
Section 600.015. Enforcement Of Chapter. [Ord. No. 18-201,
9-25-2018]
The City of St. Charles Police Department is responsible for the
enforcement of this Chapter and other ordinances relating to intoxicating
liquor, except as otherwise stated in this Chapter. Any premises which is
not kept in an orderly manner pursuant to Section 600.148, or any person
selling intoxicating liquor without a license or in violation of any provision
of this Chapter shall be reported to the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police
shall report all violations of this Chapter immediately to the other members
of the Commission.
Section 600.020. Disposal During Certain Hours Prohibited. [R.O.
2009 §115.02; CC 1981 §3-2; Ord. No. 87-116, 6-5-1987; Ord. No.
94-179, 7-21-1994; Ord. No. 94-243, 9-15-1994; Ord. No. 08-21,
1-24-2008; Ord. No. 11-097 §1, 5-20-2011]
A. No person shall purchase, sell, give away or otherwise dispose of any
intoxicating liquor or allow the same to be done upon the premises in
any quantity at any time when such disposal is prohibited by the law of
the State, or when prohibited by ordinance in the Historic Downtown
District and South Main Preservation District during Riverfest, Festival
of the Little Hills, Oktoberfest or upon any other date or location for
purposes of the public health, safety or welfare. [Ord. No. 18-021,
2-6-2018]
B. A manufacturer licensed under this Chapter may offer samples of its
wine, may sell its wine in its original package directly to consumers at
the winery and may open wine so purchased by consumers so it may be
consumed on the winery premises on Monday through Saturday
between the hours of 10:00 A.M. and Midnight and on Sunday from
11:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M. Manufacturers licensed under this Chapter
may also sell to duly licensed wholesalers and retail dealers in lots of
five (5) gallons or more on any day except Sunday.
Section
600.010
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
600.030
100:1378
Section 600.030. Sale of Intoxicating Liquor By The Drink When
Certain Holidays Fall On Sunday. [R.O. 2009 §115.03; Ord. No.
08-21, 1-24-2008]
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter to the contrary, any
licensee whose license to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink except sales
on Sundays shall be allowed to sell intoxicating liquor by the drink, from the
time and until the time which would be lawful on any other day of the week
under the license, on any Sunday for which the State of Missouri has, by
Statute, allowed such licensees to engage in Sunday sales.
Section 600.040. Premises To Be Kept Clean and Orderly —
Windows To Be Unobstructed. [R.O. 2009 §115.04; Ord. No. 08-21,
1-24-2008]
Licensees shall at all times keep and maintain the premises, both interior
and exterior, in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition and shall meet
the minimum standards of the City's sanitation ordinance. During business
hours, the licensee shall keep the premises lighted sufficiently so that
both the interior and the exterior may be inspected easily. Windows of the
premises shall not be obstructed so as to prevent reasonable viewing the
interior from the exterior thereof.
Section 600.050. Responsibility of Seller For Sales To Certain
Persons. [Ord. No. 18-021, 2-6-2018]
A. Any licensee under this Chapter, or his/her employee, who shall sell,
vend, give away or otherwise supply any intoxicating liquor in any
quantity whatsoever to any person under the age of twenty-one (21)
years, or to any person intoxicated or appearing to be in a state of
intoxication, or to a habitual drunkard, and any person whomsoever
except his/her parent or guardian who shall procure for, sell, give away
or otherwise supply intoxicating liquor to any person under the age of
twenty-one (21) years, or to any intoxicated person or any person
appearing to be in a state of intoxication, or to a habitual drunkard,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, except that this Section shall
not apply to the supplying of intoxicating liquor to a person under the
age of twenty-one (21) years for medical purposes only, or to the
administering of such intoxicating liquor to any person by a duly
licensed physician. No person shall be denied a license or renewal of a
license issued under this Chapter solely due to a conviction for unlawful
sale or supply to a minor when serving in the capacity as an employee of
a licensed establishment.
B. Each licensed premises located in the Historic Downtown District shall
conspicuously display a sign, near the cash register, in a location clearly
visible to customers, not smaller than fourteen (14) inches by fourteen
(14) inches in size, printed in the English language, and consisting of
letters not smaller than one (1) inch in height and one (1) inch in width,
Section
600.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
600.050
100:1379
Section 600.060. Presence of Minors On Premises. [R.O. 2009
§115.06; Ord. No. 08-21, 1-24-2008]
Section 600.070. Possession or Purchases By Persons Under
Twenty-One. [R.O. 2009 §115.07; CC 1981 §3-4; Ord. No. 87-116,
6-5-1987; Ord. No. 08-21, 1-24-2008; Ord. No. 09-50, 4-8-2009; Ord.
No. 11-75 §1, 4-19-2011; Ord. No. 11-097 §1, 5-20-2011]
with the following words: "IT IS UNLAWFUL TO SERVE A VISIBLY
INTOXICATED PATRON ANY ALCOHOL."
A. Any owner, occupant, or other person or legal entity with a lawful right
to the exclusive use and enjoyment of any property who knowingly
allows a person under the age of twenty-one (21) to drink or possess
intoxicating liquor or knowingly fails to stop a person under the age of
twenty-one (21) from drinking or possessing intoxicating liquor on such
property, unless such person allowing the person under the age of
twenty-one (21) to drink or possess intoxicating liquor is his or her
parent or guardian, is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. Any second
(2nd) or subsequent violation of this Subsection is a Class A
misdemeanor.
B. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this Section if:
1. The defendant is a licensed retailer, club, drinking establishment,
or caterer or holds a temporary permit, or an employee thereof;
2. The defendant sold the intoxicating liquor to the minor with
reasonable cause to believe that the minor was twenty-one (21) or
more years of age; and
3. To purchase the intoxicating liquor, the person exhibited to the
defendant a driver's license, Missouri non-driver's identification
card, or other official or apparently official document, containing a
photograph of the minor and purporting to establish that such
minor was twenty- one (21) years of age and of the legal age for
consumption of intoxicating liquor.
C. It shall be unlawful for any licensee or employee of a licensee which has
not been issued a restaurant bar license pursuant to Section 600.200(A)
or an amusement place Sunday liquor license pursuant to Section
600.200(B) to permit a person under twenty-one (21) years of age to
enter or remain on the premises unless accompanied by a parent or
legal guardian.
A. Any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years who purchases or
attempts to purchase or has in his/her possession, any intoxicating
liquor, as such is defined in Section 600.010 (or who is visibly in an
intoxicated condition, or has a detectable blood alcohol content of more
than two-hundredths of one percent (0.02%) or more by weight of
alcohol in such person's blood), shall be deemed guilty of a violation;
Section
600.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
600.070
100:1380
Section 600.080. Minors.
provided that this Section shall not apply to the supplying of
intoxicating liquor for medicinal purposes to a person under such age
or by the parent or guardian of such person.
B. For purposes of prosecution under this Section or any other provision of
this Chapter involving an alleged illegal sale or transfer of intoxicating
liquor to a person under twenty-one (21) years of age, a manufacturersealed
container describing that there is intoxicating liquor therein
need not be opened or the contents therein tested to verify that there is
intoxicating liquor in such container. The alleged violator may allege
that there was not intoxicating liquor in such container, but the burden
of proof of such allegation is on such person, as it shall be presumed
that such a sealed container describing that there is intoxicating liquor
therein contains intoxicating liquor.
C. After a period of not less than one (1) year or upon reaching the age of
twenty-one (21), whichever occurs first, a person who has pleaded
guilty to or has been found guilty of violating this Section for the first
(1st) time and who since such conviction has not been convicted of any
other alcohol-related offense and who is not on probation for the
violation of this Section at the time application is made may apply for an
order to expunge all official records of the arrest, plea, trial and
conviction except the municipal prosecutor's records. It the court
determines, upon review, that such person has not been convicted of
any other alcohol-related offense at the time of the application for
expungement and the person has had no other alcohol-related
enforcement contacts as defined in Section 302.525, RSMo., the court
shall enter an order of expungement. The effect of such an order shall
be to restore such person to the status the person occupies prior to
such arrest, plea or conviction, as if such event had never happened. No
person as to whom such order has been entered shall be held thereafter
under any provision of any law to be guilty of perjury or otherwise
giving a false statement by reason of the person's failure to recite or
acknowledge such arrest, plea, trial, conviction or expungement in
response to any inquiry made of the person for any purpose whatsoever.
A person shall be entitled to only one (1) expungement pursuant to this
Section. Nothing contained in this Section shall prevent the Municipal
Court or other City Officials from maintaining such records as are
necessary to ensure that an individual receives only one (1)
expungement pursuant to this Section.
A. Persons Eighteen Years Of Age Or Older May Sell Or Handle
Intoxicating Liquor, When.
1. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, no person under the
age of twenty-one (21) years shall sell or assist in the sale or
dispensing of intoxicating liquor.
Section
600.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
600.080
100:1381
2. In any place of business licensed in accordance with this Chapter,
persons at least eighteen (18) years of age may stock, arrange
displays, operate the cash register or scanner connected to a cash
register, accept payment for, and sack for carry-out intoxicating
liquor. Delivery of intoxicating liquor away from the licensed
business premises cannot be performed by anyone under the age of
twenty-one (21) years. Any licensee who employs any person under
the age of twenty-one (21) years, as authorized by this Subsection,
shall, when at least fifty percent (50%) of the licensee's gross sales
does not consist of non-alcoholic sales, have an employee twentyone
(21) years of age or older on the licensed premises during all
hours of operation.
3. In any distillery, warehouse, wholesale distributorship, or similar
place of business which stores or distributes intoxicating liquor but
which does not sell intoxicating liquor at retail, persons at least
eighteen (18) years of age may be employed and their duties may
include the handling of intoxicating liquor for all purposes except
consumption, sale at retail, or dispensing for consumption or sale
at retail. Any wholesaler licensed pursuant to this Chapter may
employ persons of at least eighteen (18) years of age to rotate,
stock and arrange displays at retail establishments licensed to sell
intoxicating liquor.
4. Persons eighteen (18) years of age or older may, when acting in the
capacity of a waiter or waitress, accept payment for or serve
intoxicating liquor in places of business which sell food for
consumption on the premises if at least fifty percent (50%) of all
sales in those places consists of food; provided that nothing in this
Section shall authorize persons under twenty-one (21) years of age
to mix or serve across the bar, intoxicating beverages.
B. Sales To Minor—Exceptions.
1. No licensee, his/her employee, or any other person shall procure
for, sell, vend, give away or otherwise supply any intoxicating liquor
in any quantity whatsoever to any person under the age of twentyone
(21) years, except that this Section shall not apply to the parent
or guardian of the minor nor to the supplying of intoxicating liquor
to a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years for medical
purposes only or to the administering of such intoxicating liquor to
such person by a duly licensed physician. No person shall be denied
a license or renewal of a license issued under this Chapter solely
due to a conviction for unlawful sale or supply to a minor while
serving in the capacity as an employee of a licensed establishment.
2. Any owner, occupant, or other person or legal entity with a lawful
right to the exclusive use and enjoyment of any property who
knowingly allows a person under the age of twenty-one (21) to
drink or possess intoxicating liquor or knowingly fails to stop a
person under the age of twenty-one (21) from drinking or
Section
600.080
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
600.080
100:1382
possessing intoxicating liquor on such property, unless such person
allowing the person under the age of twenty-one (21) to drink or
possess intoxicating liquor is his/her parent or guardian, is guilty
of an ordinance violation.
3. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this Subsection if:
a. The defendant is a licensed retailer, club, drinking
establishment, or caterer or holds a temporary permit, or an
employee thereof;
b. The defendant sold the intoxicating liquor to the minor with
reasonable cause to believe that the minor was twenty-one (21)
or more years of age; and
c. To purchase the intoxicating liquor, the person exhibited to the
defendant a driver's license, Missouri non-driver's
identification card, or other official or apparently official
document, containing a photograph of the minor and
purporting to establish that such minor was twenty-one (21)
years of age and of the legal age for consumption of
intoxicating liquor.
C. Misrepresentation Of Age By Minor To Obtain Liquor—Use Of Altered
Driver's License, Passport Or I.D. Cards, Penalties.
1. No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall represent,
for the purpose of purchasing, asking for or in any way receiving
any intoxicating liquor, that he/she has attained the age of twentyone
(21) years, except in cases authorized by law.
2. In addition to Subsection (C)(1) of this Section, no person under the
age of twenty-one (21) years shall use a reproduced, modified or
altered chauffeur's license, motor vehicle operator's license,
identification card issued by any uniformed service of the United
States, passport or identification card established in Section
302.181, RSMo., for the purpose of purchasing, asking for or in any
way receiving any intoxicating liquor.
D. Minors In Possession Of Intoxicating Liquor.
1. No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years, shall purchase
or attempt to purchase, or have in his/her possession, any
intoxicating liquor as defined in Section 600.010 or, shall be visibly
in an intoxicated condition as defined in Section 577.001, RSMo.,
or shall have a detectable blood alcohol content of more than twohundredths
of one percent (.02%) or more by weight of alcohol in
such person's blood.
2. The provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to a student who:
a. Is eighteen (18) years of age or older;
Section
600.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
600.080
100:1383
b. Is enrolled in an accredited college or university and is a
student in a culinary course;
c. Is required to taste, but not consume or imbibe, any beer, ale,
porter, wine, or other similar malt or fermented beverage as
part of the required curriculum; and
d. Tastes a beverage under Subsection (D)(2)(c) of this Section
only for instructional purposes during classes that are part of
the curriculum of the accredited college or university.
The beverage must at all times remain in the possession
and control of any authorized instructor of the college
or university, who must be twenty-one (21) years of age
or older. Nothing in this Subsection, may be construed
to allow a student under the age of twenty-one (21) to
receive any beer, ale, porter, wine or other similar malt
or fermented beverage unless the beverage is delivered
as part of the student's required curriculum and the
beverage is used only for instructional purposes during
classes conducted as part of the curriculum.
3. Any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years who purchases
or attempts to purchase, or has in his or her possession, any
intoxicating liquor, or who is visibly in an intoxicated condition as
defined in Section 577.001, RSMo., shall be deemed to have given
consent to a chemical test or tests of the person's breath, blood,
saliva, or urine for the purpose of determining the alcohol or drug
content of the person's blood. The implied consent to submit to the
chemical tests listed in this Subsection shall be limited to not more
than two (2) such tests arising from the same arrest, incident, or
charge. Chemical analysis of the person's breath, blood, saliva, or
urine shall be performed according to methods approved by the
State Department of Health and Senior Services by licensed
medical personnel or by a person possessing a valid permit issued
by the State Department of Health and Senior Services for this
purpose. The State Department of Health and Senior Services shall
approve satisfactory techniques, devices, equipment, or methods to
be considered valid and shall establish standards to ascertain the
qualifications and competence of individuals to conduct analyses
and to issue permits which shall be subject to termination or
revocation by the State Department of Health and Senior Services.
The person tested may have a physician, or a qualified technician,
chemist, registered nurse, or other qualified person at the choosing
and expense of the person to be tested, administer a test in addition
to any administered at the direction of a Law Enforcement Officer.
The failure or inability to obtain an additional test by a person shall
not preclude the admission of evidence relating to the test taken at
the direction of a Law Enforcement Officer. Upon the request of the
person who is tested, full information concerning the test shall be
Section
600.080
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
600.080
100:1384
Section 600.090. Consumption On Premises Where Sold. [R.O. 2009
§115.09; CC 1981 §3-6; Ord. No. 87-116, 6-5-1987; Ord. No. 08-21,
1-24-2008; Ord. No. 11-097 §1, 5-20-2011]
Intoxicating liquor sold at retail in original packages only shall not be
consumed upon the premises where sold, nor shall the original packages be
open on the premises of the vendor.
Section 600.100. Drinking in Public Places. [R.O. 2009 §115.10; CC
1981 §3-7; Ord. No. 87-116, 6-5-1987; Ord. No. 08-21, 1-24-2008;
Ord. No. 11-70 §4, 4-9-2011; Ord. No. 11-097 §1, 5-20-2011; Ord.
No. 11-124 §1, 6-22-2011]
made available to such person. "Full information" is limited to the
following:
a. The type of test administered and the procedures followed;
b. The time of the collection of the blood or breath sample or
urine analyzed;
c. The numerical results of the test indicating the alcohol content
of the blood and breath and urine;
d. The type and status of any permit which was held by the person
who performed the test;
e. If the test was administered by means of a breath-testing
instrument, the date of performance of the most recent
required maintenance of such instrument.
"Full information" does not include manuals,
schematics, or software of the instrument used to test
the person or any other material that is not in the actual
possession of the State. Additionally, "full information"
does not include information in the possession of the
manufacturer of the test instrument.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or possess an open container
of alcoholic beverage in or upon the public streets, avenues, alleys or
other public places in the City; except that the provisions of this Section
shall not apply to:
1. Intoxicating liquor sold at the City concessions in the public parks
when such is consumed in the City parks in accordance with
Section 255.170.
2. Authorized social activities being conducted within public buildings
where alcoholic beverages are not being offered for sale.
3. Any public place designated by the City for such purpose, except
that possession of alcoholic beverages in glass containers is
prohibited.
Section
600.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
600.100
100:1385
Section 600.110. Druggists May Sell and Physicians Prescribe.
[R.O. 2009 §115.11; CC 1981 §3-8; Ord. No. 87-116, 6-5-1987; Ord.
No. 08-21, 1-24-2008]
Any druggist may possess intoxicating liquor purchased from a licensed
vendor under a license pursuant to this Chapter or intoxicating liquor
lawfully acquired at the place of acquisition and legally transported into this
State and lawfully inspected, gauged and labeled as provided for by State
law; such intoxicating liquor to be used in connection with the business
of a druggist, in compounding medicines or as a solvent or preservative;
provided that nothing in this law shall prevent a regularly licensed druggist,
after procuring a license therefor in compliance with this law, from selling
intoxicating liquor in the original packages, but not to be drunk or the
packages opened on the premises where sold; and provided further, that
nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting the right of a
physician to prescribe intoxicating liquor in accordance with his/her
professional judgment for any patient at any time or prevent a druggist
from selling intoxicating liquor to a person on prescription from a regularly
licensed physician as above provided.
Section 600.120. Prohibited Acts Where Alcoholic Beverages
Offered For Sale. [R.O. 2009 §115.12; CC 1981 §3-39; Ord. No. 89-5,
1-4-1989; Ord. No. 08-21, 1-24-2008]
4. A motor vehicle being used primarily for the transportation of
persons for compensation or to the living quarters of a house
coach, house trailer or recreational vehicle or a vehicle operated by
a chauffeur in his/her for-hire capacity.
B. In prosecutions under this Section, there is a rebuttable presumption
that a container marked or labeled as containing an alcoholic beverage
actually contained the described alcoholic beverage. This rebuttable
presumption applies only in cases where a sample of the contents of the
container has been preserved and is available to the defendant for
testing.
C. The City Council authorizes the Mayor or Mayor's designee to suspend
the prohibition against drinking alcoholic beverages in public places
pursuant to this Section in the event the Missouri River level or ground
water saturation make it unsafe to hold the City sponsored or
recognized event or festival in Frontier Park as scheduled.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, owning or operating an
establishment at which alcoholic beverages are offered for consumption
on the premises:
1. To suffer or permit any female person, while on the premises of said
establishment, to expose to the public view that area of the human
breast below the top of the areola thereof.
Section
600.100
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
600.120
100:1386
2. To suffer or permit any person, while on the premises of the
establishment, to expose to public view his/her genitals, pubic area,
buttocks, anus or anal cleft or cleavage.
3. To suffer or permit any person, while on the premises of the
establishment, to touch, caress or fondle the breasts, buttocks,
genitals, whether clothed or unclothed, of any person for the
purpose of sexual arousal or gratification.
4. To suffer or permit any person, while on the premises of the
establishment, to perform acts or representations of acts of human
masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy, bestiality, cunnilingus,
fellatio of flagellation.
B. It shall be unlawful for any female person, while on the premises of an
establishment located within the City at which alcoholic beverages are
offered for consumption on the premises, to expose to public view that
area of the human female breast below the top of the areola thereof.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person, while on the premises of an
establishment located within the City at which alcoholic beverages are
offered for sale for consumption on the premises, to expose to public
view his/her genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or anal cleft or
cleavage.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person, while on the premises of an
establishment located within the City at which alcoholic beverages are
offered for sale for consumption on the premises, to touch, caress or
fondle the breasts, buttocks, genitals, whether clothed or unclothed, of
any person for the purpose of sexual arousal or gratification.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person, while on the premises of an
establishment located within the City at which alcoholic beverages are
offered for sale for consumption on the premises, to perform acts or
representations of acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or
sodomy, bestiality, cunnilingus, fellatio or flagellation.
F. At no time, under any circumstances, shall any licensee or his/her
employees permit any person to dance, sit or stand upon a bar, tables or
any other raised surface that is used for preparing or serving food or
beverages.
G. At no time, under any circumstances, shall any licensee or his/her
employees immediately fail to prevent or suppress any violent quarrel,
disorder, brawl, fight or other improper or unlawful conduct of any
person upon the premises. In the event that a licensee or his/her
employee knows or should have known that an illegal or violent act has
been committed on or about the premises, they shall immediately
report the occurrence to law enforcement authorities and shall
cooperate with law enforcement authorities during the course of any
investigation into an occurrence.
Section
600.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
600.120
100:1387
Section 600.130. Misrepresentation of Age Using False
Identification. [R.O. 2009 §115.13; Ord. No. 08-21, 1-24-2008]
Section 600.140. Below Cost Drinks and Other Drink Specials
Prohibited. [R.O. 2009 §115.14; Ord. No. 08-21, 1-24-2008; Ord. No.
18-021, 2-6-2018]
Section 600.145. Pub Crawl; Unlawful Without Registration;
Registration Required; Form and Contents; Responsible Drinking
Promoted. [Ord. No. 16-171 §3, 9-6-2016]
H. It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, owning, operating,
managing or working at an establishment at which alcoholic beverages
are offered for sale for consumption on the premises to allow any
person to exit the licensed premises and possess an open container of
alcoholic beverage. [Ord. No. 16-171 §2, 9-6-2016498]
I. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Section shall be guilty
of a violation of this Code of Ordinances punishable as provided in
Section 100.150 of this Code.
A. It shall be unlawful for a person less than twenty-one (21) years of age
to represent that he/she has attained the age of twenty-one (21) years
for the purpose of purchasing, attempting to purchase, possessing,
attempting to possess, receiving or attempting to receive an alcoholic
beverage, except as authorized by law.
B. It shall be unlawful for a person less than twenty-one (21) years of age
to produce, display, exhibit, offer or tender a reproduced, modified or
altered motor vehicle operator's license, identification card issued by a
uniformed service of the United States, passport or State issued
identification card for the purpose of purchasing, attempting to
purchase, possessing, attempting to possess, receiving or attempting to
receive an alcoholic beverage or to enter or attempt to enter the
premises of a licensee.
A. It shall be unlawful for a licensee or any person to:
1. Offer for sale or deliver alcoholic beverages of any type at less than
the cost of the alcoholic beverage to the licensee;
2. Deliver alcoholic beverages at no cost or for free to a person based
upon the person's gender or status as a student; or
3. Allow on the premises any game or contest which involves drinking
alcoholic beverages or awarding alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises.
498. Editor's Note: Subsection 2 of Ord. No. 16-171 also redesignated former Subsection (H),
which immediately followed, as Subsection (I).
Section
600.120
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
600.145
100:1388
A. It shall be unlawful to promote, conduct or organize a pub crawl that is
not registered with the Police Department.
B. Any person that promotes, conducts or organizes a pub crawl shall
complete a registration form and register the pub crawl with the Police
Department.
C. Any person that promotes, conducts or organizes a pub crawl shall
submit a pub crawl registration form which shall require a written
description of the event and include the following information:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the person completing
the registration form and the person who is responsible for the pub
crawl;
2. Event name;
3. Event date;
4. Event start and end time;
5. Name and address of each licensed premise expected to participate
in the event;
6. Geographic area where the event will occur;
7. Anticipated number of participants;
8. Maximum number of participants;
9. Method of transportation between licensed premises;
10. Location of any registration area;
11. A security plan that shall include;
a. The name, address, telephone number of the person
responsible for any law enforcement, liquor control or security
issues for the event;
b. A plan to prohibit underage drinking; and
c. Procedure to insure participants are age 21 or older; and
12. Any such other information required by the Chief of Police.
D. The registration form shall be provided by the Police Department and
shall be submitted sixty (60) days prior to the date of the event to the
Chief of Police or designee. There is no fee for registration of a pub
crawl.
E. Pub crawl promotional materials shall:
1. Include a "You must be 21 or older to participate," statement;
Section
600.145
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
600.145
100:1389
Section 600.148. Premises To Be Kept Orderly. [Ord. No. 18-201,
9-25-2018]
2. Promote use of public transportation for persons who have
consumed alcoholic beverages; and
3. Include a designated driver program plan.
F. Literature describing "responsible drinking practices" shall be available
at all registration areas on the day of the event.
G. A pub crawl shall not promote excessive drinking and shall not include
an unlimited number of alcoholic beverages for one (1) price. An "all
you can drink" event is prohibited.
A. All licensees shall at all times keep and maintain an orderly place upon
the premises. An orderly place shall be maintained by the licensee
through the prevention of immorality, violations of the law, affrays, and
breaches of the peace upon the premises, including the parking lots and
the area around the premises which is used as part of the business or
under the control of the licensee.
B. Prima facie evidence of maintaining a disorderly place, shall include,
but is not limited to, the following:
1. Acts of immorality;
2. Acts of lewd conduct;
3. Breaches of the peace;
4. Exceeding the occupancy load of the premises;
5. Allowing a person to exit the premises while possessing an open
container of an alcoholic beverage;
6. Any act prohibited by Section 600.120 was permitted upon the
premises;
7. Actions or conduct which become a nuisance;
8. Offenses concerning public peace under Article II of Chapter 215 of
the City Code;
9. A licensee's failure, or the failure of the licensee's employees, to
immediately prevent or suppress any violent quarrel, disorder,
brawl, fight or other improper or unlawful conduct of any person
upon the premises;
10. Failing to immediately report to law enforcement authorities the
occurrence of an illegal or violent act that has been committed on
or about the licensed premises, in the event that a licensee or his/
her employee knows or should have known of such illegal or violent
act;
Section
600.145
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
600.148
100:1390
11. Failing to cooperate with law enforcement authorities during the
investigation into an occurrence identified in Subsection (B)(10);
12. Open, repeated, or continuous sales of alcoholic beverages to
minors;
13. Repeated violations of Chapter 500 of the City Code, as amended,
including the Property Maintenance Code; or
14. Violation of Chapter 230 of the City Code, as amended pertaining to
noise control.
Section
600.148
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
600.148
100:1391

ARTICLE II
Licenses
Section 600.150. License Required. [R.O. 2009 §115.20; CC 1981
§3-21; Ord. No. 87-116, 6-5-1987; Ord. No. 08-21, 1-24-2008; Ord.
No. 11-097 §1, 5-20-2011; Ord. No. 18-201, 9-25-2018]
Section 600.160. Application — Form and Contents. [R.O. 2009
§115.21; CC 1981 §§3-22—3-23; Ord. No. 87-116, 6-5-1987; Ord. No.
00-328, 12-1-2000; Ord. No. 06-62, 3-10-2006; Ord. No. 08-21,
1-24-2008; Ord. No. 11-097 §1, 5-20-2011; Ord. No. 18-021,
2-6-2018]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, brew, distribute, sell
or expose for sale any intoxicating liquor in any quantity in the City
without first having obtained a license. A separate license shall be
required for each place of business.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person whose license is suspended or
revoked to manufacture, brew, distribute, sell or expose for sale any
intoxicating liquor in any quantity in the City.
A. Prerequisite To Grant Of License. No license shall be granted unless an
application has been made as required in this Chapter.
B. Form And Contents. Each application for an original or renewal license
shall be made, in writing, to the Director of Finance on an application
form provided by the City, completed in its entirety and signed under
penalty of perjury by the applicant. The applicant shall provide the
following information on the application form and the following
documents:
1. Designation of the kind of license desired.
2. Description of the premises to which such license is to apply,
including the address thereof, the floor or floors for which a license
is desired, a description of the room or rooms by square footage,
and a description of any outdoor dining area whether a sidewalk
cafe or private area.
3. Name and mailing address of applicant and the address for service
of process and delivery of any official notice. In addition, if the
applicant is:
a. An individual, the applicant's residential address;
b. A non-publicly traded corporation, the name and residential
address of each officer, director and shareholder, the
registered agent and registered address, and the current
articles of incorporation;
Section
600.150
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
600.160
100:1393
Section 600.170. Filing Deposit of License Fee. [R.O. 2009 §115.22;
CC 1981 §§3-24—3-25; Ord. No. 87-116, 6-5-1987; Ord. No. 08-21,
1-24-2008; Ord. No. 09-164, 9-3-2009]
c. A limited liability company, the name and residential address of
each member and manager, and the current operating
agreement; or
d. A partnership, the name and residential address of each
partner, and the current partnership agreement.
4. Dates and places of all suspensions or revocations of liquor licenses
and all convictions of any law applicable to the manufacture or sale
of intoxicating liquor since the ratification of the 21st Amendment
to the Constitution of the United States, if any.
5. Term of the license.
6. Signature of the applicant certifying the applicant has read
Chapter 600 of the Code of Ordinances and the State of Missouri
Liquor Control Law, Chapter 311, RSMo., and the Code of State
Regulations promulgated thereunder.
7. In the event a license is sought for the sale of intoxicating liquor in
the original package, the form shall provide for and contain spaces
for the business engaged in by the applicant and the kind of stock
of goods and invoice value thereof, exclusive of fixtures and
intoxicating liquors kept in the business store of applicant;
provided, however, that there shall be attached to new
applications, other than renewals, a photograph of the applicant
and of the place of business.
8. In the event a license is sought for the sale at retail by the drink for
consumption on the premises where sold of all kinds of intoxicating
liquor, including the sale of intoxicating liquor in the original
package, the form shall provide for and contain spaces for
information relating to the applicant's compliance with any criteria
and requirements concerning the granting of such licenses, as the
same are set forth and defined in this Chapter.
C. No application shall be processed for an applicant or entity that is in
arrears to the City for any assessment, fee, fine, court cost, penalty, tax,
special tax bill, or charge unless currently under appeal to a court of
competent jurisdiction.
D. On receipt of an application, the Director of Finance shall identify for
the applicant the Council member for the ward where the premises are
located and shall inform the Council member of the ward that an
application for a liquor license has been filed for premises within the
ward.
Section
600.160
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
600.170
100:1394
Section 600.180. Grant And Issuance; Hearing Before City Council.
[R.O. 2009 §115.24; CC 1981 §3-27; Ord. No. 87-116, 6-5-1987; Ord.
No. 08-21, 1-24-2008]
A. Filing And Presentation To Director Of Finance. Applications for
original and renewal licenses shall be filed with the Director of Finance
and the date of filing being noted thereon.
B. Deposit Of License Fee—Disposition Of Such Deposit.
1. Except as set forth in Subsection (B)(2), at the time of filing the
license application, the applicant shall submit to the Director of
Finance the amount of the license fee for the license applied for,
either in cash, bank draft, money order, certified check or cashier's
check, made payable to the City. No license shall be granted unless
such deposit of the license fee has been made. If the license is not
granted, the amount of license fee shall be refunded to the
applicant. If the license is granted, such amount deposited with the
application shall be deposited in the City Treasury.
2. Political subdivisions of the State of Missouri are exempt from the
license fee requirement and shall not be required to pay a license
fee as a condition of being granted a license.
3. No license application, whether for an original or renewal license,
shall be granted for at least ten (10) days after the filing of such
license application.
A. Original licenses, renewal licenses for premises located in the Historic
Downtown District, and renewal licenses for any license with four (4) or
more points assigned thereto pursuant to Section 600.260 in a license
year may only be granted by the City Council after a public hearing at
which the licensee or license applicant appears in person and may be
asked to provide sworn testimony. Licenses for premises located
outside of the Historic Downtown District or without the assignment of
points may be renewed administratively by the Commission and issued
by the Finance Department. The license shall describe the type of
license, the license fee, the premises on which sale is to be made, the
locations within the premises where intoxicating liquor is to be
consumed, the name of the license holder, the date of issuance and
period of time for which such license is granted. The grant of the
license may be conditioned upon the completion of construction of the
premises within a time period prescribed and upon compliance with all
zoning, fire and building codes, and possession of an occupancy permit.
[Ord. No. 18-201, 9-25-2018499]
B. Licensees at all times are responsible for the conduct of their
businesses and at all times are directly responsible for any act or
499. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 18-201 also changed the title of this Section to add "; Hearing
Before City Council."
Section
600.170
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
600.180
100:1395
Section 600.190. Categories of Licenses And License Fees. [R.O.
2009 §115.25; CC 1981 §3-28; Ord. No. 87-116, 6-5-1987; Ord. No.
08-21, 1-24-2008; Ord. No. 09-164, 9-3-2009; Ord. No. 11-097 §1,
5-20-2011; Ord. No. 12-201 §1, 11-8-2012; Ord. No. 17-172 § 1,
9-8-2017500]
conduct of any employee on the premises which is in violation of this
Chapter.
C. Licensees shall allow the licensed premises and all portions of the
buildings of the premises, including all rooms, cellars, outbuildings,
passageways, closets, vaults, yards, attics and all buildings used in
connection with the operation carried on under the license and which
are under their possession and control and all places where they keep
and have alcoholic beverages stored, to be inspected by the Director of
Community Development, Fire Chief, Police Chief or their designees.
Licensees shall cooperate fully with City personnel during the
inspections.
A. The categories of licenses and the license fees therefor shall be as
follows. A separate license shall be required for each category of
business activity the licensee desires to engage as set forth herein.
1. For the manufacture, brewing and sale by the manufacturer or
brewer of malt liquor containing not in excess of five percent (5%)
of alcohol by weight, the sum of three hundred dollars ($300.00)
per year.
2. For the manufacture and sale by the manufacturer of intoxicating
liquor containing not in excess of twenty-two percent (22%) of
alcohol by weight, the sum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00)
per year.
3. For the manufacturing, distilling or blending and for sale by the
manufacturer, distiller or blender of intoxicating liquor of all kinds,
the sum of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per year.
4. For the sale of intoxicating liquor containing not in excess of five
percent (5%) of alcohol by weight by a wholesaler to a person duly
licensed to sell such malt liquor at retail, the sum of seventy-five
dollars ($75.00) per year.
5. For the sale of intoxicating liquor containing not in excess of
twenty-two percent (22%) of alcohol by weight by a wholesaler to a
person duly licensed to sell such intoxicating liquor at retail, the
sum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year.
6. For the privilege of selling intoxicating liquor of all kinds by a
wholesaler to a person duly licensed to sell such intoxicating liquor
500. Editor’s Note: Ord. No. 17-172 also changed the title of this Section from “Classification –
Schedule of Fees” to “Categories Of Licenses And License Fees.”
Section
600.180
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
600.190
100:1396
at retail, the sum of three hundred seventy-five dollars ($375.00)
per year; provided, however, that a license authorizing the holder
to sell to duly licensed wholesalers and to solicit orders for sale
of intoxicating liquor to, by or through a duly licensed wholesaler
shall not entitle the holder thereof to sell within the State, direct
to retailers; provided, further, a wholesaler's license shall not
authorize or entitle the holder thereof to sell to other wholesalers
or to solicit orders for the sale of intoxicating liquors to, by or
through a duly licensed wholesaler within this State.
7. For the manufacturing in quantities not to exceed seventy-five
thousand (75,000) gallons, light wines containing not in excess of
fourteen percent (14%) of alcohol by weight from grapes, berries
and other fruits and vegetables grown in the State, in lieu of the
charges herein otherwise provided, the sum of seven dollars and
fifty cents ($7.50) for each five hundred (500) gallons or fraction
thereof. A manufacturer licensed under this provision shall be
privileged to sell to consumers at the winery in lots not to exceed
five (5) gallons and to sell to duly licensed wholesalers or duly
licensed retail dealers in lots of five (5) gallons or more.
8. For sale of intoxicating liquor at retail in the original package,
where such liquor shall not be consumed upon or such original
package not be opened upon the premises where sold, the sum of
one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year.
9. For sale in the original package to consumers, but not for resale, of
malt liquor containing alcohol in excess of three and two-tenths
percent (3.2%) by weight and not in excess of five percent (5%) by
weight, the sum of twenty-two dollars and fifty cents ($22.50) per
year.
10. For sale at retail by the drink, for consumption on premises where
sold, of malt liquor, including between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and
Midnight on Sunday, the sum of fifty-two dollars and fifty cents
($52.50) per year.
11. For sale at retail by the drink, for consumption on the premises
where sold, of malt liquor and light wines containing not in excess
of fourteen percent (14%) of alcohol by weight made exclusively
from grapes, berries and other fruits and vegetables, including the
sale of malt liquor between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and Midnight on
Sunday, the sum of fifty-two dollars and fifty cents ($52.50) per
year.
12. For sale at retail by the drink, for consumption on premises where
sold, of all kinds of intoxicating liquor, including the sale, except on
Sunday, of intoxicating liquor in the original package, the sum of
four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) per year.
13. For sale at retail by the drink, for consumption on premises where
sold, of all kinds of intoxicating liquor on Sunday, and in the
Section
600.190
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
600.190
100:1397
original package of all kinds of intoxicating liquor on Sunday, the
sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year.
14. For a restaurant bar located in the Historic Downtown District, for
sale at retail by the drink, for consumption on premises where sold,
of all kinds of intoxicating liquor on Sunday, and in the original
package of all kinds of intoxicating liquor on Sunday, the sum of ten
dollars ($10.00) per year.
15. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter to the
contrary, the Finance Department may issue a special license to
caterers and other persons holding licenses to sell intoxicating
liquor by the drink at retail for consumption on the premises
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 311, RSMo., and a license
issued pursuant to Section 311.486.2, RSMo., and who furnish
provisions and service for use at a particular event at a particular
location other than the licensed premises. The license shall be
effective for a maximum of fifty (50) event days from July 1 through
June 30 of any year, and shall authorize the service of alcoholic
beverages at such event during the hours at which alcoholic
beverages may lawfully be sold or served upon premises licensed to
sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption on the
premises in which such function, occasion or event is held. All
provisions of the City's ordinances shall extend to such premises
and shall be in force and enforceable during all the time the
licensee, its agents, servants, employees or stock are in such
premises. The fee for each license shall be the sum of ten dollars
($10.00) for a one (1) day license or four hundred fifty dollars
($450.00) for a license for one (1) year. This license shall allow the
sale of intoxicating liquor in the original package. [Ord. No.
17-211, 10-3-2017]
a. Caterers issued a special license pursuant to this Subsection
(A)(15) shall report to the Finance Department the location of
each event five (5) business days in advance. The report of
each event shall include permission from the property owner,
description of the premises, and the date or dates the event
will be held.
b. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter to the contrary,
applications for special license issued pursuant to this
Subsection (A)(15) shall be exempt from the requirements of
Section 600.180(A).
16. For sale at retail by the drink, for consumption on the premises
where sold, of malt liquor and wine containing not in excess of
fourteen percent (14%) of alcohol by weight the sum of four
hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) per year.
17. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter to the
contrary, any person possessing the qualifications and meeting the
Section
600.190
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
600.190
100:1398
Section 600.200. Amusement Place and Special Sunday License and
Tasting Permit. [R.O. 2009 §115.26; CC 1981 §3-29; Ord. No. 87-116,
6-2-1987; Ord. No. 93-155, 7-7-1993; Ord. No. 93-170, 7-21-1993;
Ord. No. 93-174, 8-15-1993; Ord. No. 94-127, 6-8-1994; Ord. No.
94-179, 7-21-1994; Ord. No. 94-243, 9-15-1994; Ord. No. 94-309,
11-16-1994; Ord. No. 94-324, 12-7-1994; Ord. No. 96-47, 2-21-1996;
Ord. No. 96-100, 3-21-1996; Ord. No. 03-229, 9-18-2003; Ord. No.
08-21, 1-24-2008; Ord. No. 12-201 §1, 11-8-2012]
requirements of this Chapter, who is licensed to sell intoxicating
liquor in the original package at retail pursuant to Section
600.190(A)(8) may apply for a special license to conduct wine, malt
beverage and distilled spirit tastings on the licensed premises. In
addition to all other fees required by law, a licensee shall pay
an additional fee of thirty-seven dollars fifty cents ($37.50) per
year for a wine, malt beverage and distilled spirits tasting license,
payable at the same time and in the same manner as its other
license fees. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to permit
the licensee to sell wine, malt beverages or distilled spirits for onpremise
consumption. [Ord. No. 17-211, 10-3-2017]
B. This Section shall not apply to a license granted to a political
subdivision of the State of Missouri which shall be exempt from the
payment of license fees.
A. Amusement Place Sunday Liquor License.
1. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter to the
contrary, any person who possesses the qualifications required by
this Chapter and who now or hereafter meets the requirements of
and complies with the provisions of this Chapter may apply for a
license to sell intoxicating liquor, as defined in this Chapter,
between the hours of 1:00 P.M. and Midnight on Sunday by the
drink at retail for consumption on the premises of any amusement
place as described in the application.
2. All other laws and regulations of the City relating to the sale of
liquor by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold
shall apply to an amusement place in the same manner as they
apply to establishments licensed under the provisions of this
Chapter and in addition to all other fees required by law, an
amusement place shall pay an additional fee of three hundred
dollars ($300.00) a year for such amusement place Sunday liquor
license, payable at the same time and in the same manner as its
other license fees.
3. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to permit an amusement
place licensee to sell intoxicating liquor, malt liquor or beer for offpremises
consumption.
B. Special Sunday Retail Original Package License.
Section
600.190
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
600.200
100:1399
Section 600.210. Limited Licenses. [R.O. 2009 §115.27; CC 1981
§3-30; Ord. No. 87-116, 6-5-1987; Ord. No. 88-155, 8-8-1988; Ord.
No. 08-21, 1-24-2008]
1. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter, any person
possessing the qualifications and meeting the requirements of this
Chapter, who is licensed to sell intoxicating liquor in the original
package at retail under Section 600.190(8) and (9), may apply for a
special license to sell intoxicating liquor in the original package at
retail between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and Midnight on Sundays.
2. In addition to all other fees required by law, anyone licensed to sell
intoxicating liquor in the original package at retail under Section
600.190(8) and (9) shall pay an additional fee of three hundred
dollars ($300.00) a year for a special license to sell intoxicating
liquor in the original package at retail between the hours of 9:00
A.M. and Midnight on Sundays.501
A. Malt Liquor License—Anytime. The Chief of Police may issue a license
for the sale of malt liquor for consumption on the premises where sold
to any church, school, civic, service, fraternal, veteran, political or
charitable club or organization for the sale of malt liquor at a picnic,
bazaar, fair or similar gathering. Such license shall be issued only for
the days named therein; and it shall not authorize the sale of malt liquor
for more than seven (7) days by any such organization in any fiscal year.
B. Intoxicating Liquor License—Anytime. The Chief of Police may issue a
license for the sale of intoxicating liquor, in lieu of a permit issued
pursuant to Subsection (A) of this Section, for consumption on the
premises where sold to any church, school, civic, service, fraternal,
veteran, political or charitable club or organization for the sale of
intoxicating liquor at a picnic, bazaar, fair or similar gathering. Such
license shall be issued only for the days named therein; and it shall not
authorize the sale of intoxicating liquor for more than seven (7) days by
any such organization in any fiscal year.
C. Wine And Malt Liquor, June 15 to July 15. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this Chapter to the contrary and in addition to the
preceding paragraphs, a permit for the sale of wine and malt liquor
containing alcohol in excess of three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) by
weight for consumption on the premises where sold may be issued to
any church, school, civic, service, fraternal, veteran, political or
charitable club or organization for sale of such wine and malt liquor at
any picnic, bazaar, fair, festival or similar gathering or event held to
commemorate the annual anniversary of the signing of the Declaration
of Independence of the United States. Such permit shall be issued only
during the period from June fifteenth (15th) to July fifteenth (15th)
annually and only for the day or days named therein and it shall not
501. Editor’ Note: Former Subsection (C), regarding wine, malt beverage and distilled spirits
tasting permit, which immediately followed, was repealed 10-3-2017 by Ord. No. 17-211.
Section
600.200
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
600.210
100:1400
Section 600.220. Consumption of Liquor Where Food, Beverages or
Entertainment Sold. [R.O. 2009 §115.28; CC 1981 §3-32; Ord. No.
87-116, 6-5-1987; Ord. No. 08-21, 1-24-2008]
Section 600.230. Qualification of Licensee. [R.O. 2009 §115.29; CC
1981 §3-33; Ord. No. 87-116, 6-5-1987; Ord. No. 99-239, 7-9-1999;
Ord. No. 06-216, 8-9-2006; Ord. No. 08-21, 1-24-2008]
authorize the sale of wine and malt liquor except between the hours
of 10:00 A.M. and Midnight and for not more than seven (7) days by
any such organization. The permit may be issued to cover more than
one (1) place of sale within the general confines of the place where the
gathering or event is held; provided however, no permit shall be issued
to any organization which selects or restricts the membership thereof
on the basis of race, religion, color, creed or place of national origin.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person operating any premises where food,
beverages or entertainment are sold or provided for compensation, who
does not possess a license for the sale of intoxicating liquor, to permit
the drinking or consumption of intoxicating liquor in, on or about such
premises between 10:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M. the following day without
having a license as provided for by this Section.
B. The drinking or consumption of intoxicating liquor by any person under
twenty-one (21) years of age shall not be permitted in, upon or about
the licensed premises; or by any other person at any time when the
disposal of alcoholic beverages is prohibited by the law of the State.
C. All other laws and regulations of the City relating to the sale of liquor by
the drink for consumption on the premises where sold shall apply to
persons who operate any premises where food, beverages or
entertainment are sold or provided for compensation and who hold a
license for consumption of liquor as provided for in this Section.
D. In addition to all other fees required by law, a fee of three hundred
dollars ($300.00) per year shall be paid by any person operating any
premises where food, beverages or entertainment are sold or provided
for compensation, for a license for consumption of liquor as
contemplated by this Section.
A. Individuals. No license provided for by this Chapter shall be issued to
any individual except in conformity with the following:
1. The individual shall be in fact actively engaged in the actual control
and management of the particular alcoholic beverage
establishment for which a license is sought.
2. The individual shall be least twenty-one (21) years of age and a
United States citizen.
3. The individual shall be of good moral character. In determining
whether a person possesses a good moral character, any and all
Section
600.210
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
600.230
100:1401
factors which reflect upon the character, competency and ability of
the applicant to operate and maintain an orderly place of business
which will not endanger or adversely affect the health, safety,
welfare, peace and dignity of the citizens of the City shall be
considered.
4. The individual shall not have been, since the ratification of the 21st
Amendment to the Constitution of the United States, convicted of,
nor have entered a plea of guilty, no contest or nolo contendere to a
charge of violating the provisions of any law applicable to the
manufacture, sale or disposal of alcoholic beverages as confirmed
by a Police Department record check.
5. The individual shall not have been the holder of an alcoholic
beverage license which has been revoked by any City, County or
State.
6. The individual shall not owe any delinquent taxes or fees to the City
and shall provide a no tax due letter from the Department of
Revenue which has been issued in the preceding ninety (90) days.
Delinquent taxes which have been challenged or contested in a
court proceeding or in a manner prescribed by law shall not
preclude the issuance of a license.
7. The individual shall provide proof of the right to possession of the
premises sought to be licensed upon the date of the issuance of the
license by presenting with the license application a deed, bona fide
sale contract or option duly executed or a bona fide lease duly
executed by the lessor or an option for a lease duly executed.
B. General Partnership, Limited Partnership, Limited Liability Company,
Associations, Syndicates Or Co-Partnership. No license shall be issued
to any general partnership, limited partnership, limited liability
company, association, syndicate or co-partnership unless all members
of the general partnership, limited partnership, limited liability
company, association, syndicate or co-partnership are persons who
would be eligible for licenses as individuals under the provisions of this
Chapter and no such license shall be issued to any general partnership,
limited partnership, limited liability company, association, syndicate or
co-partnership, any partner or member of which has been the holder of
a license which has been revoked by any City, County or State.
C. Corporations. No license provided for in this Chapter shall be issued to
any corporation except in conformity with the following:
1. All the officers and directors of such corporation shall be persons of
good moral character.
2. The managing officer of the corporation is an individual who is
eligible for a license as an individual under the provisions of the
Chapter.
Section
600.230
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
600.230
100:1402
Section 600.240. Assignment, Transfer And Abandonment And
Forfeiture For Non-Use. [R.O. 2009 §115.30; CC 1981 §3-34; Ord.
No. 87-116, 6-5-1987; Ord. No. 95-203, 8-8-1995; Ord. No. 08-21,
1-24-2008; Ord. No. 18-201, 9-25-2018502]
Section 600.250. Term — Renewal. [R.O. 2009 §115.31; CC 1981
§3-35; Ord. No. 87-116, 6-5-1987; Ord. No. 95-203, 8-8-1995; Ord.
No. 06-90, 4-26-2006; Ord. No. 08-21, 1-24-2008]
3. Such corporation has not been the holder of a license which has
been revoked by any City, County or State.
D. Non-Residents—Foreign Corporations. Nothing in this Section shall
prevent the issuance of a license to a non-resident of the State or to a
foreign corporation for the privilege of selling to duly licensed
wholesalers and soliciting orders for the sale of intoxicating liquors to,
by and or through a duly licensed wholesaler.
A. No license shall be transferable or assignable except as herein
provided. In the event of the death of the licensee, the widow or
widower or the next of kin of such deceased licensee, who shall meet
the other requirements of this law, may make application and the
Director of Finance may transfer such license to the widow, widower or
next of kin to permit the operation of the business of the deceased for
the remainder of the period for which a license fee has been paid by the
deceased. No executor, administrator, receiver, assignee, trustee or
guardian may sell any alcoholic beverage belonging to the estate over
which he/she has control except to a licensed wholesaler or retailer.
B. Whenever one (1) or more members of a general partnership, limited
partnership, limited liability company, association, syndicate or copartnership
withdraw from the general partnership, limited
partnership, limited liability company, association, syndicate or copartnership,
the Director of Finance upon request, shall permit the
remaining one (1) or more partners or members originally licensed to
continue to operate for the remainder of the period for which the
license fee has been paid, without obtaining a new license.
C. In the event the operation of a licensed premises shall be discontinued
or abandoned for a period of sixty (60) days or more, the Director of
Finance, first having given five (5) days' written notice to the licensee of
the premises by causing same to be served upon him/her by a City
Police Officer or sent via United States Postal Service certified mail to
the address shown on the most recent license application may declare
such license abandoned or forfeited.
A. Each license issued in compliance with this Chapter shall expire on
June thirtieth (30th) next succeeding the beginning date of such
502. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 18-201 also changed the title of this Section from "Assignment and
Transfer" to "Assignment, Transfer And Abandonment And Forfeiture For Non-Use."
Section
600.230
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
600.250
100:1403
Section 600.260. Suspension or Revocation of License. [R.O. 2009
§115.32; CC 1981 §3-36; Ord. No. 87-116, 6-5-1987; Ord. No. 89-4,
1-4-1989; Ord. No. 93-89, 4-21-1993; Ord. No. 95-203, 8-8-1995;
Ord. No. 03-330, 12-23-2003; Ord. No. 06-90, 4-26-2006; Ord. No.
07-162, 6-11-2007; Ord. No. 08-21, 1-24-2008; Ord. No. 16-171 §4,
9-6-2016; Ord. No. 18-021, 2-6-2018; Ord. No. 18-201, 9-25-2018]
license. Of the annual license tax to be paid for any such license, the
applicant shall pay as many twelfths (12ths) as there are months, part
of a month to be counted as one (1) month, remaining from the date of
the application for the license through each succeeding July first (1st).
B. All licenses granted in renewal of a license expiring on June thirtieth
(30th) of any year shall be granted and issued for a period of one (1)
year beginning on July first (1st) of the year in which granted and issued
and shall expire on June thirtieth (30th) of the next succeeding year. No
license shall be given a beginning date prior to the day of granting of
such license.
A. General And Purpose.
1. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary,
any license issued under this Chapter may be revoked or
suspended by the Commission for any licensee who fails, at all
times, to keep an orderly place under Section 600.148, or for
violating any of the provisions of this Chapter, subject to the notice
and hearing requirements and procedures set forth in this Section.
2. The intent of the point system is to provide the Commission with a
non-arbitrary means to evaluate incidents occurring on premises
for which a license to sell intoxicating liquor has been issued and to
guide the Commission in suspending or revoking liquor licenses.
B. Licensee Responsible For Conduct Of Employees. License violations
which occur due to the conduct of an employee or agent of a licensee
shall be imputed to the licensee. Any points assessed for a license
violation by an employee or agent of a licensee shall be assessed
against the licensee's liquor license.
C. Burden Of Proof, Liability. Points may only be assessed against a license
when the Commission determines by a preponderance of the evidence
that a licensee, or an employee or agent of a licensee, committed a
license violation. Points may be assessed against a license even if the
individual who performed the action or conduct that constituted the
license violation was not convicted of committing a crime.
D. Violations. For the purposes of this Section 600.260 the term "license
violation" shall include the following violations which may result in the
assessment of points against a liquor license or revocation of the liquor
license if the violation occurs on the premises, the parking lot for the
premises or an area under the control of the licensee:
Section
600.250
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
600.260
100:1404
1. Failure of a licensee, its officers, managers, employees and agents
to undergo training as required under Subsection (H)(2)(c) of this
Section.
2. Liquor violations: any action or conduct which violates any
provision of law with respect to the manufacture, sale, distribution,
solicitation, or use of alcoholic beverages, including violations of
Chapter 311, RSMo., and Chapter 600 of the City Code, as
amended.
3. Health and sanitation violations: any action or conduct which
violates any provision of Chapter 230, of the Ordinances of the
County of St. Charles, Missouri; Chapter 196, RSMo.; or 19 CSR
20-1.010 et seq., or the Missouri Food Code, as amended.
4. Homicide: any "homicide offense" under Chapter 565, RSMo., as
amended.
5. Weapons violations: any action or conduct which violates any
provision of Article V, Chapter 215 of the City Code or Chapter 571,
RSMo., as amended.
6. Controlled substance violations: any action or conduct which
violates any provision of Article VI, Chapter 215 of the City Code, or
Chapter 579, RSMo., as amended.
7. Prostitution: any action or conduct which violates any provision of
Chapter 567, RSMo., as amended.
8. Gambling: any action or conduct which violates any provision of
Chapter 572, RSMo., as amended.
9. Pornography: any action or conduct which violates any provision of
Chapter 573, RSMo., as amended.
10. Assault: any action or conduct which constitutes an "assault
offense" under Chapter 565, RSMo., or which violates Article II,
Chapter 215, of the City Code, as amended.
11. Sexual offenses: any action or conduct which violates any provision
of Chapter 566, RSMo.
12. Underage consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages or
serving a visibly intoxicated person: any action or conduct which
violates Section 600.050(B) of the City Code, as amended.
13. Exceeding the occupancy load for the premises as stated on the
occupant load limit sign posted in the premises, or failing to post
the occupant load limit sign for the premises in a conspicuous place
near the main exit or exit access doorway of the premises.
14. Allowing a person to exit the licensed premises while possessing an
open container of alcoholic beverage.
Section
600.260
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
600.260
100:1405
15. The licensee suffered or permitted any action or conduct prohibited
by Section 600.120 of the City Code.
16. The license was obtained through materially false statements in the
application for such license or renewal thereof. Violation of this
Subsection (D)(16) shall result in revocation of the liquor license.
17. The licensee failed to make a complete disclosure of all required
information in the application for such license or renewal thereof.
18. The licensee, since the issuance of such license, has ceased to be
the person actually engaged in the active control and management
of the premises for which the license was issued.
19. The licensed premises are no longer used for the purposes
permitted by the license.
20. The licensed premises, if subject to the food sales requirement of
Section 600.280(A)(10), does not have receipts from the sale of
prepared meals or food consumed on the premises of greater than
fifty percent (50%) of annual gross receipts. Failure to comply with
the food sales requirements of Section 600.280(A)(11) shall result
in revocation of the liquor license.
21. The licensee of the licensed premises, if subject to the food sales
requirement of Section 600.280(A)(10), does not maintain and
produce upon request books and records sufficient to verify that
the restaurant bar has receipts from the sale of prepared meals or
food consumed on the licensed premises of greater than fifty
percent (50%) of annual gross receipts. Violation of this Subsection
(D)(21) shall result in revocation of the liquor license.
22. The licensee of the licensed premises, if subject to the food sales
requirement of Section 600.280(A)(10), falsely reports annual
gross receipts from prepared meals or food consumed on the
licensed premises or for liquor sales; or fails to cooperate in an
audit of its prepared meals or food consumed on the premises sales
or liquor sales by producing books and records when requested to
verify compliance with Section 600.280(A)(10). Violation of this
Subsection (D)(22) shall result in revocation of the liquor license.
23. Submission of any false document or record or make any false
statement of fact regarding the license application, applicant for a
license, the licensee or the licensed premises. Violation of this
Subsection (D)(23) shall result in revocation of the liquor license.
24. The licensee violates any provision of a right-of-way encroachment
license.
25. The licensee sells food or drink in any area subject to a right-of-way
encroachment license, a sidewalk cafe permit, or outside the
licensed premises after 12:00 a.m. and before 3:00 a.m.
Section
600.260
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
600.260
100:1406
26. The licensee fails or refuses to allow access to the licensed
premises by a City employee engaged in an investigation of any
potential violation of any municipal ordinance.
27. Anything has occurred which would render the licensed premises
ineligible or unsuitable for a license under the provisions of
Chapter 600 of the City Code.
28. The licensee violates Chapter 500 of the City Code, as amended,
including the Property Maintenance Code.
29. All other violations of law or the City Code for which the
assessment of points against a liquor license is appropriate.
E. Points. The number of points assessed for the violations described
herein shall be as follows unless otherwise specified:
1. Violation under Section 600.260(D)(1) or (24) of this Code: 1.0.
2. Violation under Section 600.260(D)(3) or (14) of this Code: 1.5.
3. Violation under Section 600.260(D)(10), (11) or (25) of this Code:
2.0.
4. Violation under Section 600.260(D)(2), (27), (28) or (29) of this
Code: 2.5.
5. Violation under Section 600.260(D)(6), (7), (8), (9), (12), (13), (15)
or (26) of this Code: 3.0.
6. Violation under Section 600.260(D)(4), (5) or (17) of this Code: 3.5.
7. Violation under Section 600.260(D)(16), (18), (19), (20), (21), (22)
or (23) of this Code: Revocation.
8. Any three (3) violations under Section 600.260(D)(4), (5), (6), (7),
(8), (9), (10), (11), (12), (13), (14) or (15) of this Code in a ninety
(90) day period: Revocation.
F. Point Classifications.
1. Minor: 1.0 to 2.5 points.
2. Significant: 3.0 to 6.0 points.
3. Major: 6.5 and above.
G. Persistent Disorderly Place; Failure To Meet Restaurant Bar Food Sales
Requirement. [Ord. No. 18-273, 12-18-2018]
1. Notwithstanding any provision of this Chapter to the contrary, the
liquor license of a persistent disorderly place shall be revoked. For
purposes of this Subsection (G), a "persistent disorderly place"
means a licensed premises that sustains a total of three (3) or more
license violations pursuant to Section 600.260(D)(4 through 14),
Section
600.260
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
600.260
100:1407
inclusive, and (D)(28) within a ninety-day period. A license
revocation pursuant to this Subsection (G)(1) shall follow the
review and appeal procedures set forth in Subsections (H) and (I).
2. The liquor license of a licensed premises subject to Section
600.280(A)(11) that does not have receipts of greater than fifty
percent (50%) of gross receipts of which are derived from the sale
of prepared meals or food consumed on such premises shall be
revoked.
H. License Violation Review Procedures.
1. Notification of the point system as stated herein and a copy of this
Section 600.260 will be provided to each licensee by the Director of
Finance upon the issuance of a license.
2. Upon the receipt of an incident report or other evidence of a license
violation, the Commission shall follow the procedures set forth in
this Section.
a. The Commission will review the report and determine whether
there is probable cause to believe that a licensee, or an
employee or agent of a licensee, committed a license violation.
b. If the Commission determines that there is not probable cause
to believe that a licensee, or an employee or agent of a
licensee, committed a license violation, the Commission will
notify the licensee that the Commission will take no further
action with respect to that incident.
c. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter to the
contrary, if the Commission determines that there is probable
cause to believe that the conduct of a licensee, or an employee
or agent of a licensee, resulted in a liquor violation under
Subsection (D), the Commission may order the licensee to
undergo specialized liquor law enforcement training offered by
the City of St. Charles Police Department or another qualified
Law Enforcement Agency, in lieu of assessing points against a
liquor license. All officers, managers, employees and agents of
the licensee at the time of the Commission's determination
shall undergo such training.
d. If the Commission determines by a preponderance of the
evidence that a licensee, or an employee or agent of a licensee,
committed a license violation, the Commission will assess
points against the license(s) of the licensee in accordance with
this Section 600.280. The Commission will mail a copy of the
incident report to the liquor licensee along with a notification
of the points assessed against the applicable liquor license(s),
and the total of outstanding points assessed against such
license(s). When points assigned to a liquor license reach the
Section
600.260
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
600.260
100:1408
significant or major category, the Commission may suspend or
revoke the license.
e. Any written appeal of the assessment of points against a liquor
license must be filed with the Director of Finance by the
licensee within ten (10) calendar days of the licensee's receipt
of notification of the assessment of points. The appeal will be
heard by the Commission pursuant to the hearing procedure
under Subsection (I).
I. Hearing Procedures.
1. The Commission, after not less than ten (10) days' notice to the
licensee, shall conduct an evidentiary administrative hearing. The
notice of the hearing date and time shall be served upon the
licensee by leaving a copy at the licensed premises or by mailing
the notice by certified mail to the licensee at the licensed premises.
2. The licensee shall appear in person and may appear with legal
counsel, to present evidence to produce witnesses, to examine
witnesses, cross-examine and impeach witnesses. Witnesses may
appear voluntarily and testify. Before any witness shall testify, the
witness shall be sworn to testify under oath by any person
authorized by law to administer oaths. The hearing shall be
transcribed by a court reporter or stenographer. The technical
rules of evidence shall not apply, except the Commission may
exclude evidence which is irrelevant or repetitious. Each party is
entitled to present oral arguments or written briefs at or after the
hearing. The cost for the transcription of the hearing shall be paid
by the party requesting the transcript.
3. The Commission shall make written findings of fact and conclusions
of law within sixty (60) calendar days of the hearing. Such findings
shall be based upon competent and substantial evidence contained
in the hearing record as a whole. A copy of the Commission
decision, findings of fact and conclusions of law shall be delivered
to the City Clerk and to the licensee.
4. Judicial review of a decision of the Commission shall be by writ of
certiorari in the Circuit Court of St. Charles County, Missouri.
[Ord. No. 18-273, 12-18-2018]
J. When points assigned to a liquor license reach the minor category, the
Commission may require the licensee and employees to complete the
specialized training set forth in Subsection (H)(2)(c) or may place the
licensee on probationary status. When points assigned to a liquor
license reach the significant category, the Commission may suspend the
license. When points assigned to a liquor license reach the major
category, the Commission may suspend or revoke the license. If the
Commission elects to suspend or revoke the liquor license, it shall
proceed with notice and a hearing pursuant to Subsection (I).
Section
600.260
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
600.270
100:1409
Section 600.270. Refund of License Fee Prohibited. [R.O. 2009
§115.33; CC 1981 §3-37; Ord. No. 87-116, 6-5-1987; Ord. No. 08-21,
1-24-2008]
In case any license issued under the provisions of this Chapter is revoked,
surrendered or forfeited by the licensee, not used or used for only part of
the license period, after the effective beginning date of such license, no
refund of any license fee or part thereof shall be made.
Section 600.280. Limitations On Granting Licenses. [R.O. 2009
§115.34; CC 1981 §3-38; Ord. No. 87-116, 6-5-1987; Ord. No. 88-59,
4-13-1988; Ord. No. 88-130, 7-7-1988; Ord. No. 89-138, 7-12-1989;
Ord. No. 93-169, 7-21-1993; Ord. No. 94-185, 7-27-1994; Ord. No.
94-324, 12-7-1994; Ord. No. 95-3, 1-4-1995; Ord. No. 95-309,
11-8-1995; Ord. No. 96-5, 1-16-1996; Ord. No. 96-42, 2-21-1996;
Ord. No. 98-208, 5-14-1998; Ord. No. 00-246, 9-21-2000; Ord. No.
00-328, 12-1-2000; Ord. No. 01-42, 2-26-2001; Ord. No. 01-167,
7-19-2001; Ord. No. 04-1, 1-7-2004; Ord. No. 04-44, 2-23-2004; Ord.
No. 08-21, 1-24-2008; Ord. No. 08-139, 7-16-2008; Ord. No. 08-208,
10-8-2008; Ord. No. 09-39, 2-23-2009; Ord. No. 10-132 §1,
6-16-2010; Ord. No. 11-097 §1, 5-20-2011; Ord. No. 12-201 §1,
11-8-2012]
A. Criteria And Limitations. The granting of liquor licenses shall be
determined according to the following criteria and limitations and are
to be interpreted and applied independently of one another and of the
conditional use permit requirements of Chapter 400 of this Code.
1. No liquor license shall be granted to any person in relation to any
premises located within zoning districts "R-1C," "R-1E," "R-2,"
"R-3A," "R1-D," "R-M" or "O-I". This section shall not apply to Cityowned
property used for park purposes. [Ord. No. 13-144 §1,
8-6-2013; Ord. No. 18-110, 5-1-2018]
2. Within each separate and distinct geographical area bearing a
district "C-1," "SMPD" or "HCD" zoning classification, no more than
one (1) liquor license shall be granted in proportion to each twentyfive
(25) businesses located within such area.
3. Within each separate and distinct geographical area bearing a
district "FHCD," "CBD," "C-2" or "C-3" zoning classification, no
more than one (1) liquor license shall be granted in proportion to
each fifteen (15) businesses located within such area. This
restriction shall not apply to a license application for a business
containing at least thirty thousand (30,000) square feet. [Ord. No.
18-110, 5-1-2018]
4. Within each separate and distinct geographical area bearing a
district "I-1" zoning classification, no more than one (1) liquor
license shall be granted in proportion to each twenty (20)
businesses located within such area.
Section
600.270
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
600.280
100:1410
5. Within each separate and distinct geographical area bearing a
district "I-2" zoning classification, no more than one (1) liquor
license shall be granted in proportion to each twenty-five (25)
businesses located within such area.
6. No liquor license shall be granted to any person for any premises if
the property line of the premises sought to be licensed is less than
three hundred (300) feet from the property line of any property
used as a hospital, school or church or from the property line of any
property in a residential zoning district or a zoning district bearing
an "HCD" or "O-I" classification, unless the applicant for the license
shall first obtain the consent of the City Council. Such consent shall
not be granted until at least ten (10) days' written notice has been
provided to all owners of property within three hundred (300) feet
of the proposed licensed premises. The three hundred (300) foot
restriction contained herein shall only apply to license applications
filed on or after January 1, 2001 for premises for which no license
has previously been issued under Chapter 600 of this Code. [Ord.
No. 18-201, 9-25-2018]
7. Applicability of criteria. [Ord. No. 18-201, 9-25-2018]
a. The criteria and limitations enumerated in Subsections (A)(1)
through (A)(6) shall not apply to an application for a liquor
license restaurant or for any existing private, non-profit,
fraternal or veteran organization at its location, as of the
effective date of this Section.
b. The criteria and limitations contained in Subsections (A)(2)
through (A)(6) shall not apply to licenses for the sale of
intoxicating liquor or malt liquor, when the license is for the
sale at retail in the original package and not for consumption
upon the premises, by those types of businesses listed and
subject to the conditions in Section 600.290.
c. The term "one liquor license", as used in Subsections (A)(2)
through (A)(5) shall not include licenses for the sale of
intoxicating liquor or malt liquor, when the license is for the
sale at retail, in the original package and not for consumption
upon the premises.
d. The criteria and limitations in Subsection (A)(6) shall not apply
to an application for a liquor license in that area of the City
within zoning district "PD-MU" and consisting of
approximately a six hundred thirty-seven and nine-tenths
(637.9) acre tract of land located between New Town
Boulevard and Boschertown Road south of Highway B and
commonly known as The New Town at St. Charles.
8. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section to the contrary,
liquor licenses in effect on the date of passage of this Chapter may
Section
600.280
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
600.280
100:1411
be renewed or transferred and new applications may be made for
such locations if no license has been revoked or has otherwise
lapsed for thirty (30) days, except this paragraph shall be of no
force or effect when Subsection (A)(10)(b)(1) is applicable. [Ord.
No. 18-061, 3-20-2018; Ord. No. 18-201, 9-25-2018]
9. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section to the contrary, one
(1) license for wine making or one (1) license for the brewing of
beer may be issued within each separate and distinct geographical
area bearing one (1) of the zoning classifications listed in
Subsections (A)(1) through (A)(5), if there are fewer than the
minimum number of businesses required by the applicable
Subsection. This Subsection (A)(9) shall apply only to buildings
which are historically significant as previously being used for
brewery or winery purposes and only when the City Council finds
that the issuance of the license will not be detrimental to the
neighborhood. [Ord. No. 18-201, 9-25-2018]
10. After January 4, 1995, only those establishments which are granted
licenses pursuant to Sections 600.190(A)(12), (13) and (14) and
qualify as a restaurant bar as defined in Section 600.010 may sell
intoxicating liquor in the Historic Downtown District. [Ord. No.
18-021, 2-6-2018; Ord. No. 18-061, 3-20-2018; Ord. No.
18-201, 9-25-2018]
a. Upon the grant of licenses issued pursuant to Sections
600.190(A)(12), (13) and (14), a restaurant bar may operate in
the Historic Downtown District for a period not to exceed
ninety (90) days from the date of issuance of the liquor license
if it can demonstrate that it is more likely than not that it shall
have from the date the above licenses are issued receipts from
prepared meals or food consumed on the premises of greater
than fifty percent (50%) of gross receipts or not less than two
hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00); except that effective
January 1, 2019, receipts from the sale of prepared meals or
food consumed on the premises of greater than fifty percent
(50%) of gross receipts shall exclusively be required for a
restaurant bar in the Historic Downtown District.
The ninety (90) day period to demonstrate greater than fifty
percent (50%) of gross receipts from the sale of prepared
meals or food consumed on the premises requirement may be
extended one (1) time for an additional ninety-day period by
the Director of Finance. After the expiration of the ninety (90)
day period or the additional ninety (90) day period, the licensee
is required to comply with the greater than fifty percent (50%)
of gross receipts from the sale of prepared meals or food
consumed on the premises requirement of this Subsection
(A)(10). Failure to meet the greater than fifty percent (50%)
of gross receipts from the sale of prepared meals or food
consumed on the premises requirement after the second ninety
Section
600.280
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
600.280
100:1412
(90) days shall result in revocation of the liquor license.
Compliance with the requirements of this Subsection (A)(10)
shall be shown by the licensee filing with the Finance
Department a report of monthly receipts from the sale of
prepared meals or food consumed on the premises and
monthly receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages for a
calendar year. The annual report shall be filed by no later than
February 28 for the previous calendar year. The ninety (90)
day and additional ninety (90) day report shall be filed by no
later than thirty (30) days after the expiration of the ninety
(90) day and additional ninety (90) day period. The report shall
be signed by the licensee and report preparer under penalty
of perjury on a form prescribed by the Finance Department.
It shall be the responsibility of the Finance Department to
verify compliance with this Subsection (A)(10). The Finance
Department or its designee may audit any licensee or licensed
premises to verify compliance with this Subsection (A)(10). As
an alternative to the Finance Department audit, the Director
of Finance may require a licensee to have an audit performed
at the licensee's sole cost and expense, by a licensed Certified
Public Accountant to certify and attest under penalty of perjury
of compliance with this Subsection (A)(10). Nothing herein
shall be construed to prohibit the Finance Department from
conducting and audit to verify compliance. Every licensee shall
keep and maintain its books and records for a period of at
least three (3) years after the expiration of each license to
verify compliance with this Subsection (A)(10). Such books
and records shall consist of, at a minimum, sales ledgers,
prenumbered guest checks, cash register tapes, paid invoices
for all food and alcoholic beverage purchases, and cancelled
checks or vendor receipts evidencing payment for all food and
alcoholic beverage purchases. Every licensee shall produce its
books and records to the Finance Department upon request
and by the date requested. The duty to maintain books and
records sufficient to perform an audit of a licensee shall be
upon the licensee. Failure of a licensee to keep and produce
its books and records by the date requested shall result in
revocation of the liquor license. Failure of a licensee to have
receipts from the sale of prepared meals or food consumed
on the premises of greater than fifty percent (50%) of annual
gross receipts for a license year shall result in revocation of
the liquor license or shall result in non-renewal of the liquor
license. The licensee shall have the burden of proof by
competent and substantial evidence based upon the whole
record and the burden of going forward with the evidence of
compliance with this Subsection (A)(10).
b. Continued operation of an establishment within the Historic
Downtown District licensed pursuant to and in accordance
with this Chapter shall be contingent upon:
Section
600.280
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
600.280
100:1413
Section 600.290. Restrictions On Package Sales License. [R.O. 2009
§115.35; CC 1981 §§3-40—3-41; Ord. No. 87-116, 6-5-1987; Ord. No.
08-21, 1-24-2008; Ord. No. 11-097 §1, 5-20-2011; Ord. No. 13-059
§1, 3-10-2013; Ord. No. 16-111 §1, 5-17-2016]
No license applied for pursuant to this Chapter shall be issued for the sale
of intoxicating liquor in the original package, not to be consumed upon the
premises where sold, except to a person engaged in and which license shall
be used in connection with the operation of one (1) or more of the following
businesses: a drug store, a cigar and tobacco store, a general merchandise
store, a grocery store, a liquor store, a gas or automobile products or
service store, nor to any such person who does not have and keep in his/
her store a stock of goods having a value, according to invoices, of at least
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), exclusive of fixtures, intoxicating liquors,
gasoline, petroleum products and automotive parts and supplies and have
a display area containing no less than one thousand two hundred (1,200)
square feet, exclusive of storage rooms and walk-in refrigeration coolers,
except that a general merchandise store in the Historic Commercial District
or the Frenchtown Historic Commercial District shall have a display area
containing no less than six hundred fifty (650) square feet.
Section 600.300. Boats and Vessels. [R.O. 2009 §115.36; CC 1981
§3-42; Ord. No. 87-116, 6-5-1987; Ord. No. 08-21, 1-24-2008]
(1) Possession of licenses granted pursuant to Sections
600.190(A)(12), (13) and (14); except that the following
locations: 130 South Main Street and 218 North Main
Street shall be required to maintain licenses issued
pursuant to Sections 600.190(A)(12) and (13), and
provided said licenses for the above locations are applied
for before the June 30 expiration date of the then current
licenses, or within thirty (30) days after the day the then
current licensee ceases doing business at the licensed
premises, whichever occurs first. For purposes of this
Subsection, the words "ceases doing business" means the
tenth day of ten (10) consecutive days for which the then
current licensee has not sold intoxicating liquor.
A. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter to the contrary,
any person who possesses the qualifications required by this Chapter
and who meets the requirements of and complies with the provisions of
this Chapter may apply for and the City may issue a license to sell
intoxicating liquor, as defined in this Chapter, by the drink at retail for
consumption on the premises of any boat or other vessel licensed by the
United States Coast Guard to carry one hundred (100) or more
passengers for hire on navigable waters in or adjacent to the City, which
has a regular place of mooring in a location in this City or within two
hundred (200) yards of a location which would otherwise be licensable
under this Chapter. The license shall be valid even though the boat or
Section
600.280
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
600.300
100:1414
other vessel leaves its regular place of mooring during the course of its
operation.
B. For every license for sale of liquor by the drink at retail for consumption
on the premises of any boat or other vessel issued under the provisions
of this Section, the licensee shall pay to the Director of Finance the sum
of four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) per year.
Section
600.300
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
600.300
100:1415
Chapter 605
GENERAL LICENSING AND TAXATION PROVISIONS
Cross References—As to fireworks, sale of—licensing, §215.1100; as to
mobile home park license, §§415.020—415.030; as to solid waste collection
contracts, §§245.190 et seq.; as to street, sidewalk and curb construction
permits, §§505.240 et seq.; as to taxation generally, ch. 140; as to
wastewater discharge permit, §§710.150 et seq.
Charter References—As to financial procedures—taxation, charter art. VIII;
as to objects of licensing, taxation and regulation, charter art. XIII.
Section
600.300
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
600.300
100:1416
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 605.010. Enumeration of Occupations, Businesses and The
Like. [R.O. 2009 §110.001; CC 1981 §16-1; Ord. No. 80-37,
3-25-1980; Ord. No. 83-115, 12-21-1983; Ord. No. 19-198,
10-1-2019]
A. The following occupations, trades, businesses, subjects, callings,
vocations and professions shall be required to procure a license to do
business in the City:
Abstract agencies,
Accountants,
Addressing agencies,
Advertising agencies,
Advertising (radio and television),
Alarm service and installation,
Ambulance and hearse services,
Amusement parks,
Animal groomers,
Appliance repair,
Appraisers,
Architects,
Artists,
Associations,
Auctioneers,
Audio-visual producers,
Auto accessory dealers,
Auto dealers,
Bakeries,
Bakers,
Banks,
Barbers,
Barbershops,
Bathhouses,
Billiard halls,
Billing services,
Billposters,
Boarding houses,
Section
605.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
605.010
100:1417
Bookbinders,
Bookkeepers,
Bottling works,
Bowling alleys,
Boxing exhibitions,
Brokers,
Building contractors,
Buses,
Business offices,
Butchers,
Canvassers,
Carnivals,
Cigar and tobacco stands,
Circuses,
Cleaning establishments,
Clubs,
Coal dealers,
Collection agencies,
Commercial artists,
Computer sales and repair,
Concerts,
Confectioners,
Consultants,
Contractors,
Counselors,
Crating services,
Dance halls,
Data processing services,
Delivery companies,
Delivery trucks,
Demolition experts,
Designers,
Detectives,
Drug stores,
Dye workers,
Electric companies,
Electrical motor repair,
Section
605.010
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
605.010
100:1418
Embalmers,
Employment offices,
Engineers,
Equestrian performers,
Exhibitions,
Express companies,
Fairs,
Ferry services,
Fire extinguisher rechargers,
Florists,
Foundries,
Gas companies,
Glass board-up,
Grocers,
Guard and patrol services,
Health schools,
Health spas,
Hearse services,
Hotels,
Hucksters,
Ice cream parlors,
Ice cream stands,
Ice plants,
Insurance agent who maintains the office,
Insurance companies,
Intelligence agencies,
Inventory services,
Job printing plants,
Junk dealers,
Laboratories,
Landscapers,
Laundries,
Lawn maintenance,
Loan companies,
Lumberyards,
Lunch stands,
Lunch wagons,
Section
605.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
605.010
100:1419
Machine shops,
Manufacturers,
Masseurs,
Medical examiners,
Mercantile agents,
Meteorologists,
Miniature golf courses,
Modeling agencies,
Monument dealers,
Motor repair (airplane, electrical, small engines, marine),
Movies,
Museums,
Newspaper offices,
Nursery stock agents,
Office buildings,
Oil and gas stations,
Outdoor advertising,
Packaging services,
Packing services,
Painting contractors,
Parades,
Paving contractors,
Pawnbrokers,
Peanut and popcorn stands,
Peddlers,
Photographers,
Plasterers,
Plumbers,
Pollution contractors,
Polygraph services,
Poultry dealers,
Produce,
Public buildings,
Halls and grounds,
Public lecturers and meetings,
Public stenographers,
Radio advertising,
Section
605.010
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
605.010
100:1420
Radio stations,
Real estate agents and brokers,
Recording studios,
Research laboratories,
Retail merchants,
Restaurants,
Sand plants,
Sanitation services,
Septic tank services,
Shoe cobblers,
Shoe shine parlors,
Shooting galleries,
Short term rental property,
Shows,
Sidewalk contractors,
Sign painters,
Small appliance repair,
Small motor repair,
Snow removal,
Soft drink establishments,
Storage and warehousing,
Street contractors,
Street exhibitions,
Subcontractors,
Swimming pool installation,
Repair and cleaning,
Tailors,
Taverns,
Taxicabs,
Taxi companies,
Taxidermists,
Telephone answering,
Telephone companies,
Theatrical exhibitions,
Tree trimmers and cutters,
Transfer trucks,
Translators,
Section
605.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
605.010
100:1421
Section 605.020. License Required.503 [R.O. 2009 §110.002; CC 1981
§16-2; Ord. No. 80-37, 3-25-1980; Ord. No. 83-115, 12-21-1983; Ord.
No. 96-54, 2-21-1996]
No person shall engage in any occupation, trade, business, subject, calling,
vocation or profession expressly named in Section 605.010 or impliedly
encompassed within Section 605.010 by reason of engaging in a trade,
business, subject, calling, vocation, profession or like occupation as those
expressed in Section 605.010 without first obtaining from the Director of
Finance a license upon the payment of a license fee as provided in this Title.
Section 605.030. License and License Fee Prerequisite To Doing
Business.504 [R.O. 2009 §110.003; CC 1981 §16-12; Ord. No. 83-115,
12-21-1983; Ord. No. 16-170 §1, 9-6-2016]
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal or agent, to pursue,
conduct, carry on or operate within the City any calling, trade, business,
Undertakers,
Vendors,
Wall paper contractors,
Warehouses,
Wholesale houses and merchants,
Wood dealers.
B. No person following for a livelihood the profession or calling of minister
of the gospel, duly accredited Christian Science practitioner, teacher,
professor in a college, priest, lawyer, certified public accountant,
dentist, chiropractor, optometrist, chiropodist, or physician or surgeon
in this City shall be taxed or made liable to pay any municipal or other
corporation tax or license fee of any description whatever for the
privilege of following or carrying on such profession or calling, and
after December 31, 2003, no investment funds service corporation as
defined in Section 143.451, RSMo., may be required to pay any such
license fee in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00)
annually, any law, ordinance or Charter to the contrary
notwithstanding.
C. No person following for a livelihood the profession of insurance agent
or broker, veterinarian, architect, professional engineer, land surveyor,
auctioneer, or real estate broker or salesman in this City shall be taxed
or made liable to pay any municipal or other corporation tax or license
fee for the privilege of following or carrying on his/her profession
unless that person maintains a business office within the City of St.
Charles.
503. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
504. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
605.010
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
605.030
100:1422
vocation, occupation or profession mentioned in Section 605.160 without
paying the license fee fixed in this Chapter and obtaining the license as
required and prescribed by this Chapter, subject to regulations hereinafter
provided. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day any
person conducts business without a license.
Section 605.040. Payment of License Fee Prerequisite To Issuance
of License.505 [R.O. 2009 §110.004; CC 1981 §16-13; Ord. No.
83-115, 12-21-1983]
No license provided for in this Chapter shall be issued until the amount
prescribed as fee therefor shall have been paid to the Director of Finance
as provided in this Chapter.
Section 605.050. Payment of Personal Tax and Merchants' Ad
Valorem Tax Prerequisite To Issuance.506 [R.O. 2009 §110.005; CC
1981 §16-14; Ord. No. 83-115, 12-21-1983]
Section 605.060. Application.507 [R.O. 2009 §110.006; CC 1981
§16-15; Ord. No. 78-24, 4-5-1978; Ord. No. 83-115, 12-21-1983]
All licenses issued under the provision of this Chapter shall be issued only
upon an application form supplied by the Director of Finance and prepared
by the applicant or his/her duly authorized agent.
Section 605.070. License Period. [R.O. 2009 §110.007; CC 1981
§16-16; Ord. No. 80-37, 3-25-1980; Ord. No. 83-115, 12-21-1983;
Ord. No. 92-40, 3-18-1992]
The license required by this Chapter shall be effective from January first
(1st) through December thirty-first (31st) in a given calendar year. Renewal
applications and fees shall be filed on or before January first (1st).
A. No license provided for or required under the provisions of this Code of
Ordinances or any other ordinance of the City shall be issued by the
City to any person until the personal tax and merchants ad valorem tax
for the year next preceding the year for which such license is issued
shall first have been paid.
B. It shall be the duty of the Director of Finance to establish and
promulgate rules and regulations relative to an orderly method of
checking unpaid City personal taxes and merchants' ad valorem taxes
in order to determine the amounts thereof due and owing to the City by
such applicant.
505. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
506. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
507. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
605.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
605.080
100:1423
Section 605.080. Transfer and Assignment — Doing Business At
More Than One Place.508 [R.O. 2009 §110.008; CC 1981 §16-17; Ord.
No. 83-115, 12-20-1983; Ord. No. 99-380, 11-4-1999]
No license provided for in this Chapter shall be assigned or transferred,
except by permission of the Finance Director in case the licensee sells
his/her stock of goods to a person continuing the business at the same
place, nor shall any such license authorize the holder thereof to do business
thereunder at more than one (1) place at the same time.
Section 605.090. License Certificate. [R.O. 2009 §110.009; CC 1981
§16-18; Ord. No. 83-115, 12-21-1983; Ord. No. 13-127§2, 7-2-2013]
Upon payment of the license fee, the Director of Finance shall issue a
license designating the year for which the license is issued and a number
identical with the number of the application and such other information
as may be required. It shall be the duty of the licensee to display such
certificate conspicuously in the place of business or within the vehicle or
machine for which the same was issued, and the certificate shall not be used
for any other place of business, vehicle or machine.
Section 605.100. Two or More Businesses At One Location.509 [R.O.
2009 §110.010; CC 1981 §16-19; Ord. No. 83-115, 12-21-1983]
Except as otherwise specially provided in this Chapter, when two (2) or
more businesses are operated together at the same place or stand by the
same person, such person shall pay but one (1) license fee under the
provisions of this Chapter, which shall be the license fee that is paid upon
the branch of the business for which the highest license fee is imposed.
Section 605.110. Agents and Like, Carrying On Unlicensed
Business and The Like.510 [R.O. 2009 §110.011; CC 1981 §16-20;
Ord. No. 83-115, 12-21-1983]
Where any person is prohibited from carrying on any business, trade,
calling, vocation or profession without paying for and obtaining a license
therefor as provided in this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for any servant,
agent, officer or employee of such person to conduct or carry on or aid
in conducting or carrying on such business, trade, calling, vocation or
profession or any part thereof for which the required license has not first
been obtained as required.
Section 605.120. Free Licenses. [R.O. 2009 §110.012; CC 1981
§16-21; Ord. No. 80-37, 3-25-1980; Ord. No. 83-115, 12-21-1983;
Ord. No. 92-58, 4-14-1992; Ord. No. 93-166, 7-21-1993]
508. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
509. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
510. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
605.080
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
605.120
100:1424
Section 605.130. Proration of License For New Businesses. [R.O.
2009 §110.013; CC 1981 §16-22; Ord. No. 83-115, 12-21-1983]
License fees will be reduced by one-half (½) after one-half (½) of license
period is past. This does not apply to retail merchants whose fees are based
on gross sales.
Section 605.140. Inspections — Enforcement Authority — Registers.
[R.O. 2009 §110.014; CC 1981 §16-23; Ord. No. 83-115, 12-21-1983;
Ord. No. 90-253, 9-21-1990; Ord. No. 95-46, 2-16-1995]
A. No free licenses shall be granted or rebates allowed for any cause or
any sum accepted less than the amount specified in this Chapter or any
license issued for a shorter period of time than provided in this Chapter.
Upon petition to and action by the City Council, the City may allow
exceptions to this Section and authorize free licenses or rebates
hereunder by applicants upon satisfactory evidence of unavoidable
misfortune or poverty on the part of the applicant.
B. No license fee under this Chapter shall be charged to schools or to
fraternal, civic, service, veteran, religious or charitable organizations.
A. It shall be the duty of the Director of Finance to collect all monies for
licenses issued under the provisions of this Chapter and to keep an
accurate register of all such licenses issued by him/her in such form as
will clearly show what licenses are in force, to whom issued, the
occupation, business, object or subject for which issued, the term for
which issued and the amount paid.
B. The Director of Finance and/or the Chief of Police may enter every
place of business subject to license under this Chapter within the City,
during normal business hours, to ascertain whether such place of
business is operating in conformity with the terms specified in this
Chapter.
C. The Director of Finance and/or the Chief of Police may inspect the
operations of any person found pursuing, carrying on or operating any
calling, trade, business, vocation, occupation or profession mentioned
in this Chapter.
D. Whenever, in accordance with Section 144.083(1), RSMo., the State
retail sales license of a business has been revoked by the Missouri
Director of Revenue and pursuant to Section 144.083(2), RSMo., the
business license issued by authority of this Chapter is rendered null and
void, the Director of Finance may order the business to cease further
sales in the City. It shall be a violation of this Chapter for a business to
continue retail sales after an order to cease further sales in the City has
been issued by the Director of Finance. If a business continues retail
sales after an order to cease has been issued by the Director of Finance,
the City Attorney is authorized to seek an injunction, in addition to
Section
605.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
605.140
100:1425
Section 605.150. Late Payment Penalties.511 [R.O. 2009 §110.015;
CC 1981 §16-24; Ord. No. 83-115, 12-21-1983; Ord. No. 96-252,
9-11-1996]
Section 605.160. License Fees For Certain Occupations.512 [R.O.
2009 §110.016; CC 1981 §16-25; Ord. No. 76-65, 8-18-1976; Ord.
No. 80-37, 3-25-1980; Ord. No. 81-17, 3-4-1981; Ord. No. 82-34,
5-19-1982; Ord. No. 82-43, 6-4-1982; Ord. No. 83-9, 2-2-1983; Ord.
No. 83-115, 12-21-1983; Ord. No. 85-41, 4-17-1985; Ord. No.
85-176, 10-16-1985; Ord. No. 87-32, 2-7-1987; Ord. No. 87-104,
5-20-1987; Ord. No. 88-117, 6-23-1988; Ord. No. 89-73, 5-4-1989;
Ord. No. 90-175, 7-5-1990; Ord. No. 93-166, 7-21-1993; Ord. No.
96-58, 2-21-1996; Ord. No. 97-241, 8-5-1997; Ord. No. 99-418,
12-22-1999; Ord. No. 19-198, 10-1-2019]
Every person engaged in an occupation, trade, business, subject, calling,
vocation or profession provided herein below within the City shall pay the
license fee set out herein, which shall be an annual fee unless otherwise
specifically stated and, further, be subject to any regulation stated therein:
Accountant, bookkeepers, inventory $50.00
Addressing, billing, telephone answering, data processing and
public stenographer $50.00
Agencies:
Advertising agencies, designers, taxidermists $50.00
Commercial artists $50.00
Employment, personnel placement, entertainment
bureaus, modeling agencies $50.00
Radio or television advertising, audio-visual producers and
recording studios $50.00
Ticket or travel $50.00
other remedies, from the Circuit Court of the County to prohibit the
business from making further retail sales.
A. Any person delinquent in the payment of the required business license
shall pay a late payment penalty as follows:
1. A flat charge of ten dollars ($10.00), plus;
2. Five percent (5%) of the license fee for the first (1st) month
delinquent and one percent (1%) of the license fee for each month
thereafter. A maximum of ten percent (10%) of the license fee may
be charged.
511. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
512. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
605.140
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
605.160
100:1426
Agents:
Agricultural and farm machinery $50.00
Canvassing agent $50.00
Collecting agent $50.00
Clothing agent $50.00
Directory $50.00
Insurance agent who maintains an office within the City
limits $50.00
Mercantile agent $50.00
Nursery stock agent $50.00
Oil agent, seller of oil, gasoline, coal oil or other fuel oil $50.00
Photography $50.00
Real estate agent who maintains an office within the City
limits $50.00
Sewing machine agent $50.00
Ambulance or hearse services $50.00
Appliance repair $50.00
Architects $200.00
Artists $50.00
Associations and clubs $50.00
Auction houses $500.00
Auctioneer:
Every auctioneer who shall maintain a business office
within the City limits, per year, plus $25.00 per day for
each auction
$100.00
Banks, banking corporations and trust companies $1,000.00
Barbers, per shop $50.00
Barge lines $100.00
Beauty parlors, per shop $50.00
Billiard or pool halls $100.00
Bill poster:
Any person who furnishes billboards or other structures
for posting, painting, pasting or fastening thereon for hire
or compensation, any bill, lithograph, print, painting or
sign used in whole or in part for advertising purposes:
Per square foot for each billboard located in the City $0.50
Minimum fee $25.00
Section
605.160
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
605.160
100:1427
Maximum fee $2,000.00
But such fee shall not exceed an amount equal to $100.00
per outdoor advertising structure of the bill poster.
Blacksmith $25.00
Bowling alleys $200.00
Plus, per alley, for each additional alley in excess of ten
(10) $10.00
Broker:
Bond, stocks, merchandise, produce $100.00
Real estate, who maintains an office in the City limits $50.00
All others who maintain an office in the City limits $50.00
Building contractors:
Commercial:
General contractor $300.00
Subcontractor $200.00
Remodeling and improvement contractors $100.00
Residential:
General contractor $300.00
Subcontractor $200.00
Remodeling and improvement contractors $100.00
Building specialists, blasting services, sanitation engineers,
septic tank installation, removal and cleaning, landscaping,
lawn maintenance, tree cutting, paving, well drilling, window
cleaning, sign painting, snow removal, swimming pool repair
and cleaning, demolition
$50.00
Business offices $50.00
Carnivals, circuses, menageries and the like:
Wild west show, carnival shows, street fairs, per week $250.00
Transient shows of every kind, given or held in a tent or in
the open air, per week $250.00
Circuses, per day $250.00
Cleaning establishments:
Carpet, floor, window, wall and furniture $50.00
Clothing, dry cleaning and pressing $50.00
All others not already licensed $50.00
Commercial vehicles:
Laundry trucks, each $50.00
Section
605.160
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
605.160
100:1428
Express trucks and other delivery trucks, each $50.00
Moving vans and trucks, each $50.00
Consultant, counselor, appraiser $50.00
Dance halls $50.00
Engineers $200.00
Express companies $50.00
Exterminators $50.00
Flour mills $100.00
Freestanding surgical centers $100.00
Furniture repair and stripping $50.00
Garages:
Any person engaged in the business of storage, washing,
servicing or repairing motor vehicles $75.00
Guard and patrol services $50.00
Horse-drawn carriage, per year, plus 50% of special business
district license fees $35.00
Hotels, motels and rooming houses:
Any house or building where persons are offered or
furnished either rooms or room and board for
compensation paid or to be paid therefore and having
more than 6 rooms for the use of paying guests, per room
$8.00
Job printing plants $50.00
Laundries $50.00
Loan companies:
Any person engaged in the business of making loans, not
provided for elsewhere in this Section, shall be deemed to
be operating a loan company, irrespective of whether such
business is formed as a corporation, partnership,
association, stock company or otherwise and shall pay a
license fee
$100.00
Mail order business $50.00
Miniature golf links $50.00
Monument dealers $50.00
Motor repair $50.00
Newspaper offices $200.00
Novelties $50.00
Oil and gasoline stations $100.00
Packing and crating services $50.00
Section
605.160
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
605.160
100:1429
Peddlers $50.00
Photographers $50.00
Pollution controllers research labs, meteorologists, medical
examiners, embalmers $50.00
Produce dealers $50.00
Radio or television stations $200.00
Shoe cobbling shops $35.00
Short term rental property $8.00
Skating rinks $50.00
Soft drink vendors $50.00
Stands in public places $50.00
Storage, per year, base fee, plus $2.00 per storage unit $100.00
Theaters, halls and the like:
A place of public amusement where admission is charged:
500 seats or less $250.00
Over 500 seats $500.00
Tinners $50.00
Translators and interpreters $50.00
Undertakers $300.00
Vending machines, per year, per machine $10.00
Warehouses $100.00
Warehouses maintained as ancillary use to a retail business $50.00
Waste haulers $50.00
Wholesale houses and/or merchants $100.00
Section 605.170. Manufacturing and Other Corporations or
Institutions.513 [R.O. 2009 §110.017; CC 1981 §16-26; Ord. No.
80-37, 3-25-1980; Ord. No. 83-9, 2-2-1983; Ord. No. 83-115,
12-21-1983; Ord. No. 96-252, 9-11-1996]
A. Every manufacturing and other corporation or institution shall pay an
annual license fee based upon the amount of square footage of business
premises occupied by said manufacturing business.
B. For purposes of computation of the license fee provided for herein, the
term "square footage" shall include the actual square footage as
determined by the Mayor and City Council or their designee from
building permits, plans and the like on record or other credible
evidence of each building, structure establishment or facility used for
513. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
605.160
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
605.170
100:1430
Section 605.180. Billboard Defined.514 [R.O. 2009 §110.018; CC
1981 §16-3]
As used in this Chapter, the word "billboard" shall mean any structure
at least sixty (60) square feet in area or portion thereof upon which an
advertisement is placed, painted or printed, advertising a person, thing or
product not located or sold on the lot upon which the billboard is located.
Section 605.190. Bed and Breakfast Establishments. [R.O. 2009
§110.019; Ord. No. 96-119, 4-22-1996]
the manufacturing, selling, showing or storage of merchandise or the
transaction or conduct of any business or commercial pursuit
whatsoever. However, the term "square footage" shall not include any
area used exclusively for customer or employee parking of vehicles.
Further, any area not under roof that is used for business purposes shall
be included within the meaning of the term "square footage" as defined
herein; but for purposes of computation of aggregate square footage
for application of the license fee promoted herein, such area shall be
taxed at one-half (½) the normal rate provided below, based upon the
reduced amount of inspection, regulation and protection required for
such areas.
C. The license fee provided for herein shall be computed as follows:
Square Feet Flat Fee
0—1,000 $35.00
1,001—5,000 $75.00
5,001—10,000 $150.00
10,001 and over $200.00
D. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to require any manufacturing
corporation or institution paying the license fee required in this Section
to pay any additional business license fee under this Chapter, except
such vehicle license fee as may be prescribed by this Chapter or any
other ordinance of the City and excepting such ad valorem tax as may
be assessed and levied by ordinance.
A. Definition. For the purposes of this Section, the following word shall
have the following meaning:
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT — A building having not
more than six (6) guest rooms where travelers for compensation are
lodged for sleeping purposes and are provided a morning meal.
B. License. Any person engaging in the business of a bed and breakfast
establishment shall obtain a license. The fee for the business license for
two (2) rooms or less shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per year and
514. Cross Reference—As to billboard defined for zoning purposes, §400.1390.
Section
605.170
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
605.190
100:1431
for more than two (2) rooms shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per
year.
C. Qualifications.
1. The applicant for the license shall be, and shall remain through the
term of the license, in fact actively engaged in the actual control
and management of the particular bed and breakfast establishment
for which the license is sought.
2. No license shall be granted to any individual who owes any
delinquent taxes or fees to the City, unless the taxes or fees have
been challenged or contested in a court proceeding or in a manner
prescribed by law.
D. Licensing Procedure.
1. License application shall be filed with the Director of Finance.
2. The licensee shall file with the Director of Finance the name,
address and telephone number of one (1) or more persons
authorized to act for the licensee in emergencies. Failure to file and
to maintain throughout the term of the license accurate
information as required by this Section may result in suspension or
termination of the license.
3. A guest register shall be maintained.
4. The grant of the license may be conditioned upon the completion of
construction of the premises upon which sale is to be made within a
time period prescribed and upon compliance with all fire and
building codes and regulations.
5. The grant of the license shall be conditioned upon the provision of a
telephone for emergency use in each guest room or in a common
area. Emergency telephone numbers shall be available at all times
next to each such telephone. The list of emergency telephone
numbers shall include at least the contact number of the licensee or
representative and the emergency numbers for the Police and Fire
Department.
E. Safety Inspections. The bed and breakfast establishment shall be
inspected annually by the Fire Department and may be inspected
annually by the Department of City Development to determine
compliance with the safety requirements of the City Code. Failure to
comply with the safety requirements within thirty (30) days of written
notification may result in termination of the license.
Section
605.190
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
605.190
100:1432
ARTICLE II
Collection Procedures and Revocation of Business Licenses
Section 605.200. Purpose. [R.O. 2009 §110.030; CC 1981 §16-501;
Ord. No. 90-267, 10-17-1990; Ord. No. 13-189 §1, 10-1-2013]
This Article establishes administrative procedures for the collection of City
license fees or taxes provided for under this Title and provides for appeal of
an assessment or revocation.
Section 605.210. Determination of Failure To Pay — Notice. [R.O.
2009 §110.031; CC 1981 §16-502; Ord. No. 90-267, 10-17-1990; Ord.
No. 13-189 §1, 10-1-2013]
Whenever the Director of Finance determines that a person has failed
to pay a required license fee or tax under this Title, the Director shall
notify such person of this determination, which determination shall be an
assessment of the license fee or tax which is due and owing, plus any
penalties including interest. The notice of the Director of Finance shall
provide that the assessment shall become final ten (10) days after the date
that the notice of assessment is mailed by registered or certified mail or
delivered to the person or his/her registered agent.
Section 605.220. Mailing of Notices.515 [R.O. 2009 §110.032; CC
1981 §16-503; Ord. No. 90-267, 10-17-1990]
All licensees and applicants for licenses shall be required to designate on
their application or license a person and address for such person where
notices are to be mailed and the mailing of a registered or certified letter to
such location shall constitute notice under this Chapter.
Section 605.230. Estimate of Delinquent Tax — Penalty.516 [R.O.
2009 §110.033; CC 1981 §16-504; Ord. No. 90-267, 10-17-1990; Ord.
No. 13-189 §1, 10-1-2013]
If a person neglects to pay, refuses to pay or pays an incorrect amount for a
City license fee or tax as required by this Title, the Director of Finance shall
make an estimate based upon any information in his/her possession or that
may come into his/her possession of the amount of the delinquent license
fees or taxes for the period in respect to which such person failed to make
a proper return and payment and upon the basis of the estimated amount,
assess the license fee or tax payable by the delinquent, adding to such sum
a penalty as may be established by ordinance.
Section 605.240. Appeal and Hearings. [R.O. 2009 §110.034; CC
1981 §16-505; Ord. No. 90-267, 10-17-1990; Ord. No. 07-162,
6-11-2007; Ord. No. 13-189 §1, 10-1-2013]
515. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
516. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
605.200
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
605.240
100:1433
A. Appeal. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Director of Finance
to assess any license fee or tax or the revocation of any license pursuant
to the provisions of this Title shall have the right to appeal such action
to the Mayor or the Mayor's designee.
1. Application for appeal. Within ten (10) days of the mailing of such
notice of assessment or revocation to a person, such person may
file a written request for a hearing before the Mayor or the Mayor's
designee contesting such assessment or revocation. Such request
shall state with specificity the basis for the contest, and the relief
sought.
2. Hearing procedure. Where a hearing has been requested pursuant
to this Section, the Mayor or the Mayor's designee shall set the
matter for hearing within a reasonable time.
a. Notice of hearing.
(1) The Mayor or the Mayor's designee shall cause a copy of
the request for hearing and a notice of the date, time and
place of the hearing to be served upon the affected person
by registered or certified mail.
(2) The Mayor or the Mayor's designee shall deliver a copy of
the affected person's request for a hearing and a notice of
the date, time and place of the hearing upon the Director
of Finance.
b. Evidence, witnesses.
(1) Each party shall have the right to call and examine
witnesses, introduce exhibits, cross-examine opposing
witnesses and impeach any witness.
(2) Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation.
(3) All evidence shall be suitably recorded and preserved.
(4) The technical rules of evidence shall not apply, except the
Mayor or Mayor's designee may exclude evidence which is
irrelevant or repetitious.
(5) Each party shall be entitled to present oral arguments or
written briefs at or after the hearing.
B. Mayor Or Mayor's Designee's Final Order. After a hearing, the Mayor or
the Mayor's designee shall issue a final order based upon his/her
findings of fact and conclusions of law.
1. The Mayor or the Mayor's designee shall have the authority to
affirm, modify or reverse an assessment or revocation.
C. Findings. The Mayor or Mayor's designee shall make written findings of
fact and conclusions of law within ten (10) working days of the hearing.
Section
605.240
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
605.240
100:1434
Section 605.250. Revocation of License Upon Failure To Pay After
Final Decision — Reinstatement.517 [R.O. 2009 §110.035; CC 1981
§16-506; Ord. No. 90-267, 10-17-1990; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007;
Ord. No. 13-189 §1, 10-1-2013]
If a person fails to pay an assessment after a decision becomes final or after
a decision by the Mayor or Mayor's designee, whichever occurs first, then
the license of such person shall be revoked without further hearing five
(5) days after the Director of Finance mails such person a notice that the
license has been revoked, unless the person pays the City the delinquent
assessment, including penalties and interest to date, which money shall be
held for possible refund by the Director of Finance while the decision is on
appeal. Revocation of such license pursuant to provisions of this Section
is not appealable to any administrative body of the City, and such license
may only be reinstated by the person paying to the Director of Finance the
money due on the assessment, including all penalties and interest to date.
Section 605.255. Operation of Business After Revocation of License
Unlawful. [Ord. No. 13-189 §1, 10-1-2013]
A person/licensee whose license is revoked shall immediately discontinue
the business, occupation or activity for which the license was issued. It shall
be unlawful for a person/licensee to continue the business, occupation or
activity after revocation of the license becomes final. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day the person/licensee continues to do
business after a license revocation.
Section 605.260. License Suspension — Prostitution.518 [R.O. 2009
§110.036; CC 1981 §16-507; Ord. No. 94-5, 1-4-1994; Ord. No.
07-162, 6-11-2007]
Such findings shall be based upon competent and substantial evidence
found in the record as a whole. A copy of the Mayor or Mayor's
designee's order, his/her findings of fact and conclusions of law shall be
delivered to the affected person and Director of Finance.
D. Right Of Appeal. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Mayor or
Mayor's designee shall have the right to appeal to the Circuit Court
pursuant to Chapter 536 RSMo.
E. Collateral Actions To Enforce.
1. The City may institute a civil suit seeking injunctive relief and/or
damages where appropriate.
2. No civil judgment or any act by the City Attorney, the Director of
Finance or the licensee or other persons affected shall bar or
prevent a prosecution for each and every violation of this Article.
517. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
518. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
605.240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
605.260
100:1435
A. Conviction As Grounds For Suspension Or Revocation Of License. Any
person licensed pursuant to this Chapter, who is convicted of an activity
proscribed by Section 215.740(B) and who uses a City license in any
way whatsoever as a means to assist the person to engage in that
proscribed activity shall be subject to revocation or suspension of the
City license. Any licensee who is licensed pursuant to this Chapter, who
knowingly permits an employee, agent or other person associated with
the licensed activity to engage in an activity proscribed by Section
215.740(B) shall be subject to revocation or suspension of the City
license, if the proscribed activity is associated with the licensed activity
in any way whatsoever.
B. Conviction As Grounds For Denial Of License—Hearing. Any person
shall be prohibited from securing a business license if the City licensing
official determines that such person was convicted of an activity
prescribed by Section 215.740(B) and did use the activity required to be
licensed to assist the person to engage in the proscribed activity.
C. Hearing.
1. Notice. Any person who has been denied a license by the Director
under this Section, who is licensed and who has received a notice of
intent to suspend or revoke the license under this Section or who
has been denied a license under this Section may request a hearing
by the Mayor. Upon receipt of a timely written request for a
hearing, the Mayor, or a hearing examiner designated by the
Mayor, shall call a hearing and shall set forth in writing and send to
the applicant, licensee or permittee, by means of registered mail,
certified mail or hand delivery, notice that within a period of not
less than five (5) days nor more than fourteen (14) days from the
date of the posting of the notice, a hearing shall be conducted to
determine the existence of any facts which constitute grounds for
the denial, suspension or revocation of a license or permit. The
notification shall include the date, time and place of the hearing.
2. Conduct. The hearing shall be conducted by the Mayor or by a
hearing officer appointed by the Mayor. The applicant, licensee or
permittee may have the assistance of counsel or may appear by
counsel and shall have the right to present evidence. In the event
that the applicant, licensee or permittee, or counsel representing
the applicant, licensee or permittee, fails to appear at the hearing,
the evidence of the existence of facts which constitute grounds for
the denial, suspension or revocation of the license or permit shall
be considered unrebutted.
3. Findings—appeal to City Council. A copy of the decision specifying
findings of fact and the reasons for the decision shall be furnished
to the applicant or licensee. Any person aggrieved by the decision
may, by filing a written notice with the City Clerk within ten (10)
days after the decision is rendered, appeal the decision to the City
Council. The City Council shall hear the appeal upon the record and
Section
605.260
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
605.260
100:1436
no new evidence shall be heard. The City Council may reverse,
affirm or alter the decision based upon a review of the evidence
submitted to the hearing officer. An appeal to the City Council
shall be required in order to exhaust administrative remedies and
the time for appeal under the Administrative Procedure Act shall
begin to run only after a decision of the City Council. Upon a final
decision being rendered, the parties shall be informed of the right
of appeal under the provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act.
Any decision not appealed within thirty (30) days from the date of
a decision is final.
Section
605.260
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
605.260
100:1437

ARTICLE III
Gross Receipts Tax On Retail Merchants
Section 605.270. License Fee Based On Annual Gross Receipts or
Sales.519 [R.O. 2009 §110.050; CC 1981 §16-36; Ord. No. 80-37,
3-25-1980; Ord. No. 83-115, 12-21-1983; Ord. No. 96-252,
9-11-1996]
Every person engaged within the City in an occupation, trade, business,
subject, calling, vocation or profession provided for in Section 605.010,
except those specifically provided for in Sections 605.160 and 605.170,
shall pay an annual business license fee based upon the annual gross
receipts or sales of the occupation, trade, business, subject, calling,
vocation or profession as provided for in Section 605.280.
Section 605.280. Computation of License Fee.520 [R.O. 2009
§110.051; CC 1981 §16-37; Ord. No. 80-37, 3-25-1980; Ord. No.
81-17, 3-4-1981; Ord. No. 83-9, 2-2-1983; Ord. No. 83-115,
12-21-1983; Ord. No. 88-117, 6-23-1988; Ord. No. 96-252,
9-11-1996]
A. The business license fee provided for in Section 605.270 shall be based
upon the gross sales or receipts of the business and shall be computed
as follows:
Gross Receipts Fee Per Year
Less than $20,000.00 $25.00
$20,000.00 to $100,000.00 $50.00
Over $100,000.00 $0.75 per $1,000.00 with $2,000.00
maximum fee
B. The license fee provided herein shall be computed upon the annual
statement of sales provided for in Section 605.290; provided that no
license shall be issued to a person provided for in Section 605.270 for a
sum less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00), which sum shall be paid by
each person whose aggregate sales, as verified by affidavit, are twenty
thousand dollars ($20,000.00) or less per annum. The license fee
referred to herein shall be computed in accordance with the following
provisions:
1. New businesses. Persons commencing a new business or
occupation or a business or occupation which has been in business
less than twelve (12) months for which the license fee is based upon
gross sales or receipts shall estimate the anticipated gross sales or
receipts for the license year or part thereof remaining and the
license fee shall be computed thereon. For purposes of estimating
gross sales or annual gross receipts if the business has been in
519. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
520. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
605.270
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
605.280
100:1439
Section 605.290. Annual Statement of Gross Sales or Gross
Receipts.521 [R.O. 2009 §110.052; CC 1981 §16-38; Ord. No. 80-37,
3-25-1980; Ord. No. 83-115, 12-21-1983]
operation for less than a twelve (12) month period, the gross
sales or annual gross receipts shall mean twelve (12) times the
average monthly gross receipts or sales for which any business was
conducted.
2. Old businesses. A business which has been in operation for the
previous twelve (12) months shall pay a license fee based upon the
gross sales or receipts for the twelve (12) months of the license
year and shall use the previous year's gross sales or receipts as a
basis for computing the fee for the license at the beginning of the
business year, which fee shall be adjusted at the end of the business
year in accordance with the following procedure in order to reflect
actual gross sales or receipts incurred during the license year.
3. Adjustments and corrections in gross sales and receipts. In the
license application for the next license year thereafter, if the
licensee shall show an underpayment for the preceding license
year based upon actual gross sales or receipts for the license year,
the licensee shall pay such underpayment together with the
current license fee. If actual gross receipts or sales for such
preceding year would entitle the licensee to a refund, the licensee
shall show his/her computations upon his/her application and the
Director of Finance, upon verification thereof, shall first credit such
refund against any license fee due or owing and shall pay the
balance of the refund, if any, to the licensee.
4. Part-time occupations. Any person engaged in an occupation
described in Section 605.010, taxable under this Article and having
no employee so engaged and whose return or statement is timely
filed and shows gross receipts or sales in the preceding twelve (12)
months of less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall pay a
license fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the year of
application. Should such person be sixty (60) years of age or older
and be otherwise entitled to the within described license, the fee is
reduced to ten dollars ($10.00) for the year of application.
A. It shall be the duty of every person, whether notified or not, engaged in
an occupation, trade, business, subject, calling, vocation or profession,
provided for in Section 605.270 which constitutes an "old business"
under Section 605.280(B)(2) to provide to the Director of Finance,
between January first (1st) and April first (1st) of each year, a statement
verified by affidavit of the true amount of gross sales or gross receipts
of such person during the year next preceding the first (1st) day of
January, which statement and affidavit shall be a part of the person's
application for license required by Section 605.060.
521. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
605.280
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
605.290
100:1440
Section 605.300. Record of Sales or Receipts.522 [R.O. 2009
§110.053; CC 1981 §16-39; Ord. No. 80-37, 3-25-1980; Ord. No.
83-115, 12-21-1983]
It shall be the duty of each person provided for in Section 605.270 to keep
a proper book and enter in ink or by typing an account of all sales made or
receipts of the person, which account shall always be open to the inspection
of the Director of Finance to verify the statement made by the licensee
pursuant to Section 605.290.
Section 605.310. Inspection of Statements and Records. [R.O. 2009
§110.054; CC 1981 §16-40; Ord. No. 80-37, 3-25-1980; Ord. No.
83-115, 12-21-1983]
The statements or returns made to the Director of Finance under the
requirements of this Article shall not be made public nor shall they be
subject to the inspection of any person except the Mayor, Director of
Finance, members of the City Council and such accountant or auditor as the
Council may from time to time employ to audit the accounts of the City.
Section 605.320. Certain Sales Exempt. [R.O. 2009 §110.055; CC
1981 §16-41; Ord. No. 80-37, 3-25-1980; Ord. No. 83-115,
12-21-1983]
The sale of gasoline, lubricating or fuel oil, cigarettes, and intoxicating
liquor is exempt from the provisions of this Article and the amount of
sales thereof shall not be included in the verified statement of gross sales
required in this Article.
Section 605.330. False Statements and Failure To File Statement.523
[R.O. 2009 §110.056; CC 1981 §16-42; Ord. No. 80-37, 3-25-1980;
Ord. No. 81-17, 3-4-1981; Ord. No. 83-115, 12-20-1983; Ord. No.
96-252, 9-11-1996]
Whoever shall fail to file a statement required by this Article or make or
file with the Director of Finance, under the provisions of this Article, a false
statement under oath shall forfeit his/her license and be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor punishable as provided in Section 100.150. It shall be the
duty of the Director of Finance to examine carefully all statements filed
with the Finance Department and to see that all violations of this Article
B. Persons qualifying as a "new business" under Section 605.280(B)(1)
shall provide the Director of Finance with a statement, verified by
affidavit, of the estimated or anticipated gross sales or gross receipts
for the license year. This statement and affidavit shall be provided at the
time of application for a license and become a part of the application
form required by Section 605.060.
522. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
523. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
605.290
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
605.330
100:1441
pertaining to business licenses are prosecuted according to law; provided
that before instituting any such prosecution the Director of Finance shall
give the person the opportunity of explaining the statement and correcting
it if an error was inadvertently made.
Section 605.340. Collection. [R.O. 2009 §110.057; CC 1981 §16-43;
Ord. No. 81-17, 3-4-1981; Ord. No. 83-115, 12-20-1983]
Collection of license fees, including collection costs from persons required
to obtain licenses as provided in this Article, shall be provided by law for
the collection of taxes.
Section
605.330
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
605.340
100:1442
ARTICLE IV
Cigarette Dealers Sales Tax
Section 605.350. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §110.090; CC 1981 §26-58;
Ord. No. 84-83, 7-23-1984]
For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CIGARETTE — An item manufactured of tobacco or any substitute therefor
wrapped in paper or any substitute therefor weighing not to exceed three
(3) pounds per one thousand (1,000) cigarettes and which is commonly
classified, labeled or advertised as a cigarette.
PACKAGE OF CIGARETTES — A container of any type composition in which
is normally contained twenty (20) individual cigarettes, except as in special
instances when the number may be more or less than twenty (20).
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, firm, partnership, incorporated or
unincorporated association or any other legal or commercial entity.
RETAILER — Any person who sells to a consumer or to any person for any
purpose other than resale.
SALE — Includes sales, barters, exchanges and every other manner, method
and form of transferring the ownership of personal property from one
person to another. "Sale" also means the possession of cigarettes or tobacco
products by any person other than a manufacturer, wholesaler or retailer
and shall be prima facie evidence of possession for consumption.
WHOLESALER — Any person, firm or corporation organized and existing,
or doing business, primarily to sell cigarettes or tobacco products to, and
render service to, retailers in the territory the person, firm or corporation
chooses to serve; that purchases cigarettes or tobacco products directly
from the manufacturer; that carries at all times at his/her or its principal
place of business a representative stock of cigarettes or tobacco products
for sale; and that comes into the possession of cigarettes or tobacco
products for the purpose of selling them to retailers or to persons outside
or within the State who might resell or retail the cigarettes or tobacco
products to consumers. This shall include any manufacturer, jobber, broker,
agent or other person, whether or not enumerated in this Chapter, who so
sells or so distributes cigarettes or tobacco products.
Section 605.360. Payment of Tax Required — Rate. [R.O. 2009
§110.091; CC 1981 §26-59; Ord. No. 3425, 9-21-1966; Ord. No.
76-26, 3-10-1976; Ord. No. 77-44, 9-13-1977; Ord. No. 79-61,
6-13-1979; Ord. No. 80-74, 7-18-1980; Ord. No. 84-83, 7-23-1984]
Each person engaged in the retail business of selling cigarettes or offering
or displaying the same for sale within the City shall pay a tax at the rate of
one-half cent ($.005) per one (1) cigarette for all cigarettes so sold, offered
or displayed for sale.
Section
605.350
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
605.370
100:1443
Section 605.370. Payment of Tax — Monthly Payment. [R.O. 2009
§110.093; CC 1981 §26-61; Ord. No. 84-43, 7-17-1984; Ord. No.
97-29, 1-14-1997]
It shall be the duty of every dealer or wholesaler selling, offering or
displaying for sale any package of cigarettes to remit the monthly cigarette
tax reporting form and full payment by the fifteenth (15th) day of each
following month. The canceled check, accompanied by the monthly
cigarette tax reporting form, shall be proof of payment. The tax provided
by Section 605.360 shall be paid to the office of collections. The Director of
Finance shall allow a discount of ten percent (10%) of the denomination or
face value thereof.
Section 605.380. Invoices. [R.O. 2009 §110.096; CC 1981 §26-64;
Ord. No. 83-88, 10-5-1983; Ord. No. 84-83, 7-23-1984; Ord. No.
97-29, 1-14-1997]
Section 605.390. Filing Freight Bills With Director of Finance. [R.O.
2009 §110.097; CC 1981 §26-65; Ord. No. 84-83, 7-23-1984]
The Director of Finance by regulation may provide that whenever cigarettes
are shipped into the City, the railroad company, express company, trucking
company or other public carrier transporting any shipment thereof shall file
with the Director of Finance a copy of the freight bill within ten (10) days
after delivery in the City of each shipment.
Section 605.400. Records Other Than Invoices and Freight Bills.
[R.O. 2009 §110.098; CC 1981 §26-66; Ord. No. 84-83, 7-23-1984]
All wholesale and retail dealers within the City shall maintain and keep
for a period of three (3) years such records of cigarettes received, sold or
delivered within the City, other than invoices and freight bills mentioned
in Sections 605.380 and 605.390, as may be required by the Director of
Finance.
A. Wholesalers' Requirements. At the time of delivering cigarettes to any
retail dealer in the City, each wholesale dealer shall make a true
duplicate invoice showing the date of delivery, the amount and value of
each shipment of cigarettes delivered and the name of the retail dealer
to whom delivery is made and shall retain the same for a period of three
(3) years, subject to the use and inspection of the Director of Finance.
B. Retailers' Requirements. Each retail dealer in the City and any
wholesale dealer who shall deliver cigarettes in the City shall procure
and retain invoices showing the amount and value of each shipment of
cigarettes received by him/her, the date thereof and the name of the
shipper and shall retain the same for a period of three (3) years, subject
to the use and inspection of the Director of Finance.
Section
605.370
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
605.410
100:1444
Section 605.410. Examination of Records By Director of Finance.
[R.O. 2009 §110.099; CC 1981 §26-67; Ord. No. 84-83, 7-23-1984]
The Director of Finance or his/her duly authorized representatives are
authorized to examine the books, papers, invoices and other records and
stock of cigarettes in and upon any premises where the same are placed,
stored and sold and equipment of any such wholesale or retail dealer
pertaining to the sale and delivery of cigarettes taxable under this Article.
To verify the accuracy of the tax imposed and assessed by this Article,
each such person is hereby directed and required to give to the Director of
Finance or his/her duly authorized representatives, the means, facilities and
opportunity for such examinations as are herein provided for and required.
Section 605.420. Refunds For Stamps Purchased. [R.O. 2009
§110.100; CC 1981 §26-68; Ord. No. 84-83, 7-23-1984; Ord. No.
97-29, 1-14-1997]
Whenever any cigarettes have been sold and shipped by a retail dealer into
another City or State for sale or use there or have become unfit for use and
consumption or unsalable or have been destroyed, the retail dealer shall be
entitled to a refund of the actual amount of tax paid by him/her with respect
to such cigarettes. If the Director of Finance is satisfied that any retail
dealer is entitled to a refund, he/she shall issue to such retail dealer stamps
of sufficient value to cover the refund. The Director of Finance is hereby
authorized to adopt, prescribe and promulgate such rules and regulations
with regard to the presentation and proof of claim for refunds as he/she may
deem advisable.
Section 605.430. Seizure and Sale of Unauthorized Cigarettes —
Penalty. [R.O. 2009 §110.101; CC 1981 §26-69; Ord. No. 84-83,
7-23-1984; Ord. No. 97-29, 1-14-1997]
Whenever the Director of Finance or his/her duly authorized representative
shall discover any cigarettes subject to tax provided by this Article upon
which the tax has not been paid or the monthly report filed as required
in this Article, the Director of Finance or his/her representative is hereby
authorized and empowered forthwith to seize and take possession of such
cigarettes, together with any vending machine or receptacle in which they
are held for sale, and the same shall thereupon be deemed to be forfeited to
the City. The Director of Finance may, within a reasonable time thereafter,
by a public notice at least five (5) days before the day of sale, sell such
forfeited cigarettes at a place designated by him/her and from the proceeds
of such sale shall collect the tax due thereon, together with a penalty of
fifty percent (50%) thereof and the costs incurred in such proceedings. The
Director of Finance shall pay the balance, if any, to the person in whose
possession such forfeited cigarettes were found; provided however, that
such seizure and sale shall not be deemed to relieve any person from fine or
imprisonment provided for in Section 100.150 of this Code of Ordinances.
Section
605.410
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
605.440
100:1445
Section 605.440. Rules and Regulations As To Delegation of
Powers. [R.O. 2009 §110.103; CC 1981 §26-71; Ord. No. 84-83,
7-23-1984; Ord. No. 97-29, 1-14-1997]
Section 605.450. Oaths and Affidavits. [R.O. 2009 §110.104; CC
1981 §26-72; Ord. No. 84-83, 7-23-1984]
The Director of Finance, or his/her employees or agents duly designated
and authorized by him/her, shall have power to administer oaths and take
affidavits in relation to any matter or proceedings in the exercise of their
powers and duties under this Article.
Section 605.460. Credit of Revenue To General Fund. [R.O. 2009
§110.105; CC 1981 §26-73; Ord. No. 84-83, 7-23-1984]
All the revenue accruing to the City under the provisions of this Article shall
be credited to the General Fund.
A. The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and empowered to
prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating
to the delegation of his/her powers to a deputy or other employee of his/
her office or, with the consent of the City Council, to the Chief of Police.
1. The sale of stamps required by this Article; and
2. The delegation of his/her powers to a deputy or other employee of
his/her office or, with the consent of the City Council, to the Chief of
Police.
Section
605.440
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
605.460
100:1446
ARTICLE V
Sales Tax
Section 605.470. Tax Levied. [R.O. 2009 §110.115; CC 1981 §26-85;
Ord. No. 3855, 8-24-1971]
Pursuant to the authority granted by and subject to the provisions of
Sections 94.500 through 94.570, RSMo., a tax for general revenue purposes
is imposed upon all sellers for the privilege of engaging in the business of
selling tangible personal property or rendering taxable services at retail
to the extent and in the manner provided in Sections 144.010 through
144.510, RSMo., and the rules and regulations of the Director of Revenue
issued pursuant thereto. The rate of the tax shall be one percent (1%) on the
receipts from the sale at retail of all tangible personal property or taxable
services at retail within the City, if such property and services are subject
to taxation by the State under the provisions of Sections 144.010 through
144.510, RSMo. The tax shall become effective as provided in Subsection
(4) of Section 94.510, RSMo., and shall be collected as provided in such
Sections 94.500 through 94.570, RSMo.
Section 605.480. Reimposed On Sales Utility Service and Certain
Fuels. [R.O. 2009 §110.116; CC 1981 §26-86; Ord. No. 79-93,
10-3-1979]
Section 605.490. Capital Improvements Sales Tax. [R.O. 2009
§110.117; CC 1981 §26-87; Ord. No. 92-25, 4-2-1992]
Pursuant to the authority granted by and subject to the provisions of Section
94.577, RSMo., a sales tax for the purpose of funding of capital
improvements, including the operation and maintenance of capital
improvements and which may include the retirement of debt under
previously authorized bonded indebtedness, is hereby imposed upon all
persons in the City who are engaged in the business of selling tangible
personal property or rendering taxable services at retail to the extent and in
the manner provided in Chapter 144, RSMo., and the rules and regulations
of the Director of Revenue issued pursuant thereto. The rate of the tax shall
be one-half of one percent (0.5%).
A. The municipal sales tax on all sales of metered water service,
electricity, electrical current, natural, artificial or propane gas, wood,
coal or home heating oil used for non-business, non-commercial or nonindustrial
purposes heretofore imposed within the corporate limits of
this municipality is hereby reimposed.
B. The rate of taxation shall be, as heretofore, one percent (1%).
Section
605.470
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
605.490
100:1447
Chapter 610
SPECIAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
Section 610.010. Established — Boundaries. [R.O. 2009 §112.01; CC
1981 §16-159; Ord. No. 74-8, 2-27-1974; Ord. No. 03-280,
10-23-2003]
A special business district is hereby established, the boundaries of which
are as follows:
Being all within the City and beginning at the intersection of the centerlines
of Main Street and Clark Street; thence westwardly along the centerline of
Clark Street to its intersection with the centerline of Third Street; thence
southwardly along the centerline of Third Street to its intersection with
the centerline of Madison Street; thence eastwardly to a point being the
intersection of the centerline of Madison Street with the centerline of
Second Street; thence southwardly along the centerline of Second Street
to its intersection with the centerline of Jackson Street; thence eastwardly
along the centerline of Jackson Street to the intersection with the centerline
of the alley between Jackson Street and Tompkins Street; thence
southwardly along the centerline of the alley between Jackson Street and
Tompkins Street to the intersection with Tompkins Street; thence
southwardly along the centerline of the alley between Tompkins Street and
Pike Street to the intersection with Pike Street; then southwardly along
the centerline of the alley between Pike Street and Perry Street to the
intersection with the centerline of Perry Street; thence southwardly along
the centerline of the alley between Perry Street and Water Street to the
intersection with the centerline of Water Street; thence southwardly along
the alley between Water Street and McDonough Street to the intersection of
the south right-of-way line of McDonough Street; thence eastwardly along
the south right-of-way line of McDonough Street to the north property line
of a lot, the address being 119 McDonough Street; thence westwardly along
such property line to the west property line of said lot; thence southwardly
along said property line to the south property line of such lot; thence
eastwardly along the such property line to the intersection with the north
property line of a lot, the address being 915 South Main Street; thence
westwardly along the such property line to a point being common to the
west property line of such lot and the north right-of-way line of Boone's
Lick Road; thence to a point being common to the south right-of-way line of
Boone's Lick Road and the west property line to the west property line of
a lot, the address being 1001 South Main Street; thence southwardly along
such west property line to the west property line of a lot, the address being
1017 South Main Street; thence southwardly along such property line to
the west property line of a lot, the address being 1019 South Main Street;
thence southwardly along such property line to the west property line of a
lot, the address being 1025 South Main Street; thence southwardly along
such property line to the west property line of a lot, the address being
1039 South Main Street; thence southwardly along such property line to
the west property line of a lot, the address being 1041 South Main Street;
Section
605.490
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
610.010
100:1448
thence southwardly along such property line to the intersection with the
north right-of-way line of Barbour Street; thence southwardly to a point
being in common to the south right-of-way line of Barbour Street and the
southward extension of the west property line of a lot, the address being
1101 South Main Street; thence southwardly along such property line to
the west property line of a lot, the address being 1115 South Main Street;
thence southwardly along such property line to the west property line of a
lot, the address being 1117 South Main Street; thence southwardly along
such property line to the west property line of a lot, the address being
1119 South Main Street; thence southwardly along such property line to
the west property line of a lot, the address being 1121 South Main Street;
thence southwardly along such property line to the west property line of a
lot, the address being 1123 South Main Street; thence southwardly along
such property line to the west property line of a lot, the address being
1125 South Main Street; thence southwardly along such property line to
the west property line of a lot, the address being 1127 South Main Street;
thence southwardly along such property line to the west property line of a
lot, the address being 1129 South Main Street; thence southwardly along
such property line to the west property line of a lot, the address being
1131 South Main Street; thence southwardly along such property line to
the intersection with the north right-of-way line of Reservoir Avenue; thence
southwardly to a point being in common to the south right-of-way line of
Reservoir Avenue and the east property line of a lot, the address being
205 Reservoir Avenue; thence southwardly along such property line the
east property line of a lot, the address being 207 Reservoir Avenue; thence
southwardly along such property line to the intersection with the north
property line of a lot, the address being 1219 South Main Street; thence
westwardly along such property line to the west property line of such
property; thence southward along such property line to the east property
line of a lot, the address being 238 Reservoir Avenue; then southward along
such property line to the east property line of a lot, the address being 236
Reservoir Avenue; thence southwardly to the north property line of a lot
described as Crestview Condo Lot C; thence eastwardly along such property
line to the intersection with the west right-of-way line of South Main Street;
thence southwardly along such right-of-way line to the intersection with
the north right-of-way line of Interstate 70; thence eastwardly to a point
being the intersection of the north right-of-way line of Interstate 70 with
the east right-of-way line of South Main Street; thence northwardly along
the east right-of-way line of South Main Street to the south property line
of a property described as Water Works Lot 1 recorded in Deed Book 1976,
Page 993 in the St. Charles County Recorder's Office; thence eastwardly
along such property line its intersection with the west property line of
the Katy Trail State Park; thence continuing along the bearing of the
southern property line of the aforementioned Water Works Lot 1 to the
intersection with the east property line of the aforementioned Katy Trail
State Park; thence northwardly along such property line its intersection
with the centerline of Blanchette Creek, said centerline also being the south
property line of Frontier Park; thence eastwardly along such property line to
its intersection with the present existing City limits line; thence northwardly
Section
610.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
610.010
100:1449
along the City limits line to a point, being the intersection of the City limits
line and the eastward extension of the centerline of Adams Street; thence
westwardly along such extension and centerline of Adams Street to its
intersection with the centerline of Main Street; thence northwardly along
the centerline of Main Street to the point of beginning.
Section 610.020. Business Property and License Tax Established.524
[R.O. 2009 §112.02; CC 1981 §16-160; Ord. No. 74-8, 2-27-1974;
Ord. No. 80-110, 10-8-1980; Ord. No. 86-94, 4-18-1986; Ord. No.
87-65, 4-18-1987; Ord. No. 88-201, 10-19-1988]
A. Business Property Tax. There may be imposed annually a tax upon the
owner of real property, excluding all properties used exclusively for
residential purposes as hereinafter defined, within the special business
district up to the amount of forty-four cents ($0.44) on the one hundred
dollars ($100.00) assessed valuation. The amount of annual tax
generated from this special business property tax for any one (1)
property or business so taxed shall not exceed three hundred dollars
($300.00) annually. The amount to be imposed shall be determined by
the City Council prior to September tenth (10th) of each year and shall
be collected for and paid into a special fund hereby established.
B. Use Of Funds. The funds produced by the business property tax shall be
used for the following purposes:
1. To close existing streets or alleys or to open new streets and alleys
or to widen or narrow existing streets and alleys in whole or in part;
2. To construct or install pedestrian or shopping malls, plazas,
sidewalks or moving sidewalks, parks, meeting and display
facilities, convention centers, arenas, bus stop shelters, lighting,
benches or other seating furniture, sculptures, telephone booths,
traffic signs, fire hydrants, kiosks, trash receptacles, marquees,
awnings, canopies, walls and barriers, paintings, murals, alleys,
shelters, display cases, fountains, restrooms, information booths,
aquariums, aviaries, tunnels and ramps, pedestrian and vehicular
overpasses and underpasses and each and every other useful or
necessary or desired improvement;
3. To landscape and plant trees, bushes and shrubbery, flowers and
each and every other kind of decorative planting;
4. To install and operate public music and news facilities;
5. To purchase and operate buses, minibuses, mobile benches and
other modes of transportation;
6. To construct and operate child care facilities;
7. To construct lakes, dams and waterways of whatever size;
524. State Law Reference—Authorized, §71.800(2), RSMo.
Section
610.010
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
610.020
100:1450
Section 610.030. Amount of License Tax — When Due. [R.O. 2009
§112.03; CC 1981 §16-161; Ord. No. 74-8, 2-27-1974]
The license tax imposed by Section 610.020 shall be fifty percent (50%)
of the license tax levied yearly on the businesses and individuals under
Chapters 605, 615, 640, 655 and any other applicable provision of this Title
and shall be due at the time and place provided in these Chapters.
Section 610.040. Established — Composition — Appointment —
Terms. [R.O. 2009 §112.04; CC 1981 §16-173; Ord. No. 76-19,
2-25-1976; Ord. No. 80-110, 10-8-1980; Ord. No. 81-56, 6-17-1981;
8. To provide special police or cleaning facilities and personnel for the
protection and enjoyment of the property owners and the general
public using the facilities of such business district;
9. To maintain, as hereinafter provided, all City-owned streets, alleys,
malls, bridges, ramps, tunnels, lawns, trees and decorative
plantings of each and every nature and every structure or object of
any nature whatsoever constructed or operated by the City;
10. To acquire, construct, reconstruct, extend, maintain or repair
parking lots, both above and below ground, or other facilities for
the parking of vehicles, including the power to install such facilities
in public areas, whether such areas are owned in fee or by
easement;
11. To promote business activity in the district by, but not limited to,
advertising, decoration of any public place in the area, promotion
of public events which are to take place on or in public places,
furnishing of music in any public place and the general promotion
of trade activities in the district; and
12. To retire parking lot revenue bonds for lots in the district.
For the purpose of this Section, a "RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY"
is defined as follows: A building or structure, including
necessary residential accessory buildings, which is used solely
for residential purposes as a dwelling including, but not limited
to, a single-family, row or town house and multiple-family
dwellings. A dwelling shall not include any home occupation,
business room or rooms or any portion of the building or
accessory building to be used for business purposes.
C. Business License Tax. Further, there is imposed a business license tax
on the businesses and individuals licensed to do business within the
business district. The business license taxes shall be used for the
purpose of operating parking facilities, promoting business activities,
providing special service for the district and promoting the general
improvement and well-being of the district.
Section
610.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
610.040
100:1451
Ord. No. 89-78, 5-4-1989; Ord. No. 03-323, 12-23-2003; Ord. No.
08-32, 2-6-2008]
There is established a Special Business District Advisory Board which shall
be composed of a member of the City Council and eight (8) persons. There
shall be four (4) persons appointed from the special business district north
of First Capitol Drive and four (4) persons from the special business district
south of First Capitol Drive. All eight (8) persons shall be appointed by the
Mayor with consent of a majority of the members of the City Council. The
members of the Board appointed by the Mayor shall be appointed for terms
of three (3) years.
Section 610.050. Qualifications. [R.O. 2009 §112.05; CC 1981
§16-174; Ord. No. 76-19, 2-25-1974; Ord. No. 80-110, 10-8-1980;
Ord. No. 81-56, 6-17-1981; Ord. No. 89-78, 5-4-1989; Ord. No.
08-32, 2-6-2008]
Members of the Board, except for the Council member, shall be a property
owner in the district who shall pay the special business district property tax
or a person who owns a business in the district who shall pay the special
business district business license tax. The members may directly or through
a corporation, partnership, trust or limited liability company pay the special
business district property tax or business license tax.
Section 610.060. Duties and Responsibilities. [R.O. 2009 §112.06;
CC 1981 §16-175; Ord. No. 76-19, 2-25-1976; Ord. No. 80-110,
10-8-1980; Ord. No. 81-56, 6-17-1981; Ord. No. 89-78, 5-4-1989]
A. The City Council shall have sole discretion on the use of the revenues
derived from any tax imposed on the district; however, the Special
Business District Advisory Board shall make recommendations to the
City Council as to the use of these revenues on any matter that
concerns the special business district or that may be referred to the
Board by the Mayor and City Council.
B. All revenues that the City Council may direct to be used by the special
business district and any other funds derived, granted or donated shall
be used by the special business district for the purposes of the district
as previously outlined with the approval of the City Council.
C. All bills of the Board and all salaries of its employees shall be allowed
and paid in the same manner that bills and salaries of other officers and
employees of the City are allowed and paid. The Board shall follow the
procedures by the City's Director of Finance for payment of bills and
salaries.
D. It shall be the duty of the Board to keep books of accounts showing with
entire accuracy contemporaneous current entries of receipts and
expenditures of the Board. This shall be done in such a manner as to
enable the same to be understood and investigated and also to preserve
on file in its offices, duplicate vouchers for all expenditures. Books and
Section
610.040
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
610.060
100:1452
Section 610.070. Officers — Compensation — Quorum — Employees
— Contracts. [R.O. 2009 §112.07; CC 1981 §16-176; Ord. No. 76-19,
2-25-1976; Ord. No. 80-110, 10-8-1980]
Chapter 615
PUBLIC UTILITIES
Cross References—As to poles and wires, §§505.650 et seq.
duplicates shall, at all times, be open to examination for the City
Council or the Director of Finance of the City.
E. It shall be the responsibility of the Board to prepare an annual
statement and budget for each fiscal year operations. This shall be
presented to the Mayor and the City Council at the first (1st) Council
meeting in April of each year.
F. It shall be the duty of the Board to designate special events upon the
mall area of South Main Street and, when so designated, all vehicular
traffic or parking is prohibited during such special events. Any such
designation shall be secured from the office of the Mayor.
A. The Board shall elect a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and Secretary-
Treasurer. The Board shall meet at the call of the Chairperson or upon
the call of two (2) members of the Board. Members of the Board shall
not receive compensation for serving on the Board. Five (5) members of
the Board shall constitute a quorum.
B. The Board shall have the power to appoint an executive director and
clerical staff for the Board with approval of the Mayor and City Council.
C. The Board may contract with persons and firms for services and work
which may be required by the Board which is necessary for the
accomplishment of its work. All contracts, services or expenditures for
same shall be approved by the Mayor and City Council.
Section
610.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
610.070
100:1453

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 615.010. Distribution of Receipts. [R.O. 2009 §113.01; CC
1981 §16-100; Ord. No. 3794, 10-9-1970; Ord. No. 72-35, 6-6-1972;
Ord. No. 77-36, 8-2-1977; Ord. No. 84-73, 6-21-1984]
One hundred percent (100%) of the money collected under this Chapter
shall be deposited in the General Fund of the City for such uses as may be
provided for in the budget.
Section 615.020. Refund of Tax. [R.O. 2009 §113.02; CC 1981
§16-101; Ord. No. 91-14, 1-31-1991]
A. Definition. For the purposes of this Section, Sections 615.080 and
615.140, an "exempt consumer" shall mean any consumer who owns or
leases residential property located within the City, who occupies the
same as his/her customary place of residence and who is sixty-two (62)
years of age or older or is sixty (60) years of age or older and certified
as totally disabled by the Social Security Administration and to whom
the payment of such utility tax is an undue hardship. When any such
residential property is owned or leased by two (2) or more persons
jointly, the requirement for exemption shall be deemed satisfied if any
one (1) of such owners or lessees is sixty-two (62) years of age or older
or is sixty (60) years of age or older and certified as totally disabled by
the Social Security Administration and to whom the payment of such
utility tax is an undue hardship. [retain history; [Ord. No. 15-288 §1,
12-15-2015; Ord. No. 18-018, 2-6-2018]
B. Refund Authorized. The amount of any license fee paid to the City by a
person engaged in the business of selling, supplying or distributing
electric service, or gas service on account of sales of such persons to an
exempt consumer as herein defined for utility services rendered to such
consumer's residence shall be refunded by the City directly to such
exempt consumer. The refund shall include such fees paid since the
beginning of the fiscal year during which the exempt consumer attained
the required age. [Ord. No. 15-288 §1, 12-15-2015]
C. When Authorized. An exempt consumer may be granted a refund of the
utility taxes paid upon a showing of undue hardship. A household
annual gross income of less than thirty-five thousand dollars
($35,000.00) for one (1) person or less than forty-five thousand dollars
($45,000.00) for two (2) or more persons as reported on Internal
Revenue Form 1040 shall be prima facie evidence that payment of the
utility tax is an undue hardship to an exempt customer. [Ord. No.
18-018, 2-6-2018]
D. Investigation Of Application. Upon application for refund of such utility
taxes, the Mayor shall cause an investigation to be made to confirm that
the documentation submitted supports a finding that an undue hardship
exists. [Ord. No. 18-018, 2-6-2018]
Section
615.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
615.020
100:1455
Section 615.030. Limitation On Annual Refund of License Fees.
[R.O. 2009 §113.03; Ord. No. 07-04, 1-3-2007; Ord. No. 08-10,
1-14-2008]
The total refund available to an exempt consumer pursuant to Sections
615.080 and 615.140 combined shall not exceed one hundred twenty-five
dollars ($125.00) in a calendar year.
E. Grant Of Exemption. Upon affirmative recommendation of the Mayor,
an exempt consumer may be granted a refund of all or part of utility
taxes he/she shall have paid.
F. Revocation. Any such refund granted by the Mayor pursuant to
Subsections (A) through (E) above may be of a continuing nature and
may be revoked upon a finding that such undue hardship no longer
exists.
G. Benefit. Nothing contained herein shall in any way alter or diminish the
obligation of any persons, firm or corporation licensed pursuant to this
Code and any other ordinance of the City to pay a license tax computed
on the full amount of his/her gross sales to consumers within the City or
otherwise to comply with the provisions of this Code or any other
ordinance of the City. The exemption herein provided shall inure to the
benefit of exempt consumers only and shall be administered by the City
for their benefit.
H. Funding. Refunds herein required shall be paid from the general funds
of the City.
Section
615.020
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
615.030
100:1456
ARTICLE II
Electricity
Section 615.040. License Tax — Payment Required. [R.O. 2009
§113.15; CC 1981 §16-112; Ord. No. 3458, 1-25-1967; Ord. No. 3492,
7-6-1967 ; Ord. No. 3765, 7-14-1970; Ord. No. 75-54, 9-17-1975;
Ord. No. 77-45, 9-21-1977; Ord. No. 80-75, 7-16-1980; Ord. No.
81-34, 4-15-1981; Ord. No. 84-11, 2-1-1984; Ord. No. 84-31,
4-5-1984; Ord. No. 91-127, 7-1-1991; Ord. No. 04-07, 1-7-2004; Ord.
No. 11-194 §1, 9-28-2011; Ord. No. 11-227 §1, 11-4-2011; Ord. No.
13-051 §1, 2-22-2013]
Section 615.050. When Payable. [R.O. 2009 §113.16; CC 1981
§16-113; Ord. No. 3458, 1-25-1967; Ord. No. 3765, 7-14-1970; Ord.
No. 75-54, 9-17-1975; Ord. No. 77-45, 9-21-1977; Ord. No. 80-75,
7-16-1980; Ord. No. 81-34, 4-15-1981; Ord. No. 84-11, 2-1-1984;
Ord. No. 84-31, 4-5-1984; Ord. No. 91-127, 7-1-1991; Ord. No. 04-7,
1-7-2004]
A. Every person now or hereafter engaged in furnishing, distributing and
supplying electricity for any purpose within the City shall pay to the
City as a license tax a sum equal to:
1. Eight percent (8%) of the gross receipts from such business;
2. Effective July 1, 2004, seven and eight-tenths percent (7.8%) of the
gross receipts from such business;
3. Effective July 1, 2005, seven and six-tenths percent (7.6%) of the
gross receipts from such business;
4. Effective July 1, 2006, seven and four-tenths percent (7.4%) of the
gross receipts from such business;
5. Effective July 1, 2007, seven and two-tenths percent (7.2%) of the
gross receipts from such business;
6. Effective July 1, 2008, seven percent (7.0%) of the gross receipts
from such business;
7. Effective January 1, 2012, six and seven-tenths percent (6.7%) of
the gross receipts from such business.
B. "Gross receipts" means the aggregate amount of all sales and charges
of the commodities or services herein described from the business of
supplying electricity for compensation in the City during any period,
less discounts, credits, refunds, sales taxes and uncollectible accounts
actually charged off during the period. Gross receipts derived from the
furnishing of such service to the City shall not be included in gross
receipts, nor shall any tax be due on such gross receipts.
Section
615.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
615.050
100:1457
Section 615.060. Statement of Gross Receipts Required To Be Filed
— Investigation. [R.O. 2009 §113.17; CC 1981 §16-114; Ord. No.
3458, 1-25-1967; Ord. No. 75-54, 9-17-1975; Ord. No. 77-45,
9-21-1977; Ord. No. 80-75, 7-16-1980; Ord. No. 84-31, 4-5-1984]
It is made the duty of every person engaged in furnishing, distributing and
supplying electricity as described in Section 615.040 to file with the City
Clerk on or before the last day of each month a sworn statement of the gross
receipts from such business for the calendar month preceding the filing
of such statements. The City Clerk or his/her duly authorized deputy shall
be and is hereby authorized to investigate the correctness and accuracy
of the statement required and for that purpose shall have access to, at all
reasonable times, the books, documents, papers and records of such person
or persons to ascertain the accuracy thereof.
Section 615.070. Construction of Tax. [R.O. 2009 §113.18; CC 1981
§16-115; Ord. No. 3458, 1-25-1967; Ord. No. 3492, 7-6-1967; Ord.
No. 84-31, 4-5-1984]
The tax herein required to be paid shall be in lieu of any other occupation
tax required of any person engaged in any of the businesses described in
Section 615.040, but nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to
exempt any such person from the payment to the City of the tax which the
City levies upon the real or personal property belonging to any such person,
nor the tax required of merchants or manufacturers for the sale of anything
other than electricity, nor shall the tax herein required exempt any such
person from the payment of any other tax which may be lawfully required
other than an occupation tax on any of the businesses described in Section
615.040.
Section 615.080. Refund of Electricity License Fees Invoked By
Section 615.040 To Elderly and Totally Disabled Residents Over Age
60 — Refund Procedure — Refund Computation — Benefit and
Funding. [R.O. 2009 §113.19; Ord. No. 07-04, 1-3-2007; Ord. No.
08-10, 1-14-2008]
A. Every person now or hereafter engaged in the business of supplying
electricity described in Section 615.040 shall pay to the Director of
Finance on or before the last day of each month an amount equal to the
applicable percentage listed in Section 615.040(A) of such person's
gross receipts from such business for the preceding calendar month.
B. The percentage of license tax in Subsection (A) above shall be reduced
on January 1, 1993 and each January first (1st) thereafter to yield an
amount equal to the prior year's gross revenue adjusted for changes in
the St. Louis area cost of living, increased costs for electrical energy
usage by the City, increased population and increased City area.
A. Refund Authorized. The amount of any license fee paid to the City
pursuant to Section 615.040 by a person engaged in the business of
Section
615.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
615.080
100:1458
furnishing, distributing and supplying electricity for light, heat, power
and other purposes within the City on account of sales of such person
to an exempt consumer as herein defined for utility services rendered
to such consumer's residence shall be refunded by the City directly to
such exempt consumer.
B. Definition. For the purpose of this Section "exempt consumer" shall
mean any consumer who owns or leases residential property within the
City, who occupies the same as his/her customary place of residence
and who, on the first day of any calendar month, is sixty-two (62) years
of age or older or sixty (60) years of age or older and certified as totally
disabled by the Social Security Administration on said date and to
whom the payment of such utility tax is a hardship. When any such
residential property is owned or leased by two (2) or more persons
jointly, requirements for exemption shall be deemed satisfied if any one
(1) such owner or lessee is sixty-two (62) years of age or older or sixty
(60) years of age or older and certified as totally disabled by the Social
Security Administration on the first day of such calendar month and to
whom the payment of such utility tax is a hardship. [Ord. No. 15-288
§2, 12-15-2015525]
C. Procedure. From April 1 to May 31 of each year, any person claiming to
be entitled to a refund pursuant to this Section for taxes paid during the
prior calendar year commencing January 1 and ending December 31
shall submit a request for such refund to the office of the Mayor,
together with such proof of claim as may be required by the
Department of Finance. Such proof of claim may, at the discretion of the
Department of Finance, include proof of age, copies of utility bills and
proof of payment of such bills. [Ord. No. 15-288 §2, 12-15-2015]
D. Computation. The amount of refund owing to each exempt consumer
shall be the amount of the license tax imposed by the City's Code of
Ordinances as a result of such consumer's payments during the
preceding calendar year calculated from January 1 to December 31 for
utility services rendered to his/her residence. [Ord. No. 15-288 §2,
12-15-2015]
E. Benefit. Nothing contained herein shall in any way alter or diminish the
obligations of any person licensed pursuant to Section 615.040 to pay a
license tax computed on the full amount of their gross sales to
consumers within the City or to otherwise to comply with the provisions
of this Code. The exemption herein provided shall inure to the benefit of
exempt consumer only and shall be administered by the City for their
benefit.
F. Funds. Refunds herein required to be made shall be paid from budgeted
general revenue monies. Payment of this refund is subject to availability
of funds being budgeted in the current year for this purpose.
525. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 15-288 also changed the title of this Section to include "Over Age
60" following "Totally Disabled Residents."
Section
615.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
615.080
100:1459

ARTICLE III
Gas
Section 615.090. License Tax — Payment Required. [R.O. 2009
§113.30; CC 1981 §16-127; Ord. No. 3457, 1-25-1967; Ord. No. 3765,
7-14-1970; Ord. No. 75-54, 9-17-1975; Ord. No. 77-45, 9-21-1977;
Ord. No. 81-34, 4-15-1981; Ord. No. 84-11, 2-1-1984; Ord. No.
91-127, 7-1-1991; Ord. No. 04-7, 1-7-2004; Ord. No. 11-164 §1,
9-28-2011; Ord. No. 11-227 §2, 11-4-2011; Ord. No. 13-051 §1,
2-22-2013]
Section 615.100. License Tax — When Payable. [R.O. 2009 §113.31;
CC 1981 §16-128; Ord. No. 3457, 1-25-1967; Ord. No. 3765,
7-14-1970; Ord. No. 75-54, 9-17-1975; Ord. No. 77-45, 9-21-1977;
Ord. No. 84-11, 2-1-1984; Ord. No. 91-127, 7-1-1991; Ord. No. 04-7,
1-7-2004]
Every person now or hereafter engaged in the business as described in
Section 615.090 shall pay to the Director of Finance on or before the last
A. Every person now or hereafter engaged in furnishing, distributing and
supplying natural or manufactured gas or any combination thereof for
light, heat, power and other purposes within the City shall pay the City
as a license tax a sum equal to:
1. Eight percent (8%) of the gross receipts from such business;
2. Effective July 1, 2004, seven and eight-tenths percent (7.8%) of the
gross receipts from such business;
3. Effective July 1, 2005, seven and six-tenths percent (7.6%) of the
gross receipts from such business;
4. Effective July 1, 2006, seven and four-tenths percent (7.4%) of the
gross receipts from such business;
5. Effective July 1, 2007, seven and two-tenths percent (7.2%) of the
gross receipts from such business;
6. Effective July 1, 2008, seven percent (7.0%) of the gross receipts
from such business.
7. Effective January 1, 2012, six and seven-tenths percent (6.7%) of
the gross receipts from such business.
B. "Gross receipts" means the aggregate amount of all sales and charges
of the commodities or services as herein described from the business of
supplying gas or gas service for compensation in the City during any
period, less discounts, credits, refunds, sales taxes and uncollectible
accounts actually charged off during the period. Gross receipts derived
from the furnishing of such service to the City shall not be included in
gross receipts, nor shall any tax be due on such gross receipts.
Section
615.090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
615.100
100:1461
day of each month an amount equal to the applicable percentage listed in
Section 615.090(A) of such person's gross receipts from such business for
the preceding calendar month.
Section 615.110. Statement of Gross Receipts Required To Be Filed
— Investigation. [R.O. 2009 §113.32; CC 1981 §16-129; Ord. No.
3457, 1-25-1967; Ord. No. 75-54, 9-17-1975; Ord. No. 77-45,
9-21-1977]
It is made the duty of every person engaged in furnishing, distributing and
supplying natural or manufactured gas as described in Section 615.090
to file with the City Clerk on or before the last day of each month a
sworn statement of the gross receipts from such business for the calendar
month preceding the filing of such statements. The City Clerk or his/her
duly authorized deputy shall be and is hereby authorized to investigate the
correctness and accuracy of the statement required and for that purpose
shall have access to, at all reasonable times, the books, documents, papers
and records of such person or persons to ascertain the accuracy thereof.
Section 615.120. Construction of Tax. [R.O. 2009 §113.33; CC 1981
§16-130; Ord. No. 3457, 1-25-1967]
The tax herein required to be paid shall be in lieu of any other occupation
tax required of persons engaged in the business described in Section
615.090, but nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to exempt
any such person from the payment to the City of the tax which the City
levied upon the real or personal property belonging to any such person,
nor the tax required of merchants or manufacturers for the sale of anything
other than gas service, nor shall the tax herein required exempt any such
person from the payment of any other tax which may be lawfully required
other than an occupation tax on the business described in Section 615.090.
Section 615.130. Maximum Gross Receipts Tax. [R.O. 2009 §113.34;
CC 1981 §16-131; Ord. No. 84-11, 2-1-1984; Ord. No. 91-127,
7-1-1991]
The percentage of license tax in Section 615.100 shall be reduced annually
on January 1, 1993 and each January first (1st) thereafter to yield an amount
equal to the prior year's gross revenue adjusted for changes in the St. Louis
area cost of living, increased costs for gas usage by the City, increased
population and increased City area.
Section 615.140. Refund of Gas License Fees Invoked By Section
615.090 To Elderly and Totally Disabled Residents Over Age 60 —
Refund Procedure — Refund Computation — Benefit and Funding.
[R.O. 2009 §113.35; Ord. No. 06-38, 2-17-2006; Ord. No. 06-164,
6-30-2006; Ord. No. 08-10, 1-14-2008]
A. Refund Authorized. The amount of any license fee paid to the City
pursuant to Section 615.090 by a person engaged in the business of
Section
615.100
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
615.140
100:1462
furnishing, distributing and supplying natural or manufactured gas or
any combination thereof for light, heat, power and other purposes
within the City on account of sales of such person to an exempt
consumer as herein defined for utility services rendered to such
consumer's residence shall be refunded by the City directly to such
exempt consumer.
B. Definition. For the purpose of this Section, "exempt consumer" shall
mean any consumer who owns or leases residential property located
within the City, who occupies the same as his/her customary place of
residence and who, on the first day of any calendar month, is sixty-two
(62) years of age or older or sixty (60) years of age or older and certified
as totally disabled by the Social Security Administration on said date
and to whom the payment of such utility tax is a hardship. When any
such residential property is owned or leased by two (2) or more persons
jointly, requirements for exemption shall be deemed satisfied if any one
(1) such owner or lessee is sixty-two (62) years of age or older or sixty
(60) years of age or older and certified as totally disabled by the Social
Security Administration on the first day of such calendar month and to
whom the payment of such utility tax is a hardship. [Ord. No. 15-288
§3, 12-15-2015526]
C. Procedure. From April 1 to May 31 of each year, any person claiming to
be entitled to a refund pursuant to this Section for taxes paid during the
prior year commencing January 1 and ending December 31 shall submit
a request for such refund to the office of the Mayor, together with such
proof of claim as may be required by the Department of Finance. Such
proof of claim may, at the discretion of the Department of Finance,
include proof of age, copies of utility bills and proof of payment of such
bills. [Ord. No. 15-288 §3, 12-15-2015]
D. Computation. The amount of refund owing to each exempt consumer
shall be the amount of the license tax imposed by the City's Code of
Ordinances as a result of such consumer's payments during the
preceding year calculated from January 1 to December 31 for utility
services rendered to his/her residence. [Ord. No. 15-288 §3,
12-15-2015]
E. Benefit. Nothing contained herein shall in any way alter or diminish the
obligations of any person licensed pursuant to Section 615.090, to pay a
license tax computed on the full amount of their gross sales to
consumers within the City or otherwise to comply with the provisions of
this Code. The exemption herein provided shall inure to the benefit of
exempt consumer only and shall be administered by the City for their
benefit.
526. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 15-288 also changed the title of this Section to include "Over Age
60" following "Totally Disabled Residents."
Section
615.140
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
615.140
100:1463
F. Funds. Refunds herein required to be made shall be paid from budgeted
general revenue monies. Payment of this refund is subject to availability
of funds being budgeted in the current year for this purpose.
Section
615.140
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
615.140
100:1464
ARTICLE IV
Exchange Telephone Service
Section 615.150. License Tax — Payment Required.527 [R.O. 2009
§113.40; CC 1981 §16-142; Ord. No. 3493, 7-6-1967; Ord. No. 3765,
7-14-1970; Ord. No. 75-54, 9-17-1975; Ord. No. 77-45, 9-21-1977;
Ord. No. 84-11, 2-1-1984; Ord. No. 91-127, 7-1-1991; Ord. No. 04-7,
1-7-2004; Ord. No. 11-227 §3, 11-4-2011]
A. Every person, firm, company or corporation now or hereafter engaged
in the business of furnishing exchange telephone service in the City
shall pay the City as a license tax a sum equal to:
1. Eight percent (8%) of the gross receipts from such business;
2. Effective July 1, 2004, seven and eight-tenths percent (7.8%) of the
gross receipts from such business;
3. Effective July 1, 2005, seven and six-tenths percent (7.6%) of the
gross receipts from such business;
4. Effective July 1, 2006, seven and four-tenths percent (7.4%) of the
gross receipts from such business;
5. Effective July 1, 2007, seven and two-tenths percent (7.2%) of the
gross receipts from such business;
6. Effective July 1, 2008, seven percent (7.0%) of the gross receipts
from such business;
7. Effective January 1, 2012, six and seven-tenths percent (6.7%) of
the gross receipts from such business.
B. "Gross receipts" means the aggregate amount of all sales and charges
of the commodities or services as herein described from the business of
furnishing exchange telephone service in the City during any period
less discounts, credits, refunds, sales taxes and uncollectible accounts
actually charged off during the period. Gross receipts derived from the
furnishing of such service to the City shall not be included in gross
receipts, nor shall any tax be due on such gross receipts.
527. Note—Ord. no. 11-194 continued in effect the provisions of ord. no. 04-07 which set this
license tax at 7%, as required and allowed by section 393.275, RSMo. Subsequently, ord.
no. 11-227 lowered the tax rate on this utility as set out above. Section 4 of said ordinance
stated that it was not the intent of said ordinance to be construed to be a rollback or
reduction of the 7% business license tax on gross receipts for purposes of the Hancock
Amendment (Art. X, §§18, 23, Missouri Constitution).
Section
615.150
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
615.160
100:1465
Section 615.160. License Tax — When Payable. [R.O. 2009 §113.41;
CC 1981 §16-143; Ord. No. 3493, 7-6-1967; Ord. No. 75-54,
9-17-1975; Ord. No. 77-45, 9-21-1977; Ord. No. 84-11, 2-1-1984;
Ord. No. 91-127, 7-1-1991; Ord. No. 04-7, 1-7-2004]
Every person now or hereafter engaged in the business as described in
Section 615.150 shall pay to the Director of Finance on or before the last
day of each month an amount equal to the applicable percentage listed in
Section 615.150(A) of such person's gross receipts from such business for
the preceding month.
Section 615.170. Statement of Gross Receipts Required To Be Filed
— Investigation. [R.O. 2009 §113.42; CC 1981 §16-144; Ord. No.
3493, 7-6-1967; Ord. No. 3765, 7-14-1970; Ord. No. 75-54,
9-17-1975; Ord. No. 77-45, 9-21-1977]
It is made the duty of every person engaged in furnishing exchange
telephone service as described in Section 615.150 to file with the City Clerk
on or before the last day of each month a sworn statement of the gross
receipts from such business for the calendar month preceding the filing
of such statements. The City Clerk or his/her duly authorized deputy shall
be and is hereby authorized to investigate the correctness and accuracy
of the statement required and for that purpose shall have access to, at all
reasonable times, the books, documents, papers and records of such person
or persons to ascertain the accuracy thereof.
Section 615.180. Temporary Wire Changes. [R.O. 2009 §113.43; CC
1981 §16-145; Ord. No. 3493, 7-6-1967]
All such persons, firms, companies or corporations mentioned in Section
615.150 on the request of any person shall remove or raise or lower their
wires temporarily to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures.
The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall
be paid by the party or parties requesting such raising or lowering of wires
and payment in advance may be required. Not less than forty-eight (48)
hours' notice shall be given to arrange for such temporary wire changes.
Section 615.190. Trimming Trees and The Like Authorized. [R.O.
2009 §113.44; CC 1981 §16-146; Ord. No. 3493, 7-6-1967]
The right is hereby granted to all such persons, firms, companies or
corporations mentioned in Section 615.150 to trim trees, brush or hedges
upon and overhanging the streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the
City, so as to prevent such foliage from coming in contact with telephone
wires and cables, all of such trimming to be done under the supervision and
direction of the Governing Body of the City or any City Official to whom such
duties have been or may be delegated.
Section
615.160
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
615.200
100:1466
Section 615.200. Construction of Tax. [R.O. 2009 §113.45; CC 1981
§16-147; Ord. No. 3493, 7-6-1967]
The payments required by the provisions of this Chapter shall be in lieu of
all other excises, charges, exactions, rentals, impositions or other license
or occupation taxes heretofore imposed upon any person, firm, company
or corporation engaged in the business described in 615.150, but nothing
herein contained shall be construed to exempt such person, firm, company
or corporation from any general or special ad valorem tax imposed upon the
public generally by the City.
Section 615.210. Maximum Gross Receipts Tax. [R.O. 2009 §113.46;
CC 1981 §16-148; Ord. No. 84-11, 2-1-1984; Ord. No. 91-127,
7-1-1991]
The percentage of license tax in Section 615.160 shall be reduced annually
on January 1, 1993 and each January first (1st) thereafter to yield an amount
equal to the prior year's gross revenue adjusted for changes in the St.
Louis area cost of living, increased costs for telephone usage, increased
population and increased City area.
Section
615.200
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
615.210
100:1467
Chapter 620
HOTELS AND MOTELS
Section
615.210
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
615.210
100:1468
ARTICLE I
License Taxes
Section 620.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §114.01; CC 1981
§§16-260(c), 16-260.1(c), 16-261; Ord. No. 84-13, 4-3-1984; Ord. No.
85-151, 11-12-1985; Ord. No. 91-92, 5-8-1991]
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
GROSS RECEIPTS — Shall not be merely the basic charge made to the
customer by the licensee, but shall instead include the entire amount of the
applicable revenue, including all sales taxes.
HOTEL, MOTEL OR TOURIST COURT — Any structure or building, under
one (1) management, which contains rooms furnished for the
accommodation or lodging of guests, with or without meals being so
provided, and kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the public as
a place where sleeping accommodations are sought for pay or compensation
to transient guests or permanent guests and having more than eight (8)
bedrooms furnished for the accommodations of such guests.
RESTAURANT — An establishment offering prepared meals, with or without
alcoholic beverages by the drink, which are intended for immediate
consumption whether or not to be consumed upon said premises. This
provision shall not be construed to include retail groceries.
TRANSIENT GUESTS — The persons who occupy a room in a hotel, motel
or tourist court for thirty-one (31) days or less.
Section 620.020. License Tax — Tourism. [R.O. 2009 §114.02; CC
1981 §16-260(a),(b); Ord. No. 84-13, 4-3-1984; Ord. No. 85-151,
11-12-1985; Ord. No. 91-92, 5-8-1991]
A. Amount Of Tax. Every person engaged in the business of renting,
leasing or letting living quarters, sleeping accommodations, rooms or a
part thereof, in connection with any hotel, motel or tourist court, shall
pay to the City a license tax equal to one percent (1%) of the gross
rental receipts derived from or paid by transient guests for sleeping
accommodations. Every person engaged in the business of a restaurant
and selling prepared food or meals shall pay to the City a license tax of
one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from sales of all goods and
services transacted at retail upon the premises. This license tax shall be
in addition to all other license taxes which are applicable to hotels,
motels, tourist courts and restaurants.
B. Use Of Funds. All funds collected pursuant to the provisions of this
Section shall be used exclusively to promote tourism, conventions and
other related activities in the City. The funds shall be administered by
the Saint Charles Convention and Visitors Commission.
Section
620.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
620.030
100:1469
Section 620.030. Convention Center. [R.O. 2009 §114.03; CC 1981
§16-260.1(a),(b),(d); Ord. No. 91-93, 5-8-1991; Ord. No. 92-319,
12-23-1992; Ord. No. 93-52, 3-17-1993; Ord. No. 93-109, 6-2-1993;
Ord. No. 94-24, 2-2-1994; Ord. No. 96-364, 12-4-1996; Ord. No.
97-331, 9-18-1997; Ord. No. 99-29, 1-22-1999; Ord. No. 99-246,
7-9-1999; Ord. No. 00-153, 6-9-2000; Ord. No. 01-121, 6-8-2001;
Ord. No. 02-179, 7-19-2002; Ord. No. 02-242, 10-7-2002; Ord. No.
02-286, 12-13-2002; Ord. No. 03-77, 4-7-2003]
Section 620.040. Payment — Due Date. [R.O. 2009 §114.04; CC
1981 §16-262; Ord. No. 84-13, 4-3-1984; Ord. No. 85-151,
11-12-1985; Ord. No. 91-94, 5-8-1991]
The license taxes under this Article shall be paid to the Director of Finance
monthly and shall be due and payable on or before the twentieth (20th) day
of the month based on the total daily receipts collected during the preceding
month.
Section 620.050. Reports Required. [R.O. 2009 §114.05; CC 1981
§16-263; Ord. No. 84-13, 4-3-1984; Ord. No. 85-151, 11-12-1985]
The licensee shall make true reports to the Director of Finance on forms
prescribed by the Director, giving such information as may be necessary to
determine the amounts to which the license tax shall apply for all gross daily
receipts for the monthly period, to be submitted with the monthly payment.
A licensee may separately state the amount of such license tax on all room
accounts and restaurant rates.
A. Amount Of Tax. Every person engaged in the business of renting,
leasing or letting living quarters, sleeping accommodations, rooms or a
part thereof, in connection with any hotel or motel, shall pay to the City
a license tax equal to five and one-half percent (5½%) of the gross
rental receipts derived from or paid by transient guests for sleeping
accommodations. This license tax shall be in addition to all other license
taxes which are applicable to hotels and motels.
B. Use Of Funds. All funds collected pursuant to the provisions of this
Section shall be used exclusively for the purpose of acquisition of
buildings and land for a convention center and for the purpose of
planning, designing, constructing, furnishing, equipping and operating
a convention center.
C. The license tax described in Subsection (A) of this Section shall not
apply to the gross rental receipts derived from or paid by transient
guests for sleeping accommodations from July 1, 2002 through April 30,
2003 and only three-fourths percent (0.75%) shall apply on and after
May 1, 2003.
Section
620.030
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
620.060
100:1470
Section 620.060. Examination of Books and Records. [R.O. 2009
§114.06; CC 1981 §16-264]
The Director of Finance and the Director's authorized representative shall
have the right at all reasonable times during business hours to make such
examination and inspection of the books and records of the licensee as may
be necessary to determine the correctness of such reports.
Section 620.070. Penalties For Non-Payment. [R.O. 2009 §114.07;
CC 1981 §16-265; Ord. No. 84-13, 4-3-1984; Ord. No. 85-151,
11-12-1985]
For each and every month or part thereof any such license tax provided
for under this Chapter remains unpaid after the same becomes due and
payable, there shall be added to such license tax, as a penalty, ten percent
(10%) of the amount of the license tax for the first (1st) month or part
thereof the same is unpaid and for each and every month thereafter the
same is unpaid, two percent (2%) of the amount of such license tax shall be
added until the same is fully paid. In no case shall the total penalty exceed
thirty percent (30%) of the tax. In addition to the penalties provided herein,
any person required to pay to the City the license tax defined herein shall
be subject to all other provisions of this Title not specifically provided for
herein or in conflict herewith.
Section
620.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
620.070
100:1471
Chapter 625
JUNK DEALERS, PAWNBROKERS AND SHORT-TERM LOAN
ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
620.070
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
620.070
100:1472
ARTICLE I
Junk Dealers
Section 625.010. Definition. [R.O. 2009 §116.01; CC 1981 §16-56]
For the purpose of this Article, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
JUNK DEALER — Any person engaged in the business of dealing in any
old iron, lead, zinc, brass, steel, copper or other metals whatsoever, tags,
bottles or other things of like nature or other used or old articles no longer
useful for the purpose for which they were made or manufactured.
Section 625.020. License Required — Fee.528 [R.O. 2009 §116.02; CC
1981 §16-57]
Every person who shall keep or carry on the business or trade of a junk
dealer in this City shall, before engaging in such business, obtain from the
City a license therefor, the charge for which license shall be twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) a year.
Section 625.030. Register.529 [R.O. 2009 §116.03; CC 1981 §16-58]
Every person who shall be engaged in keeping or carrying on the business
of a junk dealer within the City shall keep a register written in ink in which
he/she shall, at the time of the purchase or receipt of junk, enter the names
and places of residence of persons from whom he/she shall have purchased
or received the same, together with the date of such purchase or receipt and
a description of the articles so purchased or received, which register shall
be kept open at all times for the examination or inspection of any officer
interested therein and requesting or demanding to see the same.
Section 625.040. Examination and Inspection of Junk.530 [R.O. 2009
§116.04; CC 1981 §16-59]
Every junk dealer shall permit, at all reasonable hours, any person asking
or demanding to do so to examine and inspect any junk of any kind by him/
her or being in or around such junk shop or place of business.
Section 625.050. Dealing With Minors.531 [R.O. 2009 §116.05; CC
1981 §16-60]
Any junk dealer who shall buy, receive or take any personal property,
goods, wares or merchandise, other than agricultural products, of any value
from any unemancipated minor or have in his/her possession any personal
property, goods, wares or merchandise so had and obtained without the
528. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
529. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
530. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
531. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
625.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
625.050
100:1473
consent of such minor's parent or guardians, had in writing, shall be subject
to the penalty set forth in Section 100.150.
Section
625.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
625.050
100:1474
ARTICLE II
Pawnbrokers
Section 625.060. Definition. [R.O. 2009 §116.15; CC 1981 §16-207;
Ord. No. 79-104, 12-19-1979]
Section 625.070. Register To Be Kept — Photographing of Persons
Pawning or Selling Articles Required.532 [R.O. 2009 §116.16; CC
1981 §§16-208—16-209; Ord. No. 79-104, 12-18-1979]
A. For the purpose of this Article, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
PAWNBROKER — Any person who loans money on deposit of personal
property or who deals in the purchase of personal property on condition
of selling the same back again at a stipulated price or who makes a
public display at his/her place of business of the sign generally used by
pawnbrokers to denote their business:
1. Three (3) gilt or yellow balls; or
Who publicly exhibits a sign of "money to loan on personal property
or deposit".
2.
A. Every pawnbroker shall keep a register of all loans and purchases of all
articles effected or made by him/her, which register shall show the date
of loans or purchases and the names of all persons who have left any
description of property on deposit as a collateral security or as a
delivery on sale thereof. Opposite such name and date shall be written
in plain hand the person's age and motor vehicle operator's or
chauffeur's license number or Social Security number or other
identification of public record designated in a list of such items
established by the License Collector. A full description of all such
property purchased or received on deposit as collateral security, the
manufacturer's identifying insignia or serial number, if applicable, the
time when the loan falls due, the amount of purchase money or the
amount loaned and the interest charged and the picture number. In
addition to this, he/she shall give the party negotiating or selling a plain
written or printed ticket for the loan and a plain written or printed
receipt of the articles purchased, having on each a copy of the entries
required by this Article to be kept in his/her register. For the ticket or
receipt, he/she shall not be entitled to make any charge. A third (3rd)
copy of such register shall be forwarded on a weekly basis to the City
Police Department to become part of their record.
B. No pawnbroker shall accept any article or property as collateral
security or purchase any article or property unless he/she makes a
photograph of the person from whom such article or property is being
received, along with the receipt or pawn ticket given to such person;
532. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
625.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
625.070
100:1475
Section 625.080. Stolen Goods.533 [R.O. 2009 §116.17; CC 1981
§16-210; Ord. No. 79-104, 12-18-1979]
It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to report to the Police any article
pledged with him/her or which is sought to be pledged with him/her, if he/
she shall have reason to believe that the article was stolen or lost and found
by the person attempting to pledge it, in the case of a lost article.
Section 625.090. Weapons.534 [R.O. 2009 §116.18; CC 1981 §16-211;
Ord. No. 79-104, 12-18-1979]
No pawnbroker shall receive as a pledge or purchase any black jack or
sawed-off shotgun and no pawnbroker shall display in his/her window or
shop any such weapons for sale.
Section 625.100. Minors.535 [R.O. 2009 §116.19; CC 1981 §16-212;
Ord. No. 79-104, 12-18-1979]
No pawnbroker shall have any business dealings as a pawnbroker with any
unemancipated minor under the age of eighteen (18) years, except with the
written consent of the parent or guardian of the minor to each particular
transaction. No pawnbroker's license shall be issued to any person who is
not eighteen (18) years of age or over. No person under eighteen (18) years
of age shall be an agent for any pawnbroker.
Section 625.110. Compliance Required.536 [R.O. 2009 §116.20; CC
1981 §16-213; Ord. No. 79-104, 12-18-1979]
No person or corporation shall conduct or operate a business of pawnbroker
in violation of any of the provisions of this Article.
Section 625.120. License Required.537 [R.O. 2009 §116.21; CC 1981
§16-224; Ord. No. 79-104, 12-18-1979]
No person or corporation shall conduct or operate the business of
pawnbroker without having first obtained a license therefor as provided in
this Article.
nor shall any pawnbroker refuse to deliver such photograph to any Law
Enforcement Officer upon request in connection with a specific item of
stolen property within one (1) year following the date such photograph
is taken. Every pawnbroker shall display a notice to his/her customers
in a prominent place to the effect that he/she is required, by City this
Section or any other applicable ordinance of the City, to photograph
every person pawning or selling an item to him/her.
533. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
534. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
535. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
536. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
537. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
625.070
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
625.130
100:1476
Section 625.130. License Application — Investigation. [R.O. 2009
§116.22; CC 1981 §16-225; Ord. No. 79-104, 12-18-1979]
Application for a pawnbroker's license shall be made to the City and shall
state thereon the name of the applicant; the place of business; and the
number of employees intended to be engaged. The Chief of Police or any
other officer of the City designated by the City Council shall investigate
each applicant for such license and shall report back to the City Council
whether or not such applicant is a person of good character. No license shall
be issued to a person who has been convicted of the offense of receiving
stolen property or of burglary or robbery.
Section 625.140. Prerequisite Agreement For License.538 [R.O. 2009
§116.23; CC 1981 §16-226; Ord. No. 79-104, 12-18-1979]
The applicant for a pawnbroker's license shall have agreed not to accept
as collateral security or to purchase any camera, radio, television set,
lawnmower, typewriter, adding machine, calculating machine, copying
machine, duplicating machine, tape recorder, tape player, cash register,
still or moving picture projector or offset projector, dictating machine,
record player, electric buffer, electric polisher or electric floor waxer or
any appliances or devices which would normally have a manufacturer's
serial number or other identifying insignia unless such item shall have
plainly visible thereon the manufacturer's serial number or other identifying
insignia.
Section 625.150. License Fee — Term. [R.O. 2009 §116.24; CC 1981
§16-227; Ord. No. 79-104, 12-18-1979]
The annual fee for a pawnbroker's license shall be five hundred dollars
($500.00) per annum; provided that no license shall be issued for less than
six (6) months and no license shall be issued until the fee is paid.
Section 625.160. Separate License For Each Location.539 [R.O. 2009
§116.25; CC 1981 §16-228; Ord. No. 79-104, 12-18-1979]
A. No pawnbroker shall be allowed to have more than one (1) place for
transacting the business of a pawnbroker without having first obtained
a license for such place of business.
B. No person shall act as agent for a pawnbroker at any other place than
the place of business stated in the application for a license.
538. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
539. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
625.130
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
625.170
100:1477
Section 625.170. Change of Address.540 [R.O. 2009 §116.26; CC
1981 §16-229; Ord. No. 79-104, 12-18-1979]
In the event a licensee under this Article shall change any of the address
stated in the application during the term for which the license is issued,
such licensee shall notify the License Collector of such change not later
than one (1) day after such change.
Section 625.180. Revocation of License. [R.O. 2009 §116.27; CC
1981 §16-230; Ord. No. 79-104, 12-18-1979]
Any license issued under this Article may be revoked by the Mayor and
Council for any violation of any provision of this Article.
Section 625.190. Limits On Number of Licenses Issued. [R.O. 2009
§116.28; Ord. No. 97-31, 1-22-1997]
No license for operating the business of pawnbroker shall be issued when
the issuance thereof would increase the number of such licenses
outstanding and in force at that time to more than one (1) for each fifteen
thousand (15,000) inhabitants residing within the City according to the last
decennial census of the United States. The renewal of an unexpired existing
license shall have priority over the issuance of a new license.
540. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
625.170
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
625.190
100:1478
ARTICLE III
Short-Term Loan Establishments
Section 625.200. Definition. [R.O. 2009 §116.35; Ord. No. 99-433,
12-22-1999]
For the purpose of this Article, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
SHORT-TERM LOAN ESTABLISHMENT — Any business which loans money
on a short-term basis to members of the general public as an element of its
operation, including: businesses offering title loans, payday loans, signature
loans and small loans under Chapter 367 or Section 408.500, RSMo.; and
other similar businesses. Short-term loan establishment shall not include: a
bank, savings and loan association or credit union which is licensed by the
appropriate State or Federal agency; or a retail credit financing institution
which is licensed under Chapters 364 or 365, RSMo.; or pawnbrokers or
retail merchants.
Section 625.210. License Required — Application. [R.O. 2009
§116.36; Ord. No. 99-433, 12-22-1999]
No person shall conduct or operate the business of short-term loan
establishment without having first obtained from the Director of Finance
a license upon the payment of a license fee as provided in this Article. All
licenses under the provisions of this Article shall be issued only upon an
application form supplied by the Director of Finance and prepared by the
applicant or a duly authorized agent.
Section 625.220. License Fee — Term. [R.O. 2009 §116.37; Ord. No.
99-433, 12-22-1999]
The license required by this Article shall be effective from January first (1st)
through December thirty-first (31st) in a given calendar year. The annual
fee for a short-term loan establishment license shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00). The license fee will be reduced by one-half (½) after one-half (½)
of the license period is past. No license shall be issued until the fee is paid.
Section 625.230. Separate License For Each Location. [R.O. 2009
§116.38; Ord. No. 99-433, 12-22-1999]
A. No short-term loan establishment shall be allowed to have more than
one (1) place for transacting the business of short-term loan
establishment without having first obtained a license for such place of
business.
B. No person shall act as agent for a short-term loan establishment at any
other place than the place of business stated in the application for a
license.
Section
625.200
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
625.240
100:1479
Section 625.240. Limits On Number of Licenses Issued. [R.O. 2009
§116.39; Ord. No. 99-433, 12-22-1999]
No license for operating the business of short-term loan establishment shall
be issued when the issuance thereof would increase the number of such
licenses outstanding and in force at that time to more than one (1) for each
fifteen thousand (15,000) inhabitants residing within the City according to
the last decennial census of the United States; provided that all persons
conducting or operating the business of short-term loan establishment
within the City of St. Charles on the effective date of this Article may
be issued a license if they meet all other requirements for licensure. The
renewal of an unexpired existing license shall have priority over the
issuance of a new license.
Section
625.240
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
625.240
100:1480
Chapter 630
PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS
Section 630.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §117.01; CC 1981 §16-241;
Ord. No. 81-21, 3-25-1981]
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
DEALER — Any person, firm, proprietorship, partnership, corporation or
other entity who shall engage at any location in the City in the business of
the purchase of precious metals and gems. As used herein, "dealer" includes
employers and principals on whose behalf the purchase was made and all
employees and agents who personally make such purchases.
DEALER, ESTABLISHED — Any dealer who has been continuous in
conducting his/her business at the same permanent business address for a
period of not less than sixty (60) calendar days and for not less than five (5)
days in any calendar week prior to applying for a license required by this
Chapter.
DEALER, ITINERANT — Any dealer who is not an established dealer. Any
employee or agent who conducts any activities regulated herein on behalf
of his/her employer or principal and any partner or principal of any entity
engaged in activities regulated herein shall also be considered an itinerant
dealer.
GEMS — Any item containing or having as part of its composition any
precious or semi-precious stones customarily used in jewelry or
ornamentation.
PRECIOUS METALS — Silver, gold or platinum, in either coin, bullion
or other form, and such other precious metals as the commissioner may
specify by rule or order.
PURCHASES — The obtaining by payment of money or its equivalent. It
shall not mean or include purchases made directly from manufacturers or
wholesalers of precious metals or gems.
Section 630.020. Obtaining A License.541 [R.O. 2009 §117.02; CC
1981 §16-242; Ord. No. 81-21, 3-25-1981; Ord. No. 84-2, 1-18-1984;
Ord. No. 10-108 §1, 5-20-2010]
A. No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems without first making
application for and obtaining a business license. Possession of a permit/
business license issued in another locality shall not relieve a dealer of
the obligation to obtain a license from the City.
B. A business license shall be issued to any established dealer as defined
or to any person seeking to become an established dealer:
541. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §630.110.
Section
625.240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
630.020
100:1481
1. By paying the fee.
2. Furnishing a legible glossy photo of the licensee.
3. Posting the bond required in Section 630.100.
4. Designation of the premises on which the dealer shall conduct
business.
5. Specification of the date or dates on which the business shall be
conducted.
C. A license shall be issued to itinerant dealers:
1. Paying the fee.
2. Upon proof of good character.
3. Designation of the premises on which the dealer shall conduct
business.
4. Specification of the date or dates on which the business shall be
conducted.
5. Furnishing a photograph of licensee.
D. Good character shall be considered proven, if neither the dealer nor any
of its principals, agents or employees have been convicted of any crime
involving moral turpitude within the last ten (10) years if the crime was
a felony and within the last five (5) years if the crime was a
misdemeanor. The burden shall be upon the dealer to prove good
character. An applicant shall submit a Request for Record Check with
the Missouri State Highway Patrol.
E. Licenses shall be issued to established dealers for a fee of ten dollars
($10.00) for the first (1st) year. Licenses issued to established dealers
shall be valid for the year, nature of business and location designated in
the application. Established dealers who change their address or the
nature of their business shall apply for such license location change and
pay a fee of ten dollars ($10.00).
F. Persons who are established dealers shall pay a fee of ten dollars
($10.00) per year for each year after the first (1st) year.
G. Licenses shall be issued to itinerant dealers only for the period
specified in the application. Such period is not to exceed sixty (60) days.
Itinerant dealers must obtain a separate license for each period or
operation and each location in the City. A fee of five hundred dollars
($500.00) per license shall be assessed. Each itinerant dealer must
specify on the application the identity of all corporations, firms or
businesses with which they are affiliated and their authorized agents.
H. Any license issued hereunder shall at all times be kept exposed by the
licensee at his/her business premises and shall, at all times, be readily
Section
630.020
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
630.020
100:1482
Section 630.030. False Statements.542 [R.O. 2009 §117.03; CC 1981
§16-243; Ord. No. 81-21, 3-25-1981]
Any false statement made on the business license application form, as
required by Section 630.020, invalidates the license in total and shall be
punished as a violation of Section 100.150.
Section 630.040. Information From Seller.543 [R.O. 2009 §117.04;
CC 1981 §16-244; Ord. No. 81-21, 3-25-1981; Ord. No. 95-121,
5-4-1995]
Licensees shall record, on forms provided by the Finance Director, the
name, address, Social Security number and date of birth of sellers by
requiring an identifying credential of the person selling or exchanging an
article. If required by the dealer, the seller shall produce proof of ownership
of any article.
Section 630.050. Records To Be Kept By Dealers.544 [R.O. 2009
§117.05; CC 1981 §16-245; Ord. No. 81-21, 3-25-1981; Ord. No.
84-2, 1-18-1984; Ord. No. 95-121, 5-4-1995]
Section 630.060. Lists of Purchases To Be Furnished To Chief of
Police.545 [R.O. 2009 §117.06; CC 1981 §16-246; Ord. No. 81-21,
3-25-1981; Ord. No. 84-2, 1-18-1984; Ord. No. 95-121, 5-4-1995]
All itinerant dealers shall furnish daily to the Chief of Police, upon forms to
be prescribed and furnished by the Finance Director, full and complete lists
of all articles purchased by such itinerant dealers within the twenty-four
(24) hour period following the time of transaction. Such lists shall contain
all data required by Section 630.050.
visible and displayed in such a manner as to be easily inspected by any
person desiring to do so.
I. Licenses are not transferable or portable.
A. All dealers purchasing precious metals and gems shall keep daily
records, on forms prescribed and furnished by the Finance Director, of
every article purchased. The records shall contain a full description of
such articles and shall show all distinguishing marks, numbers, brands,
letters or monograms of any kind on such articles.
B. The records described in this Section shall be available for inspection at
any reasonable time by the Chief of Police or his/her designated agent.
542. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §630.110.
543. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §630.110.
544. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §630.110.
545. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §630.110.
Section
630.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
630.070
100:1483
Section 630.070. Dealer To Retain Purchases.546 [R.O. 2009 §117.07;
CC 1981 §16-247; Ord. No. 81-21, 3-25-1981; Ord. No. 84-2,
1-18-1984]
Itinerant dealers shall retain all precious metals or gems purchased for a
minimum of ten (10) days from the date of purchase. During the period of
time, no change, modification or disfigurement of any nature shall be made
to any item containing precious metals or gems, nor shall any such item
be concealed, removed from the corporate limits of the City or changed
without the consent of the Chief of Police or his/her designated agent.
Section 630.080. Prohibited Purchases.547 [R.O. 2009 §117.08; CC
1981 §16-248; Ord. No. 81-21, 3-25-1981]
No purchases shall be made from anyone under age eighteen (18). No
dealer shall make a purchase from anyone when doubt of ownership exists.
If doubt of ownership exists, the dealer shall have the responsibility to
require proof of ownership.
Section 630.090. Inspection of Premises.548 [R.O. 2009 §117.09; CC
1981 §16-249; Ord. No. 81-21, 3-25-1981]
Every dealer shall admit to his/her place of business at any time the Chief
of Police or his/her agent for the purpose of searching for and taking into
possession any article known or believed to have been missing or stolen or
for the purpose of inspection of those records required to be maintained
under Section 630.050.
Section 630.100. Bond Requirement.549 [R.O. 2009 §117.10; CC
1981 §16-250; Ord. No. 81-21, 3-25-1981]
In addition to all other requirements, all itinerant dealers shall be required
to post a cash bond or bond with surety in a form acceptable to the City
Attorney in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) before a permit
is issued. In lieu of a bond with surety, an irrevocable letter of credit in a
form acceptable to the City Attorney may be provided. The letter of credit
shall be from a bank authorized to do business in the City. The period of the
bond or letter of credit shall extend for a period of sixty (60) days beyond
the last day on which the dealer transacts any business regulated by this
Chapter. The bond or letter of credit shall indemnify all persons who suffer
any loss resulting from the failure of the dealer to abide by the provisions of
this Chapter.
546. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §630.110.
547. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §630.110.
548. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §630.110.
549. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §630.110.
Section
630.070
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
630.110
100:1484
Section 630.110. Penalty. [R.O. 2009 §117.99; CC 1981 §16-251;
Ord. No. 81-21, 3-25-1981]
Any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall, upon conviction,
in addition to having his/her license revoked, be punished as provided in
Section 100.150. Each separate transaction and/or item shall be considered
as a separate offense.
Chapter 635
SECURITY SYSTEMS AND SERVICES
Section
630.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
630.110
100:1485

ARTICLE I
Alarm Systems
Section 635.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §118.01; CC 1981 §16-61;
Ord. No. 84-80, 7-23-1984; Ord. No. 86-55, 3-21-1986; Ord. No.
91-109, 6-5-1991]
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ALARM AGENT — Any person who is employed by an alarm business, either
directly or indirectly, whose duties include any of the following: selling,
maintaining, leasing, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or
installing on or in any building, structure or facility any alarm system.
ALARM BUSINESS — Any business engaged in any of the activities of
selling, installing, servicing, altering, leasing, repairing, maintaining,
replacing, moving, monitoring or responding to an alarm system or causing
any of these activities to take place.
ALARM IDENTIFICATION NUMBER — A number issued to an alarm
subscriber by the Police Department for the purpose of identifying that
alarm system for dispatching and record keeping purposes.
ALARM SUBSCRIBER — Any person who leases, contracts for, buys or
otherwise obtains and operates an alarm system for the purpose of
obtaining a response to the alarm from the Police Department or the Fire
Department and on whose premises an alarm system is maintained,
excluding audible alarms on motor vehicles. The owner of any building,
structure or facility containing alarm systems installed in or on leased
or rented individual apartments or residences contained therein shall be
deemed the alarm subscriber.
ALARM SYSTEM — Any device which is designed or used for the detection
of burglary or attempted burglary or for alerting others of the commission
of a robbery or attempted robbery within a building, structure or facility,
or both, and which emits a sound or transmits a signal or message when
activated for the purpose of deterring the intruder or notifying another
person of the happening, or both; or a device for detecting fire or alerting
medical personnel.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE — Refers to an alarm system which
automatically sends over the telephone switching network a prerecorded
voice message or coded signal indicating existence of an unlawful act to
which a Police response is requested.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of the St. Charles Police Department or his/
her designated representative.
FALSE ALARM — The activation of an alarm system whereby police, fire
or medical personnel are summoned to a location and no criminal, fire or
medical emergency in fact occurred or was attempted. The following shall
not be considered false alarms under Section 635.050:
Section
635.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
635.010
100:1487
PERSONS — An individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
TELEPHONE COMPANY — The utility that furnishes telephone service to
the City area.
Section 635.020. Alarm Reporting. [R.O. 2009 §118.02; CC 1981
§16-63; Ord. No. 84-80, 7-17-1984]
All alarm sounding reported, either directly or by relay from an alarm
business, shall be done in a manner prescribed by the Chief of Police.
Section 635.030. False Alarms.550 [R.O. 2009 §118.03; CC 1981
§16-64; Ord. No. 84-80, 7-17-1984; Ord. No. 86-55, 3-18-1986; Ord.
No. 91-109, 6-5-1991; Ord. No. 97-215, 6-18-1997]
1. An alarm caused by severe weather conditions or electric power failure;
An alarm caused by or resulting from damage, testing or repair of
telephone equipment or lines by the telephone company, provided that
such incidents are promptly reported to the telephone company;
2.
An alarm caused by an attempted and unauthorized or illegal entry, of
which there is visible evidence;
3.
An alarm caused by vandalism or destruction of property, of which there
is visible evidence;
4.
An alarm intentionally caused by the resident or occupant acting under
a reasonable belief that a need exists to call in reference to an
emergency.
5.
A. Upon receipt of the first (1st) and second (2nd) false alarms within any
calendar year, a warning notice shall be issued by the Police
Department to the subscriber.
B. Upon receipt of the third (3rd) false alarm and any subsequent false
alarms within any calendar year, a civil penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00)
shall be levied upon the alarm subscriber for each false alarm made.
Failure to pay the civil penalty within thirty (30) days of demand by the
Police Department shall constitute a violation of this Article and can
result in the service rendered by the Police Department being
suspended.
C. Each and every false alarm upon which a response is made shall be
considered a separate false alarm regardless of the frequency of such
alarms.
D. Response to any alarm system can be terminated upon authority of the
Police Chief.
550. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §635.150.
Section
635.010
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
635.030
100:1488
Section 635.040. Cancellation of Notice or Fine. [R.O. 2009
§118.04; CC 1981 §16-65; Ord. No. 84-80, 7-23-1984; Ord. No. 85-3,
1-10-1985; Ord. No. 91-109, 6-5-1991]
The Police Department shall cancel any notice or fine upon satisfactory
proof by the alarm subscriber that a particular alarm falls within the
exceptions enumerated under "FALSE ALARM" in Section 635.010.
Section 635.050. Limitations. [R.O. 2009 §118.05; CC 1981 §16-66;
Ord. No. 84-80, 7-23-1984; Ord. No. 91-109, 6-5-1991]
Section 635.060. Identification Cards. [R.O. 2009 §118.06; CC 1981
§16-67; Ord. No. 84-80, 7-23-1984; Ord. No. 91-109, 6-5-1991]
E. The making of any false alarm by the alarm subscriber is declared to be
unlawful if the alarm subscriber has had two (2) previous false alarms
within that same calendar year. This offense shall be one of strict
liability.
F. Schools offering basic education to any grade (K-12) shall be exempt
from the requirements of Section 635.030. [Ord. No. 15-068 §1,
4-21-2015]
A. Automatic Dialing Devices. No person shall use, operate or install any
device that will, upon activation, automatically initiate a telephone call
and deliver a recorded alarm message to any telephone of a customer of
the public telephone company, without the prior written consent of such
customer.
B. Noise. All bells, sirens or other noise sources that sound in the event of
an alarm are to cut off automatically within fifteen (15) minutes after
the alarm has been activated.
A. As of July 17, 1984, any person engaging in the alarm business and each
alarm agent shall have upon their person an identification card as
hereinafter set forth and each alarm agent is required to maintain on
his/her person and shall produce such identification card upon request
by any customer, prospective customer or lawful authority.
B. The identification card must contain as a minimum the following
information:
1. Full face photograph, head size not less than one (1) inch vertical;
2. Name, height, weight, date of birth;
3. Name of employing company;
4. Capacity with the company (sales representative, repair technician,
installer and the like);
5. Signature of authorizing individual of company; and
Section
635.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
635.060
100:1489
Section 635.070. Alarm Alteration Disclosure.551 [R.O. 2009
§118.07; CC 1981 §16-68; Ord. No. 84-80, 7-23-1984]
It shall be unlawful for any person engaging in the alarm business or alarm
agent to adjust, alter, fix or change any alarm system or part thereof without
written disclosure to the alarm subscriber.
Section 635.080. Contracts For Sale.552 [R.O. 2009 §118.08; CC 1981
§16-69; Ord. No. 84-80, 7-23-1984]
No alarm agent or alarm business shall sell, lease or install any alarm
system without first furnishing the alarm subscriber or prospective alarm
subscriber with a written offer in which each opening, item or area to be
protected is identified and the device to be used is described in generic
terms. Upon the installation of an alarm system, the alarm agent or business
shall furnish the alarm subscriber with instruction on the operation of the
system.
Section 635.090. License. [R.O. 2009 §118.09; CC 1981 §16-70; Ord.
No. 84-82, 7-24-1984]
Section 635.100. Exemptions. [R.O. 2009 §118.10; CC 1981 §16-71;
Ord. No. 84-80, 7-23-1984]
6. Signature of holder.
C. The identification card shall be issued annually by an alarm business to
its agents and employees.
A. As of July 17, 1984, any person engaging in the alarm business shall
obtain a license as hereinafter set forth. The fee for such business
license shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per year for each such
business.
B. The applicant for such alarm business license shall supply all
information requested on forms supplied by the Director of Finance.
A. The provisions of Sections 635.060 through 635.090 do not apply to:
1. Persons engaged solely in the manufacture or sale of alarm systems
or components from a fixed location and who do not install,
maintain, service or plan the alarm system for any location.
2. Persons engaged in the repair of alarm systems or components
from a fixed location and who do not either personally or through
an agent visit the building, structure or facility in which the alarm
system is installed.
551. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §635.150.
552. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §635.150.
Section
635.060
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
635.100
100:1490
ARTICLE II
Private Security Guards
Section 635.110. Private Security Guard. [R.O. 2009 §118.20; Ord.
No. 95-358, 12-27-1995]
No person shall engage in the activities of a private security guard without
having a valid license to do so from St. Charles County. A "private security
guard" is a person who conducts or carries on or engages in the activity of
watching or guarding over any person or property, either real or personal,
so as to act in the function of guard and not primarily engaged in the
performance of investigative work.
Section
635.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
635.110
100:1491

ARTICLE III
Convenience Business
Section 635.120. Definition. [R.O. 2009 §118.40; Ord. No. 95-256,
9-20-1995]
Section 635.130. Safety Requirements. [R.O. 2009 §118.41; Ord. No.
95-256, 9-20-1995]
A. For purposes of this Article, the term "convenience business" means
any place of business that is primarily engaged in the retail sale of
groceries or both groceries and gasoline and is open for business at any
time between the hours of 11:00 P.M. and 5:00 A.M. The term
"convenience business" does not include:
1. A business that is solely or primarily a restaurant;
2. A business that always has at least two (2) employees on the
premises after 11:00 P.M. and before 5:00 A.M.;
3. A business that has at least ten thousand (10,000) square feet of
retail floor space;
4. A business in which the owner or a member of the owner's family
works between 11:00 P.M. and 5:00 A.M.; or
5. A business which is owned by a person who owns a business at no
other location.
A. Prior to January 1, 1997, for the protection of employees and the
consumer public at late-night convenience businesses, every owner of a
convenience business shall ensure that such owner's convenience
business is equipped with the following:
1. A bullet-resistant glass enclosure or security camera system
capable of recording and retrieving an image to assist law
enforcement officials in the identification and apprehension of a
criminal offender;
2. A drop safe or cash management device for restricted access to
cash receipts;
3. Lighting for parking areas and entrances at an intensity to provide
clear visibility under normal conditions;
4. A conspicuous notice at the entrance which states that the cash
register contains limited funds;
5. Height markers at the entrance of the convenience business which
display height measures; and
6. A cash management policy to limit the cash on hand at all times
after 11:00 P.M. and before 5:00 A.M.
Section
635.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
635.130
100:1493
Section 635.140. Crime Deterrence Training. [R.O. 2009 §118.42;
Ord. No. 95-256, 9-20-1995]
The owner or principal operator of a convenience business shall provide
each employee with training in proper robbery deterrence and safety within
sixty (60) days of an employee's date of employment or if a person is an
employee on January 1, 1997, then by July 1, 1997.
Section 635.150. Penalty. [R.O. 2009 §118.99; CC 1981 §16-64; Ord.
No. 84-80, 7-23-1984; Ord. No. 86-55, 3-21-1986; Ord. No. 91-109,
6-5-1991]
B. After January 1, 1997, for the protection of employees and the
consumer public at late-night convenience business, every owner of a
convenience business shall ensure that:
1. No window signs shall be located so as to obstruct the view from
outside the building to the cash register and sales transaction area;
and
2. No window tinting that significantly reduces exterior or interior
view in a normal line of sight.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter for which no
other penalty is set forth shall be subject to the penalty provisions set
forth in Section 100.150.
B. Any subscriber convicted of violating Section 635.030 shall be punished
by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. Prosecution under this
Section shall be available in addition to any civil penalty which may be
imposed for the making of any false alarm and in addition to any
administrative action which may be taken.
Section
635.130
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
635.150
100:1494
Chapter 640
ITINERANT MERCHANTS, GARAGE SALES AND SOLICITORS
Section
635.150
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
635.150
100:1495

ARTICLE I
Vendors in Main Street Mall and Other Locations
Section 640.005. Vending Within Jefferson Street, Missouri River,
Reservoir Street and Second Street.553 [R.O. 2009 §119.09; CC 1981
§16-420; Ord. No. 90-187, 7-19-1990; Ord. No. 04-228, 9-10-2004;
Ord. No. 08-77, 4-16-2008]
A. Except as permitted by Subsections (B) and (C), it shall be unlawful to
sell, offer for sale, vend, operate, maintain or serve any goods,
merchandise, food, products or services upon any street, sidewalk or
public property located within the area bounded by Jefferson Street on
the north, the Missouri River on the east, Reservoir Street on the south
and Second Street on the west, except that the City Council may, by
conditional use approval as described in Chapter 400, allow the serving
of food and drinks at tables, by an existing restaurant, upon a
designated portion of the public right-of-way immediately adjacent to
such establishment; provided that the right-of-way remain clear for
pedestrian traffic as set forth in Section 400.490(C)(3) of this Municipal
Code.
B. During special events approved by the City, the activities prohibited by
Subsection (A) may be allowed at such locations and under such
conditions as may be approved by the City.
C. Nothing contained in this Section shall be interpreted to prohibit the
operation of vehicles for hire properly licensed under and operated in
compliance with Chapter 645 to prohibit the operation of City vehicles
or to prohibit newsracks.
D. Nothing contained in this Section shall be interpreted to prohibit the
City from allowing activities prohibited by Subsection (A) above to
occur within a building, boat or train.
553. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §640.160.
Section
640.005
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
640.005
100:1497

ARTICLE II
Itinerant Merchants — Promoters
Section 640.010. Itinerant Merchants and Promoters.554 [R.O. 2009
§119.20; CC 1981 §16-27; Ord. No. 93-166, 7-21-1993; Ord. No.
93-223, 10-6-1993; Ord. No. 94-326, 12-14-1994; Ord. No. 95-15,
1-29-1995; Ord. No. 95-103, 4-13-1995; Ord. No. 95-129, 5-4-1995;
Ord. No. 97-238, 7-16-1997]
A. Definition. For the purpose of this Section, an "itinerant merchant" is
defined as any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, agent,
consignee or employee, whether a resident of the City or not, who
engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares
and merchandise within the City and who, in furtherance of that
purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor
vehicle, tent, public room, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop,
lot or any other place within the City for the exhibition and sale of such
goods, wares and merchandise.
B. Regular Itinerant Merchant License. Except as otherwise provided in
this Section, every itinerant merchant shall pay a license fee of one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). The license shall be valid for three (3)
consecutive calendar weeks. An itinerant merchant shall not be issued
more than three (3) licenses in any calendar year.
C. Promoter-Related Itinerant Merchant License. No itinerant merchant's
license shall be required of any itinerant merchant participating in an
event for which a promoter's license has been issued.
D. Promoters.
1. The person responsible for the development, coordination,
advertising and implementation of a group event involving itinerant
merchants shall pay a license fee based upon the following rates.
The license shall be valid for any combination of seven (7) days
within one (1) year from the date of issuance and which shall be
valid only for a single location which shall be specified in the
license.
Number of Itinerant
Merchants
License Fee
1—25 $125.00
26—50 $225.00
51—100 $300.00
101—150 $375.00
151 or more $450.00
554. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §640.160.
Section
640.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
640.010
100:1499
2. Organizations exempted from license fees under Section 605.120
are exempt from this promoter's license fee, but shall obtain and
display the license when functioning as a promoter.
3. Promoters shall provide to the Director of Finance a list of itinerant
merchants participating in the event, including sales tax numbers.
In the event that an itinerant merchant does not have a sales tax
number, then the promoter shall certify that the promoter has given
the itinerant merchant a State concession report form and the
promoter shall provide the City with the name and address of that
itinerant merchant. This information shall be provided to the
Director of Finance five (5) days prior to the first (1st) day of the
event, along with any other appropriate information.
E. Licenses issued under this Section are not transferable.
F. Itinerant merchants and promoters shall not be relieved from
complying with the provisions of this Section merely by reason of
associating temporarily with any person possessing a business license
or by conducting the transient business in connection with, as a part of
or in the name of any person possessing a business license.
G. Open-Air Produce Market And Food Vendor Itinerant Merchant. Every
itinerant merchant operating an open-air produce market or operating
as a food vendor shall pay a license fee of four hundred fifty dollars
($450.00). The license shall be valid for one (1) year.
Section
640.010
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
640.010
100:1500
ARTICLE III
Garage Sales
Section 640.020. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §119.30; CC 1981 §16-401;
Ord. No. 87-136, 6-19-1987]
For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
GARAGE SALE — All general sales, open to the public, conducted from or on
a residential premise in any residential zone, as defined by Chapter 400 of
this Code of Ordinances, for the purpose of disposing of personal property
including, but not limited to, all sales entitled "garage", "lawn", "yard",
"attic", "porch", "room", "back yard", "patio", "flea market" or "rummage"
sale. This definition shall not include situations where no more than five
(5) specific items are held out for sale and all advertisements of such sale
specifically name those items to be sold.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Property which is owned, utilized and maintained
by an individual or members of his/her residence and acquired in the
normal course of living in or maintaining a residence. It does not include
merchandise which was purchased for resale or obtained on consignment.
Section 640.030. Property Permitted To Be Sold. [R.O. 2009
§119.31; CC 1981 §16-402; Ord. No. 87-136, 6-19-1987]
It shall be unlawful for any individual to sell or offer for sale, under authority
granted by this Article, property other than personal property.
Section 640.040. Maximum Sales. [R.O. 2009 §119.32; CC 1981
§16-403; Ord. No. 87-136, 6-19-1987]
No more than four (4) garage sales may be held at any one (1) residence
during any calendar year.
Section 640.050. Hours of Operation. [R.O. 2009 §119.33; CC 1981
§16-404; Ord. No. 87-136, 6-19-1987]
Each garage sale shall be limited to no more than the daylight hours of
three (3) consecutive days or two (2) consecutive weekends (Saturday and
Sunday).
Section 640.060. Advertising. [R.O. 2009 §119.34; CC 1981 §16-405;
Ord. No. 87-136, 6-19-1987]
A. Signs Permitted. Only the following specified signs may be displayed in
relation to a garage sale:
1. Two (2) signs permitted. Two (2) signs of not more than four (4)
square feet shall be permitted to be displayed on the property of
the residence where the garage sale is being conducted.
Section
640.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
640.060
100:1501
Section 640.070. Evidence of Sale. [R.O. 2009 §119.35; CC 1981
§16-406; Ord. No. 87-136, 6-19-1987]
The display of more than five (5) items for sale upon any residential
premises in any residential zone or the advertising of such sale upon the
premises or in other locations within the City shall create a rebuttable
presumption that such person is conducting a garage sale.
Section 640.080. Persons Exempted. [R.O. 2009 §119.36; CC 1981
§16-407; Ord. No. 87-136, 6-19-1987]
2. Directional signs. Two (2) signs of not more than two (2) square
feet each are permitted, provided permission to erect such signs is
received from the property owners upon whose property such signs
are to be placed.
B. Time Limitation. No sign shall be exhibited for more than two (2) days
prior to the day such sale is to commence.
C. Removal Of Signs. Signs must be removed each day at the close of the
garage sale activities or by the end of daylight, whichever first occurs.
A. The provisions of this Article shall not apply to or affect the following:
1. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
2. Persons acting in accordance with their powers or duties as public
officials.
3. Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other
business establishment from or at a place of business wherein such
sale would be permitted by the zoning regulations of the City or
under the protection of the non-conforming use section thereof or
any other sale conducted by a manufacturer, dealer or vendor
wherein such sale would be conducted from properly zoned
premises and not otherwise prohibited in other ordinances.
4. Any bona fide charitable, eleemosynary, educational, cultural or
governmental institution or organization when the proceeds for the
sale are used directly for the institution or organization's charitable
purpose and the goods or articles are not sold on a consignment
basis.
Section
640.060
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
640.080
100:1502
ARTICLE IV
Solicitors
Section 640.090. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §119.50; CC 1981
§20-95.1(a); Ord. No. 3434, 10-18-1966; Ord. No. 73-38, 6-20-1973;
Ord. No. 86-277, 10-16-1986; Ord. No. 05-50, 2-4-2005; Ord. No.
07-168, 6-13-2007]
For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
SOLICIT — The act of any person, except minors, seeking to collect from
the general public money, donations, property or financial assistance of any
kind or gifting, selling or offering to sell any article, service, publication,
advertisement, ticket or subscription of any kind for any purpose.
SOLICITOR — Any person, except minors, who engages in the act of
soliciting.
Section 640.100. Registration.555 [R.O. 2009 §119.51; CC 1981
§20-95.1(b); Ord. No. 3434, 10-18-1966; Ord. No. 73-38, 6-20-1973;
Ord. No. 86-277, 10-16-1986; Ord. No. 05-50, 2-4-2005]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit by going door to door in
areas designated as residential districts by the Zoning Code set forth in
Chapter 400 without first having registered and obtained a permit from
the City.
B. Any person required to register and obtain a permit under Subsection
(A) above shall make application to the Chief of Police upon a form
approved by the Chief of Police. The application shall include only the
following information:
1. Name of applicant.
2. All residential addresses of applicant for previous two (2) years.
Post office boxes are not acceptable.
3. Name, address and telephone number of the business, organization
or entity sponsoring or supported by the solicitation. This includes
the name, address and telephone number of any business whom the
applicant is employed by or contracts with to solicit on behalf of an
organization sponsoring or supported by the solicitation.
4. Specific dates, times and general locations where soliciting
activities will be conducted.
5. A statement made under penalty of perjury whether the applicant
has pleaded guilty to, found guilty of or convicted of a Federal or
State felony.
555. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §640.160.
Section
640.090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
640.100
100:1503
Section 640.110. Permits.556 [R.O. 2009 §119.52; CC 1981
§20-95.1(c); Ord. No. 3434, 10-18-1966; Ord. No. 73-38, 6-20-1973;
Ord. No. 86-277, 10-16-1986; Ord. No. 98-436, 10-22-1998; Ord. No.
05-50, 2-4-2005; Ord. No. 10-57 §1, 4-13-2010]
Section 640.120. Display of Permits.557 [R.O. 2009 §119.53; CC 1981
§20-95.1(d); Ord. No. 3434, 10-18-1966; Ord. No. 73-38, 6-20-1973;
Ord. No. 86-277, 10-16-1986; Ord. No. 98-436, 10-22-1998; Ord. No.
99-62, 2-17-1999; Ord. No. 05-50, 2-4-2005]
6. A written statement from the entity described in paragraph (3)
certifying the applicant is authorized to act as a representative of
the entity.
7. A copy of the sales tax license required by Chapter 144, RSMo., for
the entity described in paragraph (3), if applicable.
8. The application shall be signed by the applicant and an authorized
representative of the entity described in paragraph (3).
C. The applicant shall pay a fifty dollar ($50.00) fee at the time of making
application.
D. The applicant shall pay the applicable occupational license tax, if any,
under Chapter 605 prior to the issuance of the permit.
A. The Chief of Police shall conduct a criminal background check on the
applicant for a permit.
B. Upon receipt of a completed application as described in Section
640.100, the Chief of Police shall within five (5) business days issue a
permit to the applicant, provided that the applicant has complied with
Section 640.100(D).
C. Permits shall contain all of the information given in the application,
shall contain a photograph of the licensee and shall expire
automatically thirty (30) days after their issuance.
A. A solicitor shall display the permit to any person requesting to inspect
such permit at all times while the solicitor is actively engaged in
solicitation activities.
B. The City-issued picture identification badge with expiration date shall
be worn by the solicitor between the waist and the neck and shall be
visible at all times.
C. It shall be unlawful for any solicitor to engage in any soliciting activities
described in Section 640.090 at any time or location not listed in the
permit issued to such solicitor.
556. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §640.160.
557. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §640.160.
Section
640.100
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
640.130
100:1504
Section 640.130. Permissible Hours of Solicitation.558 [R.O. 2009
§119.54; CC 1981 §20-95.1(e); Ord. No. 3434, 10-18-1966; Ord. No.
73-38, 6-20-1973; Ord. No. 86-277, 10-16-1986; Ord. No. 98-436,
10-22-1998; Ord. No. 05-50, 2-4-2005]
It shall be unlawful for any solicitor to engage in any soliciting activities
described in Section 640.090 between the hours of 7:00 P.M. or one-half (½)
hour before dusk, whichever is later, and 8:00 A.M. of any day of the week
or on Sundays or legal holidays.
Section 640.140. Signs Prohibiting Solicitation. [R.O. 2009 §119.55;
Ord. No. 98-436, 10-22-1998; Ord. No. 05-50, 2-4-2005]
It shall be unlawful for any solicitor to solicit at any residence where a
sign is displayed in a manner reasonably likely to come to the attention of
solicitors and which contain the words: "No Soliciting", "No Solicitors" or
similar words indicating that soliciting is prohibited on the premises.
558. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §640.160.
Section
640.130
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
640.140
100:1505

ARTICLE V
Off-Premises Canvassing
Section 640.150. Title. [Ord. No. 12-250 §1, 12-19-2012]
This Article shall be known as the off-premises canvassing ordinance.
Section 640.151. Definitions. [Ord. No. 12-250 §1, 12-19-2012]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BUSINESS — Any commercial activity in which any goods or services are
sold or offered for sale or for rent.
EDIBLES — Any food or beverage intended for human consumption.
GOODS — Any tangible item, including edibles.
OFF-PREMISES CANVASSING — Distribution of information or solicitation
of customers on publicly owned property or right-of-way in connection with
a business.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Includes the street, sidewalk and colonnade area
between Main Street and the City Hall parking garage.
SALE — Any trade or offer of trade of currency, credit, service, or goods.
SERVICES — Any work, attraction, amenity or act rendered for sale.
Section 640.152. Off-Premises Canvassing Prohibited in Certain
Locations. [Ord. No. 12-250 §1, 12-19-2012]
A. It shall be unlawful to engage in off-premises canvassing in the
following location between the hours of 6:00 P.M. and 2:00 A.M. the
next following morning:
1. On publicly owned property or right-of-way of Main Street between
First Capitol Drive and Adams Street;
except that craft or edibles vendors temporarily located on the
right-of-way during the Festival of the Little Hills and Mosaics
Festival shall be exempt from this Article.
Section
640.150
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
640.152
100:1507

ARTICLE VI
Penalty
Section 640.160. Penalty. [R.O. 2009 §119.99; CC 1981 §16-408;
Ord. No. 87-136, 6-19-1987; Ord. No. 05-50, 2-4-2005; Ord. No.
12-250 §1, 12-19-2012]
A. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter for which no
other penalty is set forth shall be subject to the penalty set forth in
Section 100.150 of this Code of Ordinances.
B. Any person found guilty of violating the terms of Article III "Garage
Sales", Sections 640.020 et seq. shall be fined not less than twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each
offense.
C. Any person found guilty of violating the terms of Article IV "Solicitors",
Sections 640.090 through 640.140 shall be fined not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each offense and shall be prohibited from obtaining a permit for a
period of two (2) years from the date of being found guilty.
Section
640.160
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
640.160
100:1509
Chapter 645
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Cross References—As to authorized emergency vehicles (ambulances),
§305.030; as to equipment, loads, ch. 355; as to parking of commercial
vehicles, §§350.210 et seq.; as to traffic code, Title III.
Section
640.160
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
640.160
100:1510
ARTICLE I
Limousines
Section 645.010. License Requirements. [R.O. 2009 §120.01; CC
1981 §28-1; Ord. No. 81-66, 8-5-1981; Ord. No. 84-39, 4-18-1984;
Ord. No. 05-300, 11-9-2005]
Section 645.020. (Reserved)
A. Any person offering a vehicle for hire for a specified time or date,
wherein the origin-to-destination rates defined in Section 645.060
would not be appropriate upon fulfillment of the following
requirements, may be licensed as a limousine:
1. Payment of the vehicle license fee provided in Section 645.040.
2. Proof of liability insurance as described in Section 645.050.
3. Maintaining a taxicab operator's license and taxicab driver's
license described in Sections 645.100 through 645.150.
4. Within ten (10) days after issuance of a license and during the
balance of the term of the license, cause to be operated not less
than three (3) limousines regularly and daily.
Section
645.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
645.020
100:1511

ARTICLE II
Taxicabs
Section 645.030. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §120.15; CC 1981 §28-12;
Ord. No. 3489, 6-21-1967]
For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
DRIVER — Any person driving a taxicab.
PASSENGER — Any person or child after the fifth (5th) birthday in a selfmobile
condition.
TAXICAB — Any motor vehicle performing a bona fide for hire taxicab
service, having a capacity of not more than five (5) passengers, exclusive of
the driver, and not operated on a regular route or between fixed termini.
TAXICAB OPERATOR'S LICENSE — The license issued by the City
permitting the holder to engage in the business of operating taxicabs in the
City.
Section 645.040. Vehicle License Fee.559 [R.O. 2009 §120.16; CC
1981 §28-13]
In addition to the operating license fee required in Section 645.130, there
shall be paid a vehicle license fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each
motor vehicle to be regularly used as a taxicab by the holder of a taxicab
operator's license before any such vehicle is so used as a taxicab. Such
vehicle license fee shall be paid annually for each fiscal year beginning
on April first (1st) and ending on March thirty-first (31st) of the following
year. Such vehicle license fee shall be paid to the City Collector and the
holder of the taxicab operator's license shall designate the make, type
and motor number of the motor vehicle for which such vehicle license
fee is being paid. The City Collector shall issue his/her receipt therefor
in duplicate, containing the description of such vehicle, one (1) of which
duplicate receipts shall be covered by the insurance required in this Article.
Section 645.050. Liability Insurance.560 [R.O. 2009 §120.17; CC
1981 §28-14; Ord. No. 03-128, 6-4-2003]
A. No person shall operate a taxicab upon any street of the City unless and
until the owner thereof or person in whose name the taxicab operator's
license is issued shall have procured and deposited with the City Clerk
an insurance policy issued by a solvent insurance company of the State
or licensed to do business in the State insuring the owner or licensee of
any such taxicabs against liability imposed by law for damage on
account of personal injuries sustained by any person and on account of
property damage sustained by any person in the operation of any such
559. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §645.450.
560. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §645.450.
Section
645.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
645.050
100:1513
Section 645.060. Maximum Fares Inside City Limits — Posting.561
[R.O. 2009 §120.18; CC 1981 §§28-15—28-16; Ord. No. 90-323,
12-19-1990]
Section 645.070. Designation and Identification of Taxicabs.562 [R.O.
2009 §120.19; CC 1981 §28-17]
Each taxicab operating under this Article shall bear on the outside of one
(1) door, on each side, in painted letters in a contrasting color to the
background, not less than one (1) inch in width nor less than four (4) inches
in height, the name of the company, owner or firm name of the operator
of the same and, in addition, shall bear such identifying letters on the rear
taxicab in the amounts required by Section 303.020(10), RSMo., as the
definition of proof of financial responsibility.
B. In the event such policy of insurance shall, for any reason, be canceled
or shall expire or no longer be in force in such amounts, it shall be
unlawful to operate any taxicab otherwise licensed to be operated until
such insurance in such amounts shall have been procured and
deposited with the City Clerk. Before any such policy of insurance shall
be filed, it shall first be presented to and approved by the Mayor.
A. Maximum Fares Inside City Limits.
1. The following are the maximum fares permitted to be charged for
taxicab service inside the City limits:
a. One (1) or two (2) passengers, (same origin, same destination),
one (1) mile: $ 2.35.
b. For each additional one-half (½) mile or fractional part thereof
traveled, an additional: $0.60.
c. For each passenger over two (2), same origin, same
destination, an additional: $0.50.
d. Waiting time at the rate of twenty-five cents ($.25) per minute;
provided however, that the minimum charge per hour for the
mileage and waiting time shall be twelve dollars ($12.00).
2. When large gasoline price increases have occurred within the City,
the City Council, by resolution, may grant temporary increases in
the maximum fares. The temporary maximum fare increases shall
be valid for a period to be specified in the resolution, but shall not
exceed sixty (60) days.
B. Posting. A chart of the maximum rates of fare as set out in Subsection
(A) of this Section shall be posted in plain view in each taxicab.
561. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §645.450.
562. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §645.450.
Section
645.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
645.070
100:1514
of such taxicab together with the identifying number of such cab at the
same places and, in addition, may bear an identifying design approved by
the City. No vehicle covered by the terms of this Article shall be licensed
to use any color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia to be
used thereon which shall be found by the City to conflict with or imitate any
color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia used on a vehicle
already operating under this Article in such a manner as to be misleading or
to tend to deceive or defraud the public; provided that if, after a license has
been issued for a taxicab hereunder, the color scheme, identifying design,
monogram or insignia thereof is changed so as to be, as found by the City,
in conflict with or imitate any color scheme, identifying design, monogram
or insignia of any other person, owner or operator in such a manner as to be
misleading or tend to deceive the public, the license covering such taxicab
shall be suspended or revoked.
Section 645.080. Number of Taxicabs Operated — Extra.563 [R.O.
2009 §120.20; CC 1981 §§28-18—28-19; Ord. No. 3489, 6-21-1967;
Ord. No. 82-51, 7-6-1982; Ord. No. 12-234 §1, 12-6-2012; Ord. No.
14-138 §1, 7-1-2014; Ord. No. 16-152 §1, 8-2-2016]
Section 645.090. Application of Other Regulations.564 [R.O. 2009
§120.21; CC 1981 §28-20]
The operation of a taxicab under a taxicab operator's license issued by
the City shall be subject to all the provisions of this Title and any other
A. Number Of Taxicabs To Be Operated. Every person to whom a taxicab
operator's license is issued shall, within ten (10) days after such
issuance and during the balance of the term of such license, cause to be
operated not less than five (5) nor more than fifty (50) taxicabs
regularly and daily at least five (5) hours each day and at least one (1)
taxicab subject to call from 5:00 A.M. until Midnight each day, unless
prevented from doing so by strikes or other causes beyond his/her
control.
B. Extra And Additional Taxicabs. For each five (5) taxicabs in regular
operation, the holder of a taxicab operator's license may employ and
operate one (1) additional taxicab as an "extra" in order to afford
service during peak or rush periods and on special occasions or to
replace or substitute for a taxicab regularly used, without paying the
vehicle license fee required of regularly operated taxicabs; provided
that any such extra taxicab shall be covered by insurance as required by
this Article. The City Council may grant the privilege of operating
additional taxicabs for periods of not exceeding four (4) months;
provided that vehicle license fees be paid thereon and that such
additional taxicabs be covered by the insurance required by this Article.
563. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §645.450.
564. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §645.450.
Section
645.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
645.090
100:1515
provisions of this Code or any other ordinance of the City regulating traffic
and travel on the streets of the City.
Section 645.100. Operator License Required.565 [R.O. 2009 §120.22;
CC 1981 §28-32]
No person shall engage in the business of operating taxicabs over the
streets of the City unless a license has first been issued therefor by the City.
Section 645.110. Application — Filing and Contents.566 [R.O. 2009
§120.23; CC 1981 §§28-33—28-34]
Section 645.120. Notice To License Holders — Granting. [R.O. 2009
§120.24; CC 1981 §§28-35—28-36]
A. Application And Filing. No taxicab operator's license shall be issued
until and unless the owner or person desiring to engage in the business
of operating taxicabs shall file with the City Clerk an application for a
taxicab operator's license. The City Clerk shall refer such application to
the Mayor and City Council at the next regular meeting.
B. Contents. The application for a taxicab operator's license shall state:
1. The name and the address of the applicant and, if a corporation, the
names and addresses of the president, secretary and business
manager and, if a partnership, firm or association, the name
thereof and the names and addresses of the persons composing the
same.
2. The location or address from which the business is to be conducted.
3. The number of taxicabs desired to be operated.
4. The type of each taxicab to be operated, including the number of
persons each such taxicab is designed or constructed to carry.
A. Notice To Holders Of Licenses. The Council shall cause all holders of
taxicab operators' licenses of the City to be notified, by mail or by notice
served by the Chief of Police, of any application for a license under this
Subsection and the date on which such application will be considered
by the Council, at least five (5) days prior to acting upon any such
application.
B. Consideration And Grant. The Council shall give reasonable
consideration to the passenger transportation service being furnished
and the effect which additional transportation service may have upon
the existing licensed taxicab and motorbus service in the City. If the
Council shall decide that public convenience and necessity will be
promoted, the application shall be granted.
565. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §645.450.
566. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §645.450.
Section
645.090
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
645.130
100:1516
Section 645.130. Fee. [R.O. 2009 §120.25; CC 1981 §28-37]
Section 645.140. Issuance — Transfer — Renewal.567 [R.O. 2009
§120.26; CC 1981 §§28-38—28-40]
Section 645.150. Suspension and Revocation.568 [R.O. 2009 §120.27;
CC 1981 §§28-41—28-42]
A. An operating license fee shall be payable to the City Collector annually
on April first (1st) of each year in the sum of one hundred dollars
($100.00). This fee shall be paid on or before the first (1st) day of April
prior to the issuance of a taxicab operator's license.
B. If a taxicab operator's license is issued within six (6) months prior to
March thirty-first (31st) of any year, the operating license fee shall be
only one-half (½) of the amount provided in this Section.
A. Issuance—Form—Term. Upon the granting of an application for a
taxicab operator's license, the payment of the required operating
license fee to the City Collector and the filing of the insurance policy
provided for in Section 645.050, a taxicab operator's license shall be
issued to the applicant by the City Clerk. All licenses shall be signed by
the Mayor and the City Clerk, shall bear the date of issuance and shall
name the licensee and state the purpose for which such license is
issued and shall expire on March thirty-first (31st) following the date of
issuance.
B. Transfer. No taxicab operator's license shall be transferred except with
the prior approval of the City Council.
C. Renewal. Taxicab operators' licenses in continuation and renewal of
original taxicab operators' licenses shall be issued by the City Clerk
upon payment by the holder of the original taxicab operator's license of
the required operating license fee to the City Collector, there being on
file the required insurance policy, without application to the Council or
any notice thereof. The operating license fee for a renewal or continued
license shall be paid before April first (1st) of any year. Such renewal or
continued license shall be dated April first (1st) of the year in which
issued and shall expire on March thirty-first (31st) of the next
succeeding year.
A. Suspension. The City Council may suspend any taxicab operator's
license for failure on the part of the holder to comply with:
1. Section 645.050 relating to insurance.
2. Section 645.080(A), relating to the number of taxicabs to be
operated, unless prevented by strikes or causes beyond his/her
control.
567. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §645.450.
568. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §645.450.
Section
645.130
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
645.150
100:1517
Section 645.160. Drivers' Requirements.569 [R.O. 2009 §120.28; CC
1981 §§28-54—28-58; Ord. No. 10-19 §1, 2-4-2010]
3. The provisions of Section 645.060 relating to the rates of fares and
posting thereof if such failure is willfully and knowingly permitted
by the holder of the license.
4. The provisions of Section 645.160(F) relating to the registration of
names and identification of drivers.
B. Revocation. The City Council may revoke any taxicab operator's license
if, after five (5) days' notice, the holder shall fail to correct any of the
failures specified in Section 645.150(A) as cause for suspension.
A. Minors Not To Drive. No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall
drive any taxicab operated under a taxicab operator's license issued
pursuant to the provisions of this Article.
B. State Driver's License Required. No person shall drive a taxicab
operated under a taxicab operator's license issued pursuant to the
provisions of this Chapter unless he/she has a valid State chauffeur's
license or other proper license required of a motor vehicle driver by the
State.
C. Criminal Convictions, Illegal Aliens, And The Like. No person that:
1. Has been convicted of any felony involving:
a. A crime against another person;
b. Violence;
c. Use of a weapon; or
d. A crime against property within five (5) years next preceding:
2. Has been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor involving the
operation of a taxicab while under the influence or in an intoxicated
condition from alcohol or drugs;
3. Has been convicted of any offense involving the operation of a
motor vehicle while under the influence or in an intoxicated
condition from alcohol or drugs within five (5) years next
preceding;
4. Has been convicted of any second offense involving the operation of
a motor vehicle while under the influence or in an intoxicated
condition from alcohol or drugs;
5. Is required to register as a sex offender;
569. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §645.450.
Section
645.150
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
645.160
100:1518
6. Is not able to speak and understand directions, oral and written, in
the English language;
7. Is not able to read and understand maps of the St. Louis
metropolitan area;
8. Is not able to provide proof of citizenship of the United States of
America or, if not a citizen of the United States of America then a
valid visa and work permit;
9. Is not able to provide a statement from a physician licensed to
practice medicine in the United States of America that the person
has taken a physical examination the results of which show that the
person is physically capable of safely operating a taxicab and
providing reasonable assistance to disabled, elderly, or frail
passengers, in that, the person shall be satisfactorily ambulatory
that he or she is able to assist carrying typical packages and
luggage passengers may have with them; or
10. Is not able to furnish evidence that the person has completed a
comprehensive driver training program, of which, the curriculum
shall include, at a minimum, applicable governmental rules and
regulations, geography and map reading of the St. Louis
metropolitan area, major points of interest in the St. Louis
metropolitan area, general familiarity with the St. Louis
metropolitan area, driver safety and defensive driving, passenger
safety, vehicle safety and maintenance/inspection checks, and
customer service and relations, including guidelines for assisting
disabled, frail and elderly passengers; shall drive a taxicab
operated under a taxicab operator's license issued by the City.
Applicants shall provide proof of clearance as to items (1)—(5) of
this Subsection as set forth in Subsection (D).
D. St. Charles Police Department Review And Clearance Of Record
Required. Every applicant shall obtain from the St. Charles Police
Department proof that the applicant's record is clear from the
convictions specified in Subsection (C)(1)—(5) of this Section. The St.
Charles Police Department is authorized to obtain from the State or
Federal Government any record of information which might provide the
conviction history of any applicant. Any costs or expenses associated
with obtaining or reviewing of the applicant's record shall be born by
the applicant.
E. Badge. No person shall drive a taxicab operated under a taxicab
operator's license issued by the City unless he/she shall wear a badge
bearing the operator's name, photograph, company name and
telephone number.
F. Registration. Every holder of a taxicab operator's license shall file with
the Chief of Police and the City Clerk annually on April first (1st) or
within five (5) days thereafter and at such other times as may be
requested by the Chief of Police or Mayor, the name of each driver
Section
645.160
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
645.160
100:1519
employed by him/her, together with the number assigned by the
licensee to such driver. Such licensee shall also report the name and
number of each driver who shall cease to be employed by such licensee
and any new driver commencing such employment within three (3) days
after such employment has begun or ended.
G. No taxicab driver shall smoke or permit smoking in the taxicab while
transporting a passenger.
Section
645.160
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
645.160
100:1520
ARTICLE III
Tow Trucks
Section 645.170. Title. [R.O. 2009 §120.40; CC 1981 §28-61; Ord.
No. 81-99, 12-10-1981; Ord. No. 84-130, 11-6-1984]
This Article shall be known and cited as the "Tow Truck Code".
Section 645.180. Definitions.570 [R.O. 2009 §120.41; CC 1981
§28-62; Ord. No. 81-99, 12-10-1981; Ord. No. 82-40, 5-19-1982; Ord.
No. 84-130, 11-7-1984]
For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CRUISING — Operating a tow truck on a public highway at a slow rate of
speed or in any other fashion for the purpose of soliciting business along
the highway.
DIRECTOR OF FINANCE — The Director of Finance for the City.
HIGHWAY — Any highway, road, street or alley open to the use of the public
for the purpose of vehicular traffic.
OPERATING, OPERATION OF OR TO OPERATE A TOW TRUCK — All acts
and functions incident to the movement of a tow truck from place to place;
as well as all acts involved in the undertaking of a tow, whether for hire
or for personal or business use by the owner of the tow truck; and the
conducting of a business engaged in the operation of a tow truck.
OWNER — Any person who holds legal title to a vehicle or one who has the
legal right to possession thereof.
PERSON — Any individual, co-partnership, firm, association, company or
combination of individuals of whatever form or character.
SHORT WAVE RECEIVER — A radio receiver which is capable of operating
on a frequency assigned by the Federal Communications Commission for
fire, police, municipal or other governmental uses.
SOLICITING — Requesting or attempting to sway an owner, his/her lawful
agent or representative to give permission to a tow truck to remove, repair
or store a vehicle for monetary consideration without a previous request
from the owner, his/her lawful agent or representative.
TOW TRUCK — A mechanically propelled vehicle equipped with a device
used to hoist and tow, transport, convey or move other vehicles from place
to place upon authorization of the owner, his/her lawful agent or
representative.
VEHICLE — Every device, whether mechanically propelled or drawn, in or
by which any person or property is or may be moved upon a public highway,
except devices moved only by human or animal power or a device which
570. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §645.450.
Section
645.170
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
645.180
100:1521
works exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks and shall include trailers
and semi-trailers.
Section 645.190. License Required — Reciprocal Licensing.571 [R.O.
2009 §120.42; CC 1981 §28-63; Ord. No. 81-99, 12-10-1981; Ord.
No. 84-130, 11-6-1984]
Section 645.200. License Requirements.572 [R.O. 2009 §120.43; CC
1981 §28-64; Ord. No. 81-99, 12-10-1981; Ord. No. 82-40,
5-19-1982; Ord. No. 84-130, 11-7-1984]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a tow truck within the City
unless that person shall first obtain a license from the Director of
Finance for the tow truck or unless the person shall be exempt by
reason of one (1) or more of the exemptions enumerated herein.
Application for a license shall be made on a form furnished by the Chief
of Police and any license issued shall be affixed to the lower left corner
of the windshield of the tow truck for which the license is obtained.
B. No license shall be required of any person operating a tow truck in the
City from a location or place of business not in the City, when such tow
truck has affixed to its windshield a license obtained from any County or
City pursuant to an ordinance of the County or City, which ordinance is
similar in context to this Article. The aforementioned license must be
valid for the current year and the licensee must comply with all
requirements of such ordinance.
A. The application for the license shall contain the following:
1. Name and address of the applicant; if a natural person, the date
and place of birth and Missouri State operator's license number;
2. If a corporation, the State under which incorporated, the date of
incorporation, the address of the principal office and the names and
addresses of its officers;
3. If any other type of organization, the name thereof, the location of
its office and the names and addresses of the principal officers,
directors, trustees or managing officials or partners;
4. The place from which the tow truck will operate and the number of
the vehicles to be operated;
5. A description of each tow truck giving also the serial and motor
number;
6. There shall be annexed to the application an affidavit to be sworn to
by the applicant;
571. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §645.450.
572. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §645.450.
Section
645.180
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
645.200
100:1522
Section 645.210. Investigation — Issuance. [R.O. 2009 §120.44; CC
1981 §28-65; Ord. No. 81-99, 12-10-1981; Ord. No. 84-130,
11-7-1984]
Section 645.220. Fee — Term. [R.O. 2009 §120.45; CC 1981 §28-66;
Ord. No. 81-99, 12-10-1981; Ord. No. 84-130, 11-7-1984]
7. The names and addresses of all persons who will be directly
involved in the operation of a tow truck under the license.
A. Each application for tow truck license shall be referred by the Director
of Finance to the Chief of Police who shall investigate the character and
fitness of the proposed applicant as well as any other persons listed as
having an interest in the proposed license. The Chief of Police shall
within sixty (60) days file written reports concerning the applicant with
the Director of Finance and further containing the Chief's
recommendation for issuance or denial of the license.
B. Such license shall be issued by the Director of Finance unless he/she
finds one (1) or more of the following:
1. Intentional misstatements or misleading statements of fact in the
application.
2. Any parties interested in the proposed operation of a tow truck in
the City, having been convicted of any violation of any Statute, law
or ordinance involving theft, possession of stolen property or
interstate transportation of stolen vehicles or who have previously
had a business license suspended or revoked, provided that if the
Director shall find the conduct of such party or parties subsequent
to the aforesaid convictions, suspension or revocation has been
such as to indicate fitness to operate a tow truck and that
permitting such applicant to conduct such an operation would not
be contrary to the public interest, he/she may issue the license.
3. Failure to pay the required application fee.
C. Each applicant shall be notified by mail or hand delivery of the issuance
or non-issuance of a license by the Director of Finance.
D. If the Director of Finance does not issue a license, the reasons for his/
her not doing so shall be in writing and shall accompany the notice of
non-issuance.
E. The Director of Finance's determination of non-issuance may be
appealed under the provisions of Section 536.150, RSMo.
A. The fee for the issuance of a license under this Article shall be twentyfive
dollars ($25.00) for each tow truck, the fee to accompany the
license application. No part of the fee shall be returnable.
Section
645.200
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
645.220
100:1523
Section 645.230. Renewal Procedure.573 [R.O. 2009 §120.46; CC
1981 §28-67; Ord. No. 81-99, 12-10-1981; Ord. No. 84-130,
11-7-1984]
Section 645.240. Suspension — Revocation. [R.O. 2009 §120.47; CC
1981 §28-68; Ord. No. 81-99, 12-10-1981; Ord. No. 84-130,
11-7-1984]
B. The term of the license shall be for the calendar year and may be
renewed as provided herein for succeeding calendar years. If license is
obtained for a period other than a calendar year, the license fee shall be
prorated to the beginning of the next year.
A. Within thirty (30) days of the expiration of the license, a licensee may
apply to the Director of Finance for a renewal thereof.
B. The licensee shall indicate any changes from the information furnished
to the Director of Finance at the time of the original application.
C. An application for renewal shall be accompanied by a renewal
application fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), no part of which shall be
returnable.
D. The Director of Finance shall renew the license if he/she shall find that
the operation shall have been conducted in accordance with all
applicable laws and ordinances.
E. If the Director of Finance does not renew the license, the procedures
set forth in Section 645.240(B) shall be followed.
A. The Chief of Police may suspend for a period up to ninety (90) days or
revoke a license heretofore issued, if he/she finds one (1) or more of the
following:
1. Intentional misstatements or misleading statements of fact in the
application not discovered until after the issuance of the license.
2. Violation of any Statutes or ordinances pertaining to theft,
possession of stolen property or interstate transportation of stolen
vehicles.
B. In the event that the Chief of Police revokes the license, the licensee
shall be entitled to a hearing before the Mayor upon notice duly given
ten (10) days prior to the date of such hearing. The decision of the
Mayor and the reasons therefor shall be sent by certified mail or hand
delivered to licensee.
573. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §645.450.
Section
645.220
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
645.250
100:1524
Section 645.250. Transfer of License.574 [R.O. 2009 §120.48; CC
1981 §28-69; Ord. No. 81-99, 12-10-1981; Ord. No. 84-130,
11-7-1984]
No license shall be transferred from one owner to another, but an owner
may transfer the license of one tow truck to another tow truck. Such
transfer shall only be made on approval of the Chief of Police after written
request was made to him/her on forms provided by him/her for that
purpose.
Section 645.260. Vehicle Labeling.575 [R.O. 2009 §120.49; CC 1981
§28-70; Ord. No. 81-99, 12-10-1981; Ord. No. 84-130, 11-7-1984]
Section 645.270. Operational Requirements — Statement.576 [R.O.
2009 §120.50; CC 1981 §28-71; Ord. No. 81-99, 12-10-1981; Ord.
No. 84-130, 11-7-1984]
A. On each side of a tow truck, there shall be legibly printed in letters not
less than two (2) inches in height the following:
1. Name and address of the licensee and the license number assigned
to him/her by the Director of Finance.
2. The phrase "licensed tow vehicle of the City of St. Charles".
3. The phrase "request schedule of prices before engaging this
vehicle".
A. The owner of a tow truck shall prepare and file in triplicate with the
Chief of Police a schedule of prices to be charged for the towing and
storage of vehicles. Such schedule may be based on time, mileage or a
combination of both. In addition, the schedule may include the
minimum charge for any undertaking involving towing and storage.
One (1) copy of the schedule shall be retained by the Chief of Police, one
(1) copy shall be returned to the applicant upon the issuance of a
license and one (1) copy shall be forwarded to the Director of Finance.
B. Prior to the undertaking of a tow, the licensee or his/her agent shall
present the schedule to the customer for his/her examination. The
schedule shall be on a special printed form approved by the Chief of
Police which shall serve not only to advise a customer of the basis of
charges under which the towing is to be done, but also as an authority
for the commencement of the tow as a work order. This printed form
shall be in duplicate and the customer shall sign in a space provided
below a bold face printed statement declaring "I have examined the
schedule of prices and I hereby authorize the towing of my vehicle." A
574. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §645.450.
575. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §645.450.
576. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §645.450.
Section
645.250
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
645.270
100:1525
Section 645.280. Statement Required.577 [R.O. 2009 §120.51; CC
1981 §28-72; Ord. No. 81-99, 12-10-1981; Ord. No. 84-130,
11-7-1984]
licensee or his/her agent or employee shall give one (1) copy to the
customer and shall retain the original for his/her files.
C. This original statement shall be retained by the licensee for a period of
one (1) year and shall be exhibited by him/her upon demand to the Chief
of Police or his/her authorized representative.
D. It shall be unlawful to charge a sum in excess of that authorized by the
schedule filed with the Chief of Police.
E. The form used by the licensee as hereinbefore mentioned shall, in
addition to the information contained in Subsection (B) of this Section,
contain the following:
1. The full name and address of the licensee.
2. The full name and address of the driver of the tow truck.
3. The full name and address of the person engaging the tow truck.
4. The State license plate number or the State vehicle identification
number of the vehicle to be towed.
5. The State license plate number of the tow truck.
6. The number of the license issued by the City to the tow truck
pursuant to this Article.
7. Any other information required by the Chief of Police.
A. All persons operating a tow truck or their agents, when operating the
tow truck, shall keep in their possession a pad of printed statements
containing his/her name and the address of his/her place of business
and after towing a vehicle shall prepare one (1) of the printed
statements in duplicate and furnish the original to the owner of the
vehicle or to his/her authorized representative.
B. The statement shall contain the following information:
1. The full name and address of the licensee and the number of the
license issued to the tow truck pursuant to this Article.
2. The full name and address of the person driving the tow truck.
3. The full name and address of the person engaging the tow truck.
4. The State license number or the State vehicle identification
number of the vehicle.
577. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §645.450.
Section
645.270
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
645.280
100:1526
Section 645.290. Exemptions. [R.O. 2009 §120.52; CC 1981 §28-73;
Ord. No. 81-99, 12-10-1981; Ord. No. 84-130, 11-7-1984]
The provision of Sections 645.270 and 645.280 of this Article shall not be
applicable to any licensee operating a tow truck under the terms of this
Article when such licensee is under a written contract for a specific period
of time with any person, firm or corporation to tow, transport, convey or
move a vehicle owned or controlled by such person, firm or corporation to a
specific location so designated for consideration set forth in such contract,
provided that the licensee under this Article has in his/her possession at all
times while towing, transporting, conveying or moving such vehicle such
contract or verified copy thereof and shall display such contract or copy
when required to do so by any Law Enforcement Officer. This provision shall
not be so construed or interpreted so as to render or to relieve the licensee
from complying with the other provisions of this Article.
Section 645.300. Insurance Required.578 [R.O. 2009 §120.53; CC
1981 §28-74; Ord. No. 81-99, 12-10-1981; Ord. No. 82-40,
5-19-1982; Ord. No. 84-130, 11-7-1984]
No license to operate a tow truck shall be issued until and unless the
applicant shall first obtain a policy of insurance from a company authorized
to do business in the State or a bond of indemnity, acceptable to the
Director of Finance, with limits for bodily injury liability of at least twentyfive
thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each person, fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) for each accident and property damage liability of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for each accident. No person shall operate a
tow truck in the City unless the operator shall be covered by an insurance
policy with the foregoing minimum limits of liability.
Section 645.310. Operational Regulations.579 [R.O. 2009 §120.54;
CC 1981 §28-75; Ord. No. 81-99, 12-10-1981; Ord. No. 84-130,
11-7-1984]
5. The total amount to be charged for towing to include the number of
miles towed and the storage rate per day or price thereof.
6. A duplicate of each statement shall be retained by the licensee for a
period of one (1) year and shall be exhibited by him/her upon
demand by the Chief of Police or his/her authorized representative.
A. No driver of a tow truck shall engage in cruising.
B. No driver of a tow truck shall invite or permit loitering within or near
his/her tow truck.
C. No driver of a tow truck shall seek employment by repeatedly driving
his/her vehicle to and from in a short space on any highway or
578. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §645.450.
579. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §645.450.
Section
645.280
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
645.310
100:1527
otherwise interfering with the proper and orderly progress of traffic
along a public highway.
D. No driver of a tow truck shall solicit or attempt to divert prospective
patrons of another tow truck.
E. No driver of a tow truck shall solicit or divert prospective patrons at a
given garage in the City to any other garage.
F. No driver of a tow truck shall solicit, demand or receive from any
person any pay or commission or emolument whatever except the
proper fare for transporting the vehicle in accordance with the
schedule of charges defined in Section 645.270.
G. All licensees shall promptly report all changes of address to the Chief of
Police.
H. A driver of a tow truck shall not remove a vehicle involved in an
accident in which a person has been killed or seriously injured unless
such vehicle has been released by a duly authorized member of the
Police Department.
I. No person or agent of the person holding a license pursuant to this
Article shall use or have in his/her possession a short wave receiver as
defined herein while engaged in the business of towing, except those
persons under written contract with the City or other municipal Police
agency for towing services.
Section
645.310
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
645.310
100:1528
ARTICLE IV
Horse-Drawn Carriages
Section 645.320. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §120.65; CC 1981 §28-77;
Ord. No. 85-17, 3-6-1985]
For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CARRIAGE — Any device in, upon or by which any person is or may be
transported or drawn upon a public way, designed to be or capable of being
drawn by a horse.
CARRIAGE STAND — The portion of the curb lane designated by the
Department of Public Works for loading and unloading of passengers for
horse-drawn vehicles.
HORSE — An animal of the genus equis.
SINGLE EVENT CARRIAGE LICENSE — A horse-drawn carriage license
that is for a single event and a duration of twenty-four (24) hours.[Ord. No.
17-229, 11-7-2017]
SPECIAL CITY-SPONSORED EVENT CARRIAGE LICENSE — A horse-drawn
carriage license that is for special City-sponsored events and is for the
duration of October 1 through December 31.[Ord. No. 17-229,
11-7-2017]
VETERINARIAN — A practicing veterinarian licensed by the State.
Section 645.325. Animal-Drawn Vehicles For Hire Restricted. [Ord.
No. 18-184, 8-21-2018]
Section 645.330. License Requirements. [R.O. 2009 §120.66; CC
1981 §28-78; Ord. No. 85-17, 3-6-1985]
A. No person shall drive or cause to be operated for hire any vehicle, of
whatever nature, drawn by animals for the purpose of conducting tours
or transporting passengers within the City, except horse-drawn
carriages as provided in this Article.
B. Horse-drawn carriages shall only be operated in the area bounded on
the east by the eastern curbline of Riverside Drive, on the north by the
northern curbline of Clark Street, on the west by the western curbline
of Main Street, and on the south by a line parallel to the southern
curbline of James Mackay Drive west to the western curbline of South
Main Street.
A. Any horse used for the purpose of drawing a carriage licensed under
this Article must first be licensed as follows:
1. The annual license for each horse licensed under this Article shall
be issued at no charge. Each horse license issued under this Article
Section
645.320
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
645.330
100:1529
Section 645.340. Carriage License Required.580 [R.O. 2009 §120.67;
CC 1981 §28-79; Ord. No. 85-17, 3-6-1985]
shall expire on March thirty-first (31st) following the date of
issuance.
2. Each horse licensed shall be photographed or otherwise clearly
identified by an identification number tattooed in a conspicuous
place.
3. Any Animal Control Officer or other person designated by the City
has the power to demand proof of the issuance of a license any time
that the horse is being used to draw a carriage licensed under this
Article any place within the City.
4. Every licensee and the licensee's agents shall at all times allow
complete access to any horse licensed hereunder for the purpose of
inspection.
5. Any horse upon a public street which shall be drawing a carriage
shall be driven at all times by a person licensed as a "driver".
6. To be licensed as a driver of a horse-drawn carriage, a person must
be eighteen (18) years of age, of good moral character and not have
been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor involving violence,
physical abuse or moral turpitude. An applicant must have
knowledge of the handling and driving of horses.
A. Application for horse-drawn carriage licenses shall be made in writing,
signed and sworn to by the applicant or if applicant is a corporation, by
its duly authorized agent upon forms provided by the Finance Director.
The application shall contain the full name and residence address of the
applicant; place of business; the business telephone number of the
applicant; and the manufacturer's name, model, length of time in use,
seating capacity and type of brake system of the carriage which
applicant will use.
B. Horse-drawn carriage licenses shall be renewable at the same time as
the horse license herein described. The fee for a Single Event Carriage
License shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00) and shall be valid for
twenty-four (24) hours and a specific one-day event, such as a wedding.
[Ord. No. 17-229, 11-7-2017]
C. If the application and all other statements and documents required to
be filed with the application have been properly executed, the applicant
is qualified to pursue this occupation, the carriage or carriages are in
safe and proper condition and the horse has been properly licensed, a
license will be issued for each horse-drawn carriage applied for to
terminate on March thirty-first (31st) following the date of issuance. A
horse-drawn carriage license may not be applied for by, nor may a
580. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §645.450.
Section
645.330
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
645.340
100:1530
Section 645.350. Horse and Driver Requirements.581 [R.O. 2009
§120.68; CC 1981 §28-80; Ord. No. 85-17, 3-6-1985]
license be issued to, any person other than the owner of a carriage or
horse.
D. Every horse-drawn carriage licensee shall carry liability insurance and
Workmen's Compensation insurance for his/her employees with solvent
and responsible insurers authorized to transact such insurance in the
State and qualified to assume the risk or the amounts hereinafter set
forth under the laws of the State, to secure payment of any loss or
damage resulting from any occurrence arising out of or caused by the
operation or use of any of the licensee's horse-drawn carriages. The
liability insurance policy may cover one (1) or more horse-drawn
carriages, but each horse-drawn carriage shall be insured with
coverage amounts at minimum at the State sovereign immunity limits
set annually by the State of Missouri, Department of Insurance, per
Section 537.610, RSMo. Licensee shall provide City with a Certificate of
Liability Insurance evidencing the required coverage and naming the
City as an additional primary insured. [Ord. No. 17-229, 11-7-2017]
A. No horse licensed shall be used to draw a carriage unless the following
requirements are met:
1. The horse shall be fit for such work.
2. The hooves of the horse must be properly shod and trimmed,
utilizing rubber coated, rubber heal pads or open steel borium tip
shoes to aid in the prevention of slipping.
3. The horse must be groomed daily.
4. The horse must be examined by a veterinarian every six (6) months.
The horse must be immunized against equine infectious anemia
and immunized annually against rabies. The driver of a horsedrawn
carriage must have in his/her possession, at all times the
carriage is in operation, a license for the carriage being driven and
a license for the horse drawing the carriage.
5. All harnesses and bits shall be used and maintained in accordance
with the manufacturing design.
6. No horse shall be utilized to pull a carriage carrying more
passengers than the carriage is designed to carry by the
manufacturer, nor shall a carriage be pulled by fewer animals than
provided for by the design.
7. No horse drawing a carriage shall be worked at a speed faster than
a slow trot.
581. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §645.450.
Section
645.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
645.350
100:1531
Section 645.360. Carriage Requirements.582 [R.O. 2009 §120.69; CC
1981 §28-81; Ord. No. 85-17, 3-6-1985; Ord. No. 18-184; 8-21-2018]
Section 645.370. Time of Operation — Application of Regulations.583
[R.O. 2009 §120.70; CC 1981 §§28-82—28-83; Ord. No. 85-17,
3-6-1985]
8. All horses shall be equipped with a waste-catching device,
approved by the City, while on any public way. Any waste or debris
resulting from the horse or carriage shall be immediately removed
by the driver.
A. A horse-drawn carriage licensee and the licensee's agents shall at all
times allow complete access to any carriages, horses and any facilities
used by the licensee in the course of operating horse-drawn carriages
within the City for purposes of inspection.
B. All horses drawing horse-drawn carriages shall be kept in compliance
with the applicable provisions of this Code of Ordinances, the laws of
the State and Federal law.
C. All horse-drawn carriages must be equipped with lights visible from the
front and side, an approved brake system and rubber tires. All carriages
and drivers shall comply with any applicable requirements of the State
and this Code of Ordinances including, but not limited to, traffic laws
and ordinances.
D. The driver of a horse-drawn carriage shall not stop such vehicle upon
any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading
passengers other than at a designated horse-drawn carriage stand
other than in the case of an emergency. However, the driver of a horsedrawn
carriage may pick up and discharge passengers along South
Main Street as long as traffic is not obstructed.
E. All horse-drawn carriage stands shall be maintained clean and free of
litter by the driver.
F. Every carriage shall be an authentically styled passenger carriage. A
carriage with a body style that resembles a fruit, vegetable or a wagon
patently designed for cargo instead of passengers, except that a wagon
is permitted from October 1 through October 31, is prohibited.
G. The use of decorative lights that blink, strobe, or are of any color other
than white is prohibited. Lights shall comply with Sections 400.330(F)
and 400.350(E).
A. Time Of Operation. No horse-drawn carriage may be driven on any City
street before 9:30 A.M. nor after 10:00 P.M., unless the times are
extended by the Mayor.
582. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §645.450.
583. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §645.450.
Section
645.350
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
645.370
100:1532
Section 645.380. Removal of Horse. [R.O. 2009 §120.71; CC 1981
§28-84; Ord. No. 85-17, 3-6-1985]
Any horse licensed under this Article for the purposes of drawing a carriage
which must be removed from a public way for any reason shall be under the
custody and control of the Animal Control Officer, except that if no Animal
Control Officer is available, then any Police Officer is authorized to remove
the horse from the public way.
Section 645.385. Standards For Care And Health Of Horses. [Ord.
No. 18-184, 8-21-2018]
B. Application Of Regulations. No person may operate a horse-drawn
carriage for compensation, nor may the owner thereof permit such
operation upon the public streets in the City except in the area and at
the times described in Subsection (A) of this Section, nor may a
carriage be so operated unless the carriage is licensed as a horsedrawn
carriage and the horse drawing the carriage is licensed under
the provisions of this Article; except that re-enactment groups utilizing
horses are excluded from the provisions of this Chapter.
A. Health, Care And Sanitation Standards. No horse shall be used to draw
a carriage unless the horse is in good health and all of the following
standards are met:
1. The horse shall not have open sores, open wounds, diarrhea, nor
shall the animal be lame or have any other ailments unless the
Convention and Visitors Bureau has a current written statement by
a veterinarian that the animal is fit for such work, notwithstanding
such condition. Further, the written statement by the veterinarian
must have a required expiration date.
2. The hooves of all horses while engaged in work on pavement, brick,
concrete or other like hard surfaces shall have rubber or elastomer
shoes, boots or pads to prevent slipping and shall be evenly
trimmed and shod. Also, if a farrier determines that the horse's
hooves will not accommodate the use of rubber pads, metal shoes
can be used on the rear legs of the animal.
3. The horse shall be properly and appropriately groomed daily.
4. The horse shall have adequate flesh and muscle tone as determined
by the Body Condition Scale of the Henneke Body Conditioning
Scoring Chart and shall average between 4 and 7.
5. The horse is kept in good working condition.
6. At introduction into the touring stock, then bi-annually thereafter,
the animal shall have had a physical inspection completed by and a
certificate of serviceability for carriage work signed by a licensed
veterinarian, with the results thereof provided to the Convention
and Visitors Bureau.
Section
645.370
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
645.385
100:1533
7. All horses, upon reasonable notice by the Convention and Visitors
Bureau or Police Department shall be made available for an annual
physical inspection to be conducted by the City's veterinarian with
the results thereof being maintained by the City with a copy being
provided to the carriage company operator.
8. At introduction into the touring stock, then quarterly thereafter, the
animal shall have been dewormed.
9. At introduction into the touring stock, the animal has been
vaccinated under the direction of a veterinarian for appropriate
diseases and risk factors of the area, including equine infectious
anemia and immunized annually against rabies.
10. Water shall be provided to each horse immediately after completing
a tour for a minimum of fifteen (15) minutes.
11. Horses shall be provided electrolyte supplements at each feeding.
12. In a twenty-four-hour period, animals shall not engage in work
more than eight (8) consecutive hours or ten (10) hours without a
one and one-half (1 1/2) hour break being disconnected from the
carriage, in a twenty-four-hour period.
13. Horses shall not engage in work more than six (6) days in a sevenday
period.
14. Horses shall not engage in work with equipment causing an
impairment of vision, other than normal blinders.
15. Horses shall not be driven at a speed faster than a slow trot.
16. Horses shall not be subject to any cruel or harassing treatment or
equipment.
17. No horse shall be utilized to pull a carriage carrying more
passengers than the carriage is designed to carry by the
manufacturer, nor shall a carriage be pulled by fewer animals than
provided for by the design.
18. Horses shall be at least three and one-half (3 1/2) years of age and
shall not weigh less than nine hundred fifty (950) pounds in fit
condition.
B. Harness And Tack Standards. The following standards shall apply to
harnesses used on horses:
1. Horses shall not engage in work with harnesses or bits that harm or
are unsafe to the animal.
2. Harnesses, bridles, bits and padding shall be properly fitted and
kept in clean and good repair.
Section
645.385
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
645.385
100:1534
Section 645.390. Designation of Horse-Drawn Carriage Stands:
Loading and Unloading of Passengers. [R.O. 2009 §120.72; Ord. No.
95-289, 10-18-1995; Ord. No. 17-229, 11-7-2017584]
3. Harnesses shall be kept free of makeshifts like wire, rope, and
rusty chain.
4. Trace chains shall not put pressure on the collar and shoulders of
the animal when it starts pulling the carriage resulting in a jolting
start versus a smooth start with a snug collar already in place.
5. Breeching shall fit so that it will not rub or hinder the hind leg
movement of the animal.
6. All harnesses and bits shall be used and maintained in accordance
with the manufacturing design.
C. Diapering Apparatus And Sanitation Required. It shall be unlawful for
any person to drive a horse for the purpose of pulling any carriage on a
street unless such horse is equipped with diapering apparatus that
prevents the droppings of such horse from being deposited or otherwise
left on the street. It shall be the responsibility of the driver and licensee
to insure that the diapering apparatus is maintained in good working
order. Any waste, debris or excreta resulting from the horse or carriage,
despite the proper use of a diapering apparatus, shall be immediately
removed by the driver.
D. Extreme Or Inclement Weather Operations. Drivers shall use caution
when working horses in adverse weather conditions such as high heat
and humidity, snow, ice, heavy rain, and other slippery or reduced
visibility situations. The City, through its Convention and Visitors
Bureau, may determine that extreme temperatures or weather
conditions are contrary to the safe operation of horse-drawn carriages
and may prohibit the operation of horse-drawn carriages during those
conditions.
A. The City is authorized to determine the location of designated horsedrawn
carriage stands and shall place and maintain appropriate signs
indicating the same.
B. There shall be a maximum of four (4) designated horse-drawn carriage
stands utilized during City-sponsored events occurring in the Historic
Commercial District pursuant to Code Section 400.200 between
October 1 and December 31 annually.
C. It shall be unlawful for a driver of a horse-drawn carriage possessing a
special City-sponsored event carriage license to load or unload
passengers at any place other than a designated horse-drawn carriage
stand.
584. Editor’s Note: Ord. No. 17-229 also changed the title of this Section to include ": Loading
and Unloading of Passengers."
Section
645.385
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
645.395
100:1535
Section 645.395. Exclusive Carriage Providers For City-Sponsored
Events Occurring Between October 1 And December 31 Annually.
[Ord. No. 17-229, 11-7-2017; Ord. No. 18-184; 8-21-2018]
A. The City shall solicit bids and select the highest and best bids in order
to designate horse-drawn carriage providers who shall then receive a
special City-sponsored event carriage license and be designated as an
exclusive horse-drawn carriage provider within the respective event
area during the City-sponsored events occurring between October 1
and December 31 annually.
B. There shall be no more than twelve (12) horse-drawn carriages
permitted to operate at any one time in the Historic Commercial
District for City-sponsored events occurring between October 1 and
December 31. The Director of the Convention and Visitors Bureau or
his/her designee shall determine the twelve carriages and the providers
thereof on a daily basis.
C. No other horse-drawn carriage providers shall be permitted to provide
horse-drawn carriage rides or services in the Historic Commercial
District for City-sponsored events occurring between October 1 and
December 31.
D. In addition to meeting all other registration, insurance and operational
requirements set forth in this Chapter, horse-drawn carriage providers
selected and designated as exclusive carriage providers for the City for
events between October 1 and December 31 shall also:
1. Meet special event and insurance requirements, where applicable;
and
2. Display signage with lettering not smaller than one (1) inch in
height prominently displaying per-person or per-ride pricing
information.
E. It shall be unlawful to operate a horse-drawn carriage without a special
City-sponsored event carriage license in the Historic Commercial
District for City-sponsored events occurring between October 1 and
December 31.
Section
645.395
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
645.395
100:1536
ARTICLE V
Pedal Cab or Bicycle Taxis and Rickshaws
Section 645.400. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §120.80; Ord. No. 08-172,
8-21-2008]
For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
BICYCLE TAXI — Any multi-wheeled, hooded or unhooded vehicle that is
propelled by human power through the use of a belt, chain or gears and is
used to transport one (1) or more passengers on City streets.
LICENSEE — Any person, partnership, corporation, association or other
organization licensed by the City to make themselves available for hire to
transport passengers by means of one (1) or more than one (1) pedal cab,
bicycle taxi or rickshaw.
OPERATOR — Any person who transports one (1) or more passengers in a
pedal cab, bicycle taxi or rickshaw for hire on City streets.
PEDAL CAB — Any multi-wheeled, hooded or unhooded vehicle that is
propelled by human power through the use of a belt, chain or gears and is
used to transport one (1) or more passengers on City streets.
PEDAL CAB, BICYCLE TAXI OR RICKSHAW STAND — The portion of the
curb designated by the Department of Public Works for loading and
unloading of passengers for pedal cabs, bicycle taxis or rickshaws.
RICKSHAW — Any two-wheeled vehicle that is propelled by human power
only and is used to transport one (1) or more passengers on City streets.
Section 645.410. License Required. [R.O. 2009 §120.81; Ord. No.
08-172, 8-21-2008]
A. Application for pedal cab/bicycle taxi/rickshaw licenses shall be made
in writing, signed and sworn to by the applicant or if applicant is a
corporation, by its duly authorized agent, upon forms provided by the
Department of Finance. The application shall contain the full name and
residence address of the applicant; place of business; the business
telephone number of the applicant; and the manufacturer's name,
model, length of time in use, seating capacity and type of brake system
of the vehicle which applicant will use.
B. Pedal cab/bicycle taxi/rickshaw licenses shall be renewable annually.
For each pedal cab, bicycle taxi or rickshaw licensed under this Article,
the applicant shall pay thirty-five dollars ($35.00).
C. If the application and all other statements and documents required to
be filed with the application have been properly executed, the applicant
is qualified to pursue this occupation and the pedal cabs, bicycle taxis
or rickshaws are in safe and proper condition, a license will be issued
for each pedal cab, bicycle taxi or rickshaw applied for to terminate on
December thirty-first (31st) following the date of issuance. A pedal cab,
Section
645.400
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
645.410
100:1537
Section 645.420. Pedal Cab, Bicycle Taxi and Rickshaw
Requirements. [R.O. 2009 §120.82; Ord. No. 08-172, 8-21-2008]
Section 645.430. Areas Where Operation of Pedal Cabs, Bicycle
Taxis or Rickshaws Permitted. [R.O. 2009 §120.83; Ord. No. 08-172,
8-21-2008]
Pedal cabs, bicycle taxis or rickshaws shall be operated only in areas where
the posted speed limit does not exceed forty-five (45) miles per hour.
Section 645.440. Designation of Pedal Cab, Bicycle Taxi or
Rickshaw Stands. [R.O. 2009 §120.84; Ord. No. 08-172, 8-21-2008]
The Director of Public Works is authorized to determine the location of
designated pedal cab, bicycle taxi or rickshaw stands and shall place and
maintain appropriate signs indicating the same.
Section 645.450. Penalty. [R.O. 2009 §120.99; CC 1981 §28-76; Ord.
No. 81-99, 12-10-1981; Ord. No. 84-130, 11-7-1984]
bicycle taxi or rickshaw license may not be applied for by, nor may a
license be issued to, any person other than the owner of the pedal cab,
bicycle taxi or rickshaw.
D. Every pedal cab, bicycle taxi or rickshaw licensee shall carry liability
and property damage insurance and, if required, Workmen's
Compensation insurance with an insurer authorized to transact
business in the State and qualified to assume the risk or the amounts
hereinafter set forth under the laws of the State, to secure payment of
any loss or damage resulting from any occurrence arising out of or
caused by the operation or use of any of the licensee's pedal cab,
bicycle taxi or rickshaw. The liability insurance policy or contract may
cover one (1) or more pedal cab, bicycle taxi or rickshaw but each pedal
cab, bicycle taxi or rickshaw shall be insured for property damage and
for injuries or death for the sum of at least three hundred thousand
dollars ($300,000.00) per individual and one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) per occurrence.
A. A licensee shall at all times permit inspection of any pedal cab, bicycle
taxi or rickshaw and any facilities used by the licensee in the course of
operating the pedal cab, bicycle taxi or rickshaw.
B. All pedal cabs, bicycle taxis and rickshaws must be equipped with lights
visible from the front, side and rear, an approved brake system and
rubber tires. All pedal cabs, bicycle taxis and rickshaws shall comply
with applicable State law and this Code of Ordinances, including traffic
laws.
C. All pedal cab, bicycle taxi or rickshaw stands shall be maintained clean
and free of litter by the operator.
Section
645.410
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
645.450
100:1538
A. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter for which no
other penalty is set forth shall be subject to the penalty set forth in
Section 100.150.
B. Any person who shall be convicted of a violation of any provision of
Sections 645.170 through 645.310 may be punished by a fine not
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not
more than ninety (90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
Section
645.450
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
645.450
100:1539
Chapter 650
MEDICAL AND HEALTH CARE FACILITIES
Section
645.450
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
645.450
100:1540
ARTICLE I
Freestanding Surgical Centers
Section 650.010. Purpose. [R.O. 2009 §121.01; CC 1981 §16-300;
Ord. No. 84-116, 10-4-1984]
Section 650.020. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §121.02; CC 1981 §16-301;
Ord. No. 84-116, 10-2-1984]
For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
FREESTANDING SURGICAL TREATMENT CENTER — Any institution,
place or building devoted primarily to the maintenance or operation of a
facility for the performance of surgical procedures. Such facilities shall not
provide services or other accommodations for the overnight stay of patients.
Individual patients shall be discharged in an ambulatory condition without
danger to the continued well-being of the patients or shall be transferred to
a hospital. Excluded from this definition are any facilities licensed as part of
a hospital or operated as routine dental care facility.
SURGICAL PROCEDURES — By way general description and not by way of
limitation, shall include tonsillectomy, plastic surgery, arthroscopy, abortion,
reduction of fracture, eye surgery, opthalmosurgery and surgical procedure
shall be defined as medical treatment by instrumental operations.
Section 650.030. License Required.585 [R.O. 2009 §121.03; CC 1981
§16-302; Ord. No. 84-116, 10-4-1984]
A. The citizens of the City are supportive of the highest standards of
medical and health care.
B. The City finds and determines the public health, safety and welfare of
our community requires the City exercise control over certain surgical
centers and procedures, which surgical procedures can result in
complications and adequate disclosure of equipment and personnel
should be required for knowledgeable decision making and in order to
ensure the highest standards of care for the protection of the life and
health of the patient and the public health and welfare.
C. After due investigation and consideration the City Council concludes
that enactment of this Article is a reasonable and prudent action which
will significantly contribute to the preservation of the public life, health,
safety and welfare and the health and welfare of the City and its trade
and commerce.
A. In addition to all other licenses and permits required to lawfully operate
a business in the City, no person, either as owner, agent or manager,
shall operate, conduct or maintain a freestanding surgical center
585. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §650.070.
Section
650.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
650.030
100:1541
without first obtaining a freestanding surgical center license from the
City.
B. The fee for the license is ten dollars ($10.00) per year.
C. In order to obtain a freestanding surgical center license, the applicant
shall file an application with the Director of Finance of the City, which
contains the following:
1. The full and correct name of the applicant, his/her business address
and his/her current residence. If the applicant is a firm, partnership
or association, the full business address of such organization shall
be given. If the applicant is a corporation, the full and correct name
of such corporation and the name of the State under the laws of
which it is incorporated shall be stated in the application. If the
applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of the current
board of directors and the names and resident addresses of all
current officers.
2. A description of the medical facilities and major equipment which
shall be available and used at the premises of the center.
3. Applicant shall submit a copy of a working agreement with a duly
licensed general hospital located in or near the City to provide for
transfer of patients for emergency treatment whenever necessary.
Alternatively, applicant shall demonstrate that every physician
performing surgical procedures at applicant's facility is a member
of the staff of a hospital located in or near the City, thus providing
assurance to the public that patients treated in the center shall
receive continuity of care should the services of a hospital be
required.
4. A statement assuring that there shall be at least one (1)
professional registered nurse licensed in Missouri on duty in the
freestanding surgical center at all times a patient is in the facility.
5. A statement assuring that emergency equipment shall be provided
to handle emergencies resulting from the services rendered in the
facility. The following shall be provided as a minimum:
a. Cardiac monitor and resuscitation equipment;
b. Immediate access to a blood bank where blood or blood
products are readily obtainable; and
c. Immediate access to an ambulance service.
6. Applicant shall propose to the City how it intends to dispose of all
human tissue (including fetal remains). All human tissue shall be
disposed of by incineration, burial or other sanitary method of
disposal. If the method chosen is other than incineration or burial,
the City Council shall, within thirty (30) days, hold a public hearing
to determine whether the method of disposal is detrimental to
Section
650.030
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
650.030
100:1542
Section 650.040. Compliance With Law.586 [R.O. 2009 §121.04; CC
1981 §16-303; Ord. No. 84-116, 10-4-1984]
The freestanding surgical treatment center shall comply with all laws and
local ordinances relating to health, sanitation and safety and this Chapter
shall not relieve it of such duty to comply.
Section 650.050. Revocation Procedure. [R.O. 2009 §121.05; CC
1981 §16-304; Ord. No. 84-116, 10-4-1984; Ord. No. 07-162,
6-11-2007]
The Mayor may revoke or suspend any permit issued under this Chapter
for any willful violation by a licensee of any of the provisions, conditions,
restrictions and requirements contained herein, provided such license shall
public health, safety and welfare and shall approve or disapprove of
the proposed method of disposal within fourteen (14) days after the
hearing. Approval of the method of disposal shall not be arbitrarily
withheld. In the event that applicant desires to change its method
of disposal, it shall comply with the procedure set forth in this
Subdivision.
7. The applicant shall make an oath before a notary public, affirming
the truth of statements made in the application or if the applicant is
a corporation, the oath or affirmation shall be made by the
president and the secretary of the corporation.
D. The application shall be approved or denied by the City Council and the
license issued by the City Clerk in accordance with this Chapter and the
license shall be conspicuously displayed in the place of business of the
licensee.
E. The license issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be renewed by the
licensee filing an updated application to be received by the Director of
Finance of the City prior to June thirtieth (30th) of each year and
approved or denied by the City Council within thirty (30) days
thereafter. No license granted hereunder shall be transferable.
F. No person shall assist in, procure or perform surgery on the premises of
an outpatient surgical treatment center which is not in possession of a
duly issued license.
G. Any freestanding surgical treatment center which is performing
surgical procedures or which has been duly licensed and authorized to
operate a business and perform surgical procedures as of the date of
enactment of this Article shall have three (3) months from the date of
enactment of this Chapter within which to comply with the provisions
hereof. The City Council, in its discretion, may extend this period for
individual cases.
586. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §650.070.
Section
650.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
650.050
100:1543
be revoked only after the licensee shall have been notified in writing at his/
her place of business of the violations complained of and shall be afforded
an opportunity to be heard in answer to any alleged violation. The notice
shall fix a time and place at which the Freestanding Surgical Center Review
Board shall hear and determine the alleged violations. The service of such
notice shall not be less than ten (10) days prior to the time fixed therein for
hearing.
Section 650.060. Freestanding Surgical Center Review Board. [R.O.
2009 §121.06; CC 1981 §16-305; Ord. No. 84-116, 10-4-1984; Ord.
No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
A. There is created the Freestanding Surgical Center Review Board to
ensure compliance with this Chapter. The duties and objectives of the
Board shall be to:
1. Act as a communication channel between the applicant and the City
Council.
2. Review and determine efficiency and effectiveness of equipment,
personnel and procedures which are subject to the provisions of
this Chapter.
3. Review and determine compliance by applicant for granting of
license under this Chapter.
4. Recommend acceptance or rejection of applicant for licensing.
5. Hear appeals on any suspension or revocation of license.
B. The Review Board shall consist of six (6) members, with a tenure of onethird
(1/3) rotation each year. Initial terms shall be two (2) members for
three (3) years, two (2) members for two (2) years and two (2) members
for one (1) year. Standards for membership shall include:
1. Persons employed by the City will be ineligible.
2. Those having family members or relatives working for the City will
be ineligible for membership.
3. Must be a resident of the County for a continuous period of one (1)
year.
4. Must be a registered voter.
C. The Mayor shall serve as ex officio member of the Review Board. A
Council member shall be selected to serve as a member of the Review
Board.
D. The Review Board shall select its own officers, to include: Chairperson,
Vice Chairperson and Secretary. The Review Board shall meet as may
be required, with a quorum of three (3) members other than the Council
Section
650.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
650.060
100:1544
Section 650.070. Penalty. [R.O. 2009 §121.99; CC 1981 §16-306;
Ord. No. 84-116, 10-4-1984]
member. Such meeting date may be established by the Chairperson and
the Mayor. The meeting place shall be the City Hall.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter for which no
other penalty is set forth shall be subject to the penalty set forth in
Section 100.150.
B. Violation. Upon conviction of any violation of the provisions of the
Article set forth in Sections 650.010 through 650.060, there shall be
assessed a civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
C. No freestanding surgical treatment center shall conduct business or
operate in any manner without the license provided for herein or in any
way in violation of this Article. The City is hereby authorized to seek
injunctive or other appropriate relief to prevent or redress a violation of
this Article.
Section
650.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
650.070
100:1545
Chapter 655
INSURANCE COMPANIES
Cross Reference—As to withholding insurance proceeds as to damage or
loss of building, §500.450.
Section 655.010. Classification and Schedule of Fees. [R.O. 2009
§122.01; CC 1981 §16-72]
Section 655.020. Expiration Date. [R.O. 2009 §122.02; CC 1981
§16-84]
All licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall expire on
the following March thirty-first (31st), it being the intention of this Section
to fix March thirty-first (31st) of each calendar year as the expiration date
of all licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.
Section 655.030. Manner of Computing Fee — Deposit. [R.O. 2009
§122.03; CC 1981 §16-85]
A. For the privilege of doing business within the City, insurance companies
shall be classified in the following manner and shall pay the following
occupational license fees:
1. Insurance companies writing fire insurance policies along with any
other type of insurance, exclusive of automobile fire insurance,
shall pay thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per annum plus three and sixtenths
percent (3.6%) on all premiums on fire insurance policies,
exclusive of automobile fire insurance.
2. Insurance companies writing fire insurance only, exclusive of
automobile fire insurance, shall pay three and six-tenths percent
(3.6%) on premiums for such policies, exclusive of automobile fire
insurance.
3. Insurance companies writing insurance policies other than fire
insurance, exclusive of automobile fire insurance, shall pay thirtyfive
dollars ($35.00) per annum.
A. Every insurance company writing policies of fire insurance on any or all
classes of property located within the City, excepting only automobile
fire insurance risks written under fire and transportation policies, shall
pay an occupational fee as required by Section 655.010 on the
percentage of the net gross premium or premium collected less all
returned premiums actually paid to policy holders. Such license fee
shall be computed on the business done from January first (1st) to
December thirty-first (31st), inclusive, of the year preceding the year
first for which the license is issued.
B. Any such company commencing business shall deposit with the City
Collector the sum of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) until the time for
Section
650.070
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
655.030
100:1546
Section 655.040. Annual Report Generally. [R.O. 2009 §122.04; CC
1981 §16-86]
The annual reports of insurance business done during the preceding year
and net premiums collected and retained by insurance companies doing
business and licensed to do business under the terms and provisions of this
Chapter shall be in writing and compiled on a form to be furnished by the
City Collector. Such reports shall be made by an authorized representative
of such insurance company under oath to be administered by an officer
possessing a seal.
Section 655.050. When Report Filed and Fee Paid. [R.O. 2009
§122.05; CC 1981 §16-87]
Every annual report, as referred to in Section 655.040, together with
remittance for the total amount of fees due for the particular year, shall be
made and filed and the fee paid on or before March thirty-first (31st) of each
year.
Section 655.060. Responsibility of Company. [R.O. 2009 §122.06; CC
1981 §16-88]
The insurance company or corporation, against which an occupational
license fee is levied pursuant to this Chapter, shall be solely and primarily
liable and responsible to the City for the accounting for such fee and its
payment and shall be punishable under the laws of this State or other
competent jurisdiction for any false statements or representations made or
set forth in any written report hereinabove called for, for the purpose of
calculating the amount of the fee due to the City.
renewal of the license on or before April first (1st) the following year,
at which time any excess beyond three and six-tenths percent (3.6%) of
the net gross premiums collected less all returned premiums actually
paid to policy holders from the time of commencing until January first
(1st) shall be returned to such company or applied as credit on the
succeeding year's license.
C. Any such company having been in business less than twelve (12)
months at the time for making the annual report required by this Article
shall, upon application for renewal of license, pay to the City Collector
three and six-tenths percent (3.6%) of the sum calculated by prorating
or proportioning the gross net premium reported in the annual report to
a twelve (12) month basis. Any excess of the sum paid on this
calculation over three and six-tenths percent (3.6%) of the gross net
premiums reported in the next annual report shall be returned to such
company or applied as a credit on the succeeding year's license. The
intent of this Section is that no such company shall pay more than three
and six-tenths percent (3.6%) of the gross net premiums collected less
all returned premiums actually paid to policy holders for the privilege
and right to do business in the City.
Section
655.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
655.060
100:1547
Chapter 660
MASSAGE TECHNICIANS
Section 660.010. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §123.01; Ord. No. 94-109,
5-18-1994; Ord. No. 95-75, 3-22-1995]
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Saint Charles City Police
Department.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Finance Department.
MASSAGE BUSINESS — Any place of business in which massage therapy is
practiced.
MASSAGE THERAPY — A health care profession which involves the
treatment of the body's tonus system through the scientific or skillful
touching, rubbing, pressing or other movements of the soft tissues of the
body with the hands, forearms, elbows, or feet, or with the aid of mechanical
apparatus, for relaxation, therapeutic, remedial or health maintenance
purposes to enhance the mental and physical well-being of the client,
but does not include the prescription of medication, spinal or joint
manipulation, the diagnosis of illness or disease, or any service or
procedure for which a license to practice medicine, chiropractic, physical
therapy, or podiatry is required by law, or to those occupations defined in
Chapter 329, RSMo.
PRACTICE OF MASSAGE — The administration of a massage to another
person for any form of consideration.
Section 660.020. Application of Chapter. [R.O. 2009 §123.02; Ord.
No. 94-109, 5-18-1994; Ord. No. 95-75, 3-22-1995]
A. This Chapter shall not apply to:
1. Physicians, surgeons, nurses, chiropractors, physical therapists
and osteopaths who are licensed to practice their respective
profession in the State.
2. A trainer of any duly constituted athletic team who administers a
massage in the normal course of training duties.
3. Any cosmetologist, barber or manicurist who is duly licensed under
the law of the State and who administers massages pursuant to
such laws in the course of his/her duties.
Section
655.060
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
660.030
100:1548
Section 660.030. Massage Technician License Required.587 [R.O.
2009 §123.03; Ord. No. 94-109, 5-18-1994; Ord. No. 95-75,
3-22-1995; Ord. No. 98-413, 10-22-1998]
No person shall engage in the practice of massage within the City unless
such person has first been issued a massage technician license by the
Director of Finance and unless such license remains in effect in conformity
with this Chapter.
Section 660.040. Application — Required Information. [R.O. 2009
§123.04; Ord. No. 94-109, 5-18-1994; Ord. No. 95-75, 3-22-1995;
Ord. No. 98-413, 10-22-1998]
Section 660.050. License Fee. [R.O. 2009 §123.08; Ord. No. 94-109,
5-18-1994; Ord. No. 95-75, 3-22-1995; Ord. No. 95-187, 7-20-1995]
Any person obtaining a license to act as a massage technician shall pay to
the Chief of Police an annual license fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
Section 660.060. Transfer of License.588 [R.O. 2009 §123.09; Ord.
No. 94-109, 5-18-1994; Ord. No. 95-75, 3-22-1995]
No massage technician license shall be transferable.
Chapter 665
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS REGULATIONS
A. Each application for a massage technician license shall be submitted to
the Director of Finance and shall contain the following information:
1. The applicant's full name, residential address and telephone
number;
2. The name, address and telephone number of the massage
establishment;
3. A copy of the license to practice massage therapy from the State of
Missouri;
4. Three (3) portrait photographs, at least two (2) inches by two (2)
inches.
587. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
588. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
660.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
660.060
100:1549

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 665.010. Title. [R.O. 2009 §158.001; Ord. No. 06-330,
12-14-2006]
This Chapter shall be known as "The Sexually Oriented Business Ordinance
for the City of St. Charles, Missouri".
Section 665.020. Scope. [R.O. 2009 §158.002; Ord. No. 06-330,
12-14-2006]
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the corporate limits of the City
of St. Charles, Missouri.
Section 665.030. Purpose. [R.O. 2009 §158.003; Ord. No. 06-330,
12-14-2006]
It is the purpose of this Chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses
and related activities to promote the health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the citizens of the City of St. Charles, Missouri, and to establish
reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location
and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the City of St.
Charles, Missouri. The provisions of this Chapter have neither the purpose
nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any
communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly,
it is not the intent nor effect of this Chapter to restrict or deny access
by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment
of the United States Constitution or Article I, Section 8 of the Missouri
Constitution or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually
oriented entertainment to their intended market. It is neither the intent nor
effect of this Chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene
material.
Section 665.040. Legislative Findings of Fact. [R.O. 2009 §158.004;
Ord. No. 06-330, 12-14-2006]
A. Based upon evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult
uses on the community from factual findings incorporated in the cases
of City of Littleton v. Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C., 541 U.S. 774 (2004); City of
Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 424 (2002); City of Erie v.
Pap's A.M, 529 U.S. 277, 146 L. Ed. 2d 265, 120 S. Ct. 1382 (2000);
Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); FW/PBS, Inc. v. City
of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc.,
475 U.S. 41 (1986); Arcara v. Cloud Books, Inc., 478 U.S. 697 (1986);
Iacobucci v. City of Newport, Ky., 479 U.S. 92 (1986); Young v. American
Mini Theatres, 427 U.S. 50 (1976); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109
(1972); United States v. O'Brien, 391 U.S. 367 (1968); World Wide Video
of Washington, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 368 F.3d 1186 (9th Cir. 2004);
Ben's Bar, Inc v. Village of Somerset, 316 F.3d 702 (7th Cir. 2003); SOB,
Section
665.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
665.040
100:1551
Inc. v. City of Benton, 317 F.3d 856 (8th Cir. 2003); Center for Fair
Public Policy v. Maricopa County, 336 F.3d 1153 (9th Cir. 2003); DLS,
Inc. v. City of Chattanooga, 107 F.3d 403 (6th Cir.1997); Kev, Inc. v.
Kitsap County, 793 F.2d 1053 (9th Cir.1986); Hang On, Inc. v. City of
Arlington, 65 F.3d 1248 (5th Cir.1995); South Florida Free Beaches,
Inc. v. City of Miami, 734 F.2d 608 (11th Cir.1984); N.W. Enterprises v.
City of Houston, 27 F. Supp. 2d 754 (S.D. Tex.1998); St. Louis County
v. B.A.P., 18 S.W.3d 397 (Mo. Ct. App. ED 2000); studies conducted in
other Cities and Counties including, but not limited to, Kansas City,
Missouri; Rochester, New York; Denver, Colorado; Newport News,
Virginia; St. Croix County, Wisconsin; Virginia Beach, Virginia; New
York, New York; Manatee County, Florida; Phoenix, Arizona; St. Paul,
Minnesota; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis,
Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles,
California; Whittier, California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington;
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio; Beaumont, Texas; St.
Cloud, Minnesota; Greensboro, North Carolina; Spokane, Washington
Legislative Record; Kennedale, Texas; Tucson, Arizona; Rome City,
Georgia; St. Marys, Georgia; Centralia, Illinois; Effingham County,
Illinois; and Cleburne, Texas; findings reported in the Final Report of
the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986), the Report
of the Attorney General's Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually
Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota) and the report
to the American Center for Law and Justice on the Secondary Impacts
of Sexually Oriented Businesses dated March 31, 1996, the City Council
finds that:
1. The outright prohibition of sexually oriented businesses improperly
infringes upon protected forms of expression; but that reasonable
regulation of such businesses so as to curtail and prevent
pernicious secondary effects is both permissible and desirable.
2. Sexually oriented businesses, if unregulated, are likely to lead to an
increase in illegal sexual activities, drug and alcohol offenses,
disorderly conduct and other criminal activity.
3. Crime statistics show that all types of crimes, especially sex-related
crimes, occur with more frequency in neighborhoods where
sexually oriented businesses are located. See, e.g., studies of the
Cities of Phoenix, Arizona; Indianapolis, Indiana; and Austin, Texas.
4. When more than one (1) sexually oriented business use occupies
the same location or business address, the secondary effects
caused by such businesses are increased. Secondary effects are
reduced or controlled to a greater degree when only a single
sexually oriented business use is allowed to occupy the same
location.
5. Law enforcement resources available for responding to problems
associated with or created by sexually oriented businesses are
Section
665.040
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
665.040
100:1552
Section 665.050. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §158.005; Ord. No. 06-330,
12-14-2006]
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates of requires a different meaning.
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein paper token-operated, coin-operated or slug-operated or
electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture
machines, projectors, videos, digital video disc, video over Internet
protocol, computer-operated or other image-producing devices are
maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at
any one (1) time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or
characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
ADULT BOOKSTORE OR ADULT VIDEO/DVD STORE — Any business,
commercial establishment or premises that has as a substantial or
limited due to the growth of the City and such resources are best
conserved by regulating sexually oriented businesses.
6. The public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the residents
of the City require that sexually oriented businesses and their
locations be regulated in order to reduce the potential for harm and
in order to preserve and protect the quality of life in the residential
and business environs of the City.
7. The location of sexually oriented businesses in close proximity to
each other adversely affects the property values, causes an
increase in crime and encourages residents and other businesses in
proximity to such sexually oriented businesses to move and locate
elsewhere.
8. It is the duty and responsibility of the Mayor and Council for the
City to protect and preserve the public health, safety and welfare of
the City and its residents, the stability of the value and use of
property within the City and the character of its neighborhoods and
developments.
9. In order to preserve the public peace and good order and to
safeguard and promote the health, safety and welfare of the City
and its citizens, therefore, it is necessary and advisable to regulate
and restrict the location of sexually oriented business
establishments.
10. The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of this
City will be promoted by enactment of this Chapter.
11. The requirements of this Chapter advance the public health, safety
and welfare by providing neutral regulations governing the
conduct of sexually oriented businesses within the corporate limits
of the City of St. Charles, Missouri.
Section
665.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
665.050
100:1553
significant portion of its stock in trade or has as one (1) of its primary
or principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of
consideration any one (1) or more of the following:
ADULT CABARET — An adult live entertainment facility or that part of a live
adult entertainment facility which may include a nightclub, bar, restaurant,
cafe or similar establishment that regularly, commonly, habitually or
consistently features or otherwise offers to the public, customers or
members in a viewing area, any live exhibition, performance or dance
by persons whose exhibition, performance or dance includes any of the
following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or photographs,
films, motion picture, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides,
digital video disc, computer disc or other visual representations that
depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas; or
1.
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed for use in
connection with specified sexual activities.
A principal business purpose exists if materials offered for sale or
rental depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas generate twenty percent (20%) or more of the
business's income or account for twenty percent (20%) or more of
inventory or occupy twenty percent (20%) or more of gross total floor
area. A commercial establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material
depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas and still be categorized as an adult bookstore or
adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to
exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as an
adult bookstore or adult video store so long as one (1) of its principal
business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration
the specified materials that depict or describe specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
2.
1. Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity;
Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities;
2.
Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, digital video discs,
photographic reproductions, video over Internet protocol or other
image-producing devices that are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas;
or
3.
Persons who engage in erotic dancing or performances that are
intended for the sexual interests or titillation of an audience or
customers.
4.
Section
665.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
665.050
100:1554
ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY — Any building, structure or
facility which contains or is used for commercial entertainment, including
theaters used in presenting live presentations, predominately distinguished
or characterized by their principal emphasis on matter displaying,
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas and including adult cabaret facilities providing a live
presentation, where customers observe any live presentation of any person
wholly or partially nude with their genitals or pubic region exposed or
covered only with transparent covering and additionally, in the case of a
female person, with the areola and nipple of the breast exposed or covered
only with transparent covering or observe specified sexual activities.
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel, building or portion of a building,
structure, facility or similar commercial establishment that:
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER — A building or portion of a building
(including any portion of a building which contains more than one hundred
fifty (150) square feet) where films, motion pictures, movies, video
cassettes, slides, digital video discs or similar photographic reproductions,
video over Internet protocol or other projected images are regularly,
commonly, habitually or consistently shown that are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment that regularly, commonly, habitually or
consistently features persons who appear in person in a state of nudity or
semi-nudity or live performances that are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Community Development.
EMPLOYEE — A person who performs any service on the premises of
a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time, contract basis or
independent basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee,
independent contractor, agent or otherwise and whether or not the said
person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said
business. "Employee" does not include a person exclusively on the premises
Offers accommodation to the public for any form of consideration and
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, digital video discs, video over
Internet protocol or other photographic reproductions that are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the
public right-of-way that advertises the availability of this adult type of
photographic reproductions; or
1.
Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than
eighteen (18) hours; or
2.
Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for
a period of time that is less than eighteen (18) hours.
3.
Section
665.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
665.050
100:1555
for repair or maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises
or for the delivery of goods to the premises, nor does "employee" include
a person exclusively on the premises as a patron or customer. The term
"employee" includes any manager.
ESTABLISHMENT — Includes any of the following:
GROSS TOTAL FLOOR AREA — The total area of the building accessible
or visible to the public, including showrooms, motion picture theaters,
motion picture arcades, service areas, behind-counter areas, storage areas
visible from such other areas, restrooms (whether or not labeled "public"),
areas used for cabaret or similar shows (including stage areas) plus aisles,
hallways and entryways serving such areas.
LICENSED DAY CARE CENTER — A facility licensed by the State of
Missouri, whether situated within the County or not, that provides care,
training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for more than twelve
(12) children under fourteen (14) years of age, where such children are
not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the owner or operator of the
facility.
LIVE THEATRICAL PERFORMANCE — A play, skit, opera, ballet, concert,
comedy or musical drama.
MATERIAL — Anything printed or written or any picture, drawing,
photograph, motion picture film, videotape or videotape production or
pictorial representation or any statue or other figure or any recording
or transcription or any mechanical, chemical or electrical reproduction or
anything that is or may be used as a means of communication. "Material"
includes undeveloped photographs, molds, printing plates and other latent
representational objects.
MEDIA — Anything printed or written or any picture, drawing, photograph,
motion picture film, videotape or videotape production or pictorial
representation or any electrical or electronic reproduction of anything that
is or may be used as a means of communication. "Media" includes, but shall
not be limited to, books, newspapers, magazines, movies, videos, sound
recordings, cd-roms, digital video discs, laser discs, other magnetic media
and undeveloped photographs.
The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business;
1.
The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
2.
The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business; or
3.
4. The relocation of any sexually oriented business; or
A sexually oriented business or premises on which the sexually oriented
business is located.
5.
Section
665.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
665.050
100:1556
NUDITY OR A STATE OF NUDITY — The appearance of a human bare
buttock, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic area, male genitals, female
genitals or vulva, with less than a fully opaque covering; or a female breast
with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the areola; or human
male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely
covered.
OPERATOR — Any person operating, conducting or maintaining a sexually
oriented business.
OWNER — The proprietor, if a sole proprietorship; all partners (general
and limited), if a partnership; all officers, directors and persons holding
five percent (5%) or more of the outstanding shares if a corporation; or all
officers, directors, members and persons holding five percent (5%) or more
of any ownership interest, if a limited liability company; or any beneficiary
or trustee of a trust.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, trust,
incorporated or unincorporated association, limited liability company, joint
venture, governmental entity or other entity or group of persons however
organized.
PREMISES — The real property upon which the sexually oriented business
is located and all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon including,
but not limited to, the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private
walkways and parking lots or parking garages adjacent thereto under the
ownership, control or supervision of the owner or operator.
SEMI-NUDE OR SEMI-NUDITY — The appearance of the female breast
below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point. This
definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast,
but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast
exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing
apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore or
adult video store, adult cabaret, adult live entertainment facility, adult
motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude
model studio or sexual encounter center.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Includes any of the following:
The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if fully and
opaquely covered;
1.
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks or a female breast below a point immediately above
the top of the areola.
2.
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus or female breasts, whether covered or uncovered;
1.
Section
665.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
665.050
100:1557
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;
2.
3. Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in Subsections (1) through (3) above.
4.
Section
665.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
665.050
100:1558
ARTICLE II
Location — Building and Signage Restrictions
Section 665.060. Location and Building Restrictions. [R.O. 2009
§158.010; Ord. No. 06-330, 12-14-2006]
A. Sexually oriented businesses shall be permitted in any "I-2" Heavy
Industrial District provided that the sexually oriented business may not
be operated within:
1. One thousand (1,000) feet of a church, synagogue, mosque, temple
or building which is used primarily for religious worship and
related religious activities;
2. One thousand (1,000) feet of a public or private educational facility
including, but not limited to, licensed day care center, nursery
schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private
schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools,
high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation
schools, special education schools, junior colleges and universities;
school includes the school ground, but does not include the
facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally
as a school;
3. One thousand (1,000) feet of a public park or recreational area
which has been designated for park or recreational activities
including, but not limited to, a park, playground, nature trails,
swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts,
skating rink, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness areas or other
similar public land;
4. One thousand (1,000) feet of the property line of a lot zoned for
residential use as defined in Chapter 400 as "R-1C", "R-1D", "R-1E",
"R-2", "R-3" or "R-M" and being devoted to residential use;
5. One thousand (1,000) feet of another sexually oriented business;
6. One thousand (1,000) feet of any establishment that offers for sale
alcoholic beverages for on- premise consumption or provides for
on-premise consumption of alcoholic beverages; or
7. One thousand (1,000) feet of the property line of any lot designated
for residential use on a development plan approved under a "PD-R"
Planned Development—Residential, "PD-MU" Planned
Development—Mixed Use or "PD-RF" Planned
Development—Riverfront Zoning District.
B. A sexually oriented business may not be operated in the same building,
structure or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented
business.
Section
665.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
665.060
100:1559
Section 665.070. Sign Restrictions. [R.O. 2009 §158.015; Ord. No.
06-330, 12-14-2006]
C. For the purpose of this Chapter, measurement shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from
the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the
premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted to the
nearest property boundary of the premises described in Subsections
(A)(1) and (2); or to the nearest property boundary described in
Subsections (A)(3), (4) and (7).
D. For purposes of Subsection (C) of this Section, the distance between
any two (2) sexually oriented business uses shall be measured in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from
the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is
located.
A. Notwithstanding any other ordinance, code or regulation to the
contrary, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any sexually oriented
business or any other person to erect, construct or maintain any sign
for the sexually oriented business other than the one (1) primary sign
and one (1) secondary sign as provided herein.
B. Primary signs shall have no more than two (2) display surfaces. Each
such display surface shall:
1. Not contain any flashing lights;
2. Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
3. Not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet in area; and
4. Not exceed ten (10) feet in height or ten (10) feet in length.
C. Primary signs shall contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings or
pictorial representations in any manner and may contain only the name
of the establishment.
D. Each letter forming a word on a primary sign shall be of solid color and
each such letter shall be the same print-type, size and color. The
background behind such lettering on the display surface of a primary
sign shall be of a uniform and solid color.
E. Secondary signs shall have only one (1) display surface. Such display
surface shall:
1. Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
2. Not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area;
3. Not exceed five (5) feet in height and four (4) feet in width; and
4. Be affixed or attached to any wall or door of the enterprise.
Section
665.060
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
665.070
100:1560
Section 665.080. Exterior Portions of Sexually Oriented Businesses.
[R.O. 2009 §158.020; Ord. No. 06-330, 12-14-2006]
F. The provisions of Subsection (B)(1) and Subsections (C) and (D) shall
also apply to secondary signs.
G. Any sign erected prior to the enactment of this Chapter shall be
considered a lawful non-conforming sign.
A. It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of a sexually oriented
business to allow the merchandise or activities of the establishment to
be visible from a point outside the establishment.
B. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented
business to allow the exterior portion of the sexually oriented business
to have flashing lights or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes,
drawings or pictorial representations of any manner except to the
extent permitted by the provisions of this Chapter.
C. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented
business to allow exterior portions of the establishment to be painted
any color other than a single achromatic color. This provision shall not
apply to a sexually oriented business if the following conditions are met:
1. The establishment is a part of a commercial multi-unit center; and
2. The exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial
multi-unit center, including the exterior portions of the business,
are painted the same color as one another or are painted in such a
way so as to be a component of the overall architectural style or
pattern of the commercial multi-unit center.
D. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to require the painting of an
otherwise unpainted exterior portion of a sexually oriented business.
Section
665.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
665.080
100:1561

ARTICLE III
Hours of Operation
Section 665.090. Hours of Operation. [R.O. 2009 §158.025; Ord. No.
07-102, 4-24-2007]
No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open
at any time between the hours of 11:00 P.M. and 9:00 A.M.
Section
665.090
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
665.090
100:1563

ARTICLE IV
Age Restrictions
Section 665.100. Age Restrictions. [R.O. 2009 §158.030; Ord. No.
06-330, 12-14-2006]
A. It shall be unlawful to allow a person who is younger than eighteen (18)
years of age to enter or be on the premises of a sexually oriented
business at any time the sexually oriented business is open for business.
B. It shall be the duty of each owner, operator and employee of each
sexually oriented business to ensure that an attendant is stationed at
each public entrance to the sexually oriented business at all times
during such sexually oriented business's regular business hours. It shall
be the duty of the attendant to prohibit any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years from entering the sexually oriented business. It
shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was under the age
of eighteen (18) unless such attendant asked for and was furnished:
1. A valid motor vehicle driver's license; or
2. A valid personal identification certificate issued by any State
reflecting that such person is eighteen (18) years of age or older.
Section
665.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
665.100
100:1565

ARTICLE V
Non-Conforming Uses
Section 665.110. Non-Conforming Uses. [R.O. 2009 §158.040; Ord.
No. 06-330, 12-14-2006; Ord. No. 07-102, 4-24-2007]
A. Any business lawfully operating on the effective date of this Chapter
that is in violation of the locational or hours of operation requirements
of this Chapter shall be deemed a non-conforming use. The nonconforming
use will be permitted to continue, unless terminated for any
reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or
more. Such non-conforming use shall not be increased, enlarged,
extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a
conforming use.
B. A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is
not rendered a non-conforming use by the location of a church,
synagogue or regular place of religious worship, public or private
elementary or secondary school, licensed day care center, public park,
residential district or use described in Section 665.060(A) within one
thousand (1,000) feet of the sexually oriented business.
Section
665.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
665.110
100:1567

ARTICLE VI
Administration, Enforcement, Violations and Penalties
Section 665.120. Administration. [R.O. 2009 §158.050; Ord. No.
06-330, 12-14-2006]
The Director of Community Development shall be responsible for
administering, maintaining, interpreting, revising and updating this
Chapter. The Director is authorized to inspect sexually oriented businesses
to determine compliance with this Chapter.
Section 665.130. Enforcement. [R.O. 2009 §158.051; Ord. No.
06-330, 12-14-2006]
It shall be the duty of the Department of Community Development to
enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
Section 665.140. Penalty. [R.O. 2009 §158.052; Ord. No. 06-330,
12-14-2006]
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of
this Chapter. Upon conviction thereof, such person shall be fined up to
five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be punished by imprisonment not to
exceed ten (10) days or be punished by both such fine and imprisonment.
Each day's violation of or failure, refusal or neglect to comply with any
provision of this Chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
The penalties provided in this Section are cumulative and in addition to and
are separate from any civil action to enforce this Chapter.
Section 665.150. Injunction. [R.O. 2009 §158.053; Ord. No. 06-330,
12-14-2006]
With or without the initiation of criminal prosecution or any other legal
proceedings, the City may apply to the appropriate court for injunctive
relief, which would require the correction or abatement of any violation of
this Chapter. The initiation or exhaustion of one (1) of these enforcement
proceedings shall not be a prerequisite to the initiation of any other of these
enforcement proceedings. Different types of enforcement proceedings may
be pursued concurrently.
Section 665.160. Conflicting Law. [R.O. 2009 §158.054; Ord. No.
06-330, 12-14-2006]
All ordinances, codes, regulations and orders or parts thereof in conflict
with the provisions of this Chapter shall not apply.
Section
665.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
665.160
100:1569
Chapter 670
CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS
Charter Reference—As to franchises, charter art. XI.
Section
665.160
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
665.160
100:1570
ARTICLE I
Statement of Intent and Purpose — Short Title — Definitions
Section 670.010. Statement of Intent and Purpose. [R.O. 2009
§111.001; Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
Section 670.020. Short Title. [R.O. 2009 §111.002; Ord. No. 01-125,
6-20-2001]
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The City of Saint Charles
Master Cable Services Regulatory Ordinance".
A. The City, pursuant to applicable Federal and State law, is authorized to
grant one (1) or more non-exclusive franchises to construct, operate,
maintain and reconstruct cable systems within the City.
B. The City Council finds that cable service has become an integral part of
its citizens' lives and that evolving cable systems have the potential to
play an even more dramatic role in the future, providing great benefits
and advanced capabilities to residents of the City. At the same time, the
rapidly emerging role of the cable modem as an integrated broadband
communications platform, coupled with the relative lack of competition
faced by the incumbent cable operator within the City limits,
necessitates a finding that the local government has a legitimate and
vital role to play in regulating cable services in a manner that ensures
high quality customer service while at the same time fostering
competition to the extent permitted by law. The Council further finds
that the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be
served by establishing regulatory powers that are vested in the City or
such persons as the City designates.
C. In order to ensure that the City and its residents receive state of the art
cable services and capabilities as this technology further evolves, all
franchises granted pursuant to this Chapter will be subject to periodic
review and modifications to keep current with changing law, technology
and services. It is the intent of this Chapter to provide for and specify
the means to attain the best possible cable service to residents of the
City and any franchises issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be
deemed to include this finding as an integral part thereof.
D. The Council further finds that ongoing industry consolidation has
resulted in less local accountability and that therefore flexible franchise
lengths and stringent customer service standards, including liquidated
damage provisions, may be the only practical means of ensuring
compliance and approximating the costs of franchise agreement noncompliance
to the City and its residents.
Section
670.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
670.030
100:1571
Section 670.030. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §111.003; Ord. No. 01-125,
6-20-2001]
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number and
words in the singular number include the plural number. The words "shall"
and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall
be given their common and ordinary meaning.
APPLICATION FEE — a reasonable, non-refundable fee established by the
City that shall be required to accompany an initial cable franchise
application or renewal application.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE — Any cable service tier that includes the lawful
retransmission of local television broadcast signals and any public,
educational and governmental access programming required by this
Chapter or a franchise agreement to be carried on the basic tier. Basic
cable service as defined herein shall be consistent with 47 U.S.C. Section
543(b)(7) (1997).
CABLE ACT — The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, Pub. L. No.
98-549 (codified at 47 U.S.C. Sections 521—611) (1982 and Supp. V. 1987)
as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition
Act of 1992, Pub. L. No. 102-385 and the Telecommunications Act of 1996,
Pub. L. No. 104-104 (1996) as may, from time to time, be amended.
CABLE INTERNET SERVICE — As used in the definition of gross revenues,
this means any cable service offered by a grantee whereby persons receive
access to the Internet in combination with or high-speed information
services through the cable system. At the time of adoption of this Chapter,
the regulatory status of Internet service was subject to various
interpretations. For this reason, this definition may be amended to conform
to applicable Federal law.
CABLE SERVICE OR SERVICE —
CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM, CABLE SYSTEM OR SYSTEM — A facility,
consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal
generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide
cable service to multiple subscribers within the franchise area, but such
term does not include:
The one-way transmission to subscribers of:
Video programming, including the broad categories of programs
and services agreed to in a franchise granted pursuant to this
Chapter, or
a.
b. Other programming service; and
1.
Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use
of such video programming or other programming service.
2.
Section
670.030
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
670.030
100:1572
CAPITAL COSTS — Costs associated with the purchase of assets, products
or other resources that will provide service for more than one (1) year, but
shall not have any meaning inconsistent with generally accepted accounting
principles.
CHANNEL — A portion of the electromagnetic spectrum that is capable of
carrying one (1) industry standard video signal, in either analog or digital
form. At the time of the adoption of this Chapter, analog standard video
channel is defined as six (6) MHZ.
CITY — The City of Saint Charles, Missouri.
COMMUNITY ACCESS CORPORATION OR CAC — A non-profit access
corporation serving the City, its assignees or delegees or any other entity
designated by the grantor whose duties shall include the financing,
management and programming of public, educational access and whatever
other duties with respect to the public and educational access channels that
the grantor from time to time may delegate.
COMPLAINT — Any oral, written or electronic inquiry, allegation or
assertion made by a person regarding service or system operations that is
not resolved at the time of initial contact.
CONVERTER — An electronic device that converts signals to a frequency
not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a subscriber
and, through the use of an appropriate channel selector, permits a
subscriber to view all authorized subscriber signals delivered at designated
converter dial locations.
COUNCIL — The City Council of Saint Charles, Missouri.
DIGITALLY COMPRESSED CHANNELS — Programs or services that are
provided to subscribers through signals that have been digitally
compressed and which may constitute at the grantee's option a separate
tier or category of program offering. Consistent with applicable law this
definition is purely intended to be descriptive and does not in any way
provide the City with authority to regulate the use of digitally compressed
channels.
DIRECT INCREMENTAL COSTS — The costs actually incurred by grantee
in meeting an obligation under its franchise which grantee would not
otherwise have incurred in order to either operate and conduct the business
of its cable system or meet another obligation of the franchise.
A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one (1)
or more television broadcast stations;
1.
A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way;
or
2.
A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to
the provisions of 47 U.S.C. Sections 201—226, except that such facility
shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility, whether
on a common carrier basis or otherwise, is used in the transmission of
video programming directly to subscribers.
3.
Section
670.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
670.030
100:1573
DROP — The cable or cables that connect the users of the system to the
distribution system in order to receive service.
EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNELS —
EFFECTIVE DATE — The date a franchise becomes effective in accordance
with the franchise and the rules and procedures of the City.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission or a designated
representative.
FRANCHISE — The rights and obligations extended by the City to a person
to own, lease, construct, maintain or operate a cable system in the right-ofway
within the franchise area for the purpose of providing cable services.
Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean or
include:
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT — A franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter.
FRANCHISE AREA — The entire geographic area within the City as it is now
constituted or may in the future be constituted or any other area in the City
for which a franchise is granted in a franchise agreement.
FRANCHISE FEE — Any fee or assessment of any kind imposed by the City
or other governmental entity on a grantee solely because of its status and
activities as such. Franchise Fee does not include:
Channels specially designated for non-commercial educational access
programming use, including the cablecasting of events and activities of
the school systems authorized to use such channels; and
1.
The facilities and equipment necessary for the activation of such
channels as specified in the applicable franchise agreement.
2.
Any other permit or authorization required for the privilege of
transacting and carrying on a business within the City required by
the ordinances and laws of the City, including the provision of
telecommunications services;
1.
Any permit, agreement or authorization required in connection with
operations in the right-of-way including, without limitation, permits
and agreements for placing devices on or in poles, conduits or other
structures, whether owned by the City or a private entity, or for
excavating or performing other work in or along the right-of-way.
2.
Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability (including any such
tax, fee or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or
their services but not including a tax, fee or assessment that is unduly
discriminatory against cable operators or cable subscribers);
1.
Capital costs that are required by a franchise agreement to be incurred
by a grantee for PEG access equipment and facilities;
2.
Requirements or charges incidental to the award or enforcement of
a franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of
3.
Section
670.030
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
670.030
100:1574
GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNELS —
GRANTEE — A person who is granted a franchise and that person's agents,
employees, lawful successors, transferees or assignees.
GRANTOR — The City and its successors or delegates.
GROSS REVENUES — Any revenue received by the grantee or by any other
entity that is a cable operator of the cable system, including grantee's
affiliates, from the operation of the grantee's cable system to provide cable
services. By way of illustration and not limitation, this definition would
include revenue derived from pay cable fees, installation and reconnection
fees, franchise fees collected from subscribers, leased channel access fees;
converter rentals; revenue from cable Internet service (unless it is
determined by applicable law that it is not a cable service); revenue from
home shopping to the extent conducted through a cable service; all cable
service lease payments from the cable system; payments or other
consideration received by the grantee from programmers for carriage of
programming on the cable system and accounted for as revenue under
generally accepted accounting practices ("GAAP"); advertising revenues;
revenues from data transmissions to the extent these transmissions are
considered cable services under Federal law; payments or other
consideration received by the grantee for the use of the cable system to
provide cable service and accounted for as revenue under GAAP. Gross
revenues shall include revenue received by any entity other than the
grantee where necessary to prevent evasion or avoidance of the obligations
under this Chapter or a franchise to pay the applicable franchise fees. Gross
revenues shall not include:
credit, insurance, indemnification, compliance audits, penalties or
liquidated damages; or
4. Any fee imposed under Title 17 of the United States Code.
Channels specially designated for non-commercial governmental access
programming use; and
1.
The facilities and equipment necessary for the activation of such
channels as specified in the applicable franchise agreement.
2.
To the extent consistent with GAAP, bad debt; provided however, that
all or part of any such bad debt that is written off but subsequently
collected shall be included in gross revenues in the period collected;
1.
Amounts collected from subscribers for public, educational and
governmental access;
2.
Any taxes on services furnished by a grantee which are imposed
directly upon any subscriber or user by the State, City or other
governmental unit and which are collected by grantee on behalf of said
governmental unit; or
3.
4. Institutional network charges for educational or governmental use.
Section
670.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
670.030
100:1575
INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK OR I-NET — Capacity, fibers, or both, from
both within the primary cable network and/or separately constructed
networks that may be dedicated to governmental, educational and other
publicly funded users for two-way, broadband communications. The I-Net
includes all equipment and maintenance of equipment required to make
the capacity available including, but not limited to, fiber and coaxial cable,
cable modems, switching, routing, transmitting and receiving necessary for
the use of the network as determined in the individual franchise agreement.
INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK SERVICES — The provision of an I-Net by a
grantee to governmental, educational and other publicly funded users, as
determined by the City, pursuant to the terms of the franchise agreement
for non-commercial applications including, but not limited to, two-way
dedicated voice, video, data and telephony channels connecting and
interconnecting user facilities.
LOCAL ORIGINATION PROGRAMMING — Channel capacity designated
for local interest video programming produced by the grantee, such
programming may not be required as a broad programming category and is
not considered franchise related.
LOCKOUT DEVICE — A mechanical or electrical accessory to a subscriber's
terminal that inhibits the video or audio portions of a certain program or
certain channel(s) provided by way of a cable system.
NON-COMMERCIAL — Channels or programming that are operated on a
non-commercial or not-for-profit basis in a manner consistent with the rules
and regulations of the national Public Broadcasting System.
NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS — Those hours during which most similar
businesses in the community are open to serve customers. In all cases,
"normal business hours" must include some evening hours, at least one (1)
night per week and some weekend hours.
NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS — Any and all situations or conditions
that are ordinarily within the control of a grantee including, but not limited
to, management or corporate decisions; employee conduct; staffing levels;
special promotions; pay-per-view events; rate increases; regular peak or
seasonal demand periods; electronic and video equipment; maintenance,
repair or upgrade of the cable system. Those conditions that are not within
the control of a grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters;
civil disturbances; power outages; telephone network outages; vandalism;
public works projects for which no advanced notice is given; and severe or
unusual weather conditions.
OTHER PROGRAMMING SERVICE — Information that a cable operator
makes available to all subscribers generally.
PERSON — Any corporation, partnership, proprietorship, individual,
organization, governmental entity or any natural person.
PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNELS —
Channels specially designated for non-commercial public access
programming by persons from the community; and
1.
Section
670.030
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
670.030
100:1576
RENEWAL — A new franchise granted to an existing cable operator.
REPORTS — Any and all non-trade secret documents and information
required to be completed and/or kept or filed by the grantee on order of
the Federal Communications Commission, State or City. In accordance with
applicable law, the City shall maintain such information as confidential to
the extent that grantee identifies specific information as such.
RESPONSE TIME — The period between when a problem is reported and/
or a request for action is made by a subscriber or the grantor and when the
action is completed by the grantee.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The surface and space above and below any real property
in which the City has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee or
other estate or interest or as a trustee for the public including, but not
limited to, any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley,
court, sidewalk, parkway, swale, river, tunnel, viaduct, bridge, park or any
other place, area or real property owned by or under the control of the City.
SERVICE INTERRUPTION — The loss of picture or sound on one (1) or
more channels on the system or the degradation of the picture and/or sound
quality on such channels to the extent that the subscriber is unable to use
the signals, regardless of the cause, for any reason whatsoever.
STANDARD INSTALLATION — Any service installation that can be
completed using a drop of one hundred fifty (150) feet or less, unless
otherwise specified in the franchise agreement.
SUBSCRIBER — Any person who or which elects to subscribe for any
purpose to cable service provided by a grantee by means of, or in
connection with, the cable system and whose premises or facilities are
physically wired and lawfully activated to receive cable service from
grantee's cable system, including persons who receive cable service without
charge according to the terms of the franchise agreement.
TRAINED REPRESENTATIVE — Employees of the grantee who have the
authority and capability while speaking with a subscriber to, among other
things, answer billing questions, adjust bills and schedule service and
installation calls.
The facilities and equipment necessary for the activation of such
channels as specified in the applicable franchise agreement.
2.
Section
670.030
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
670.030
100:1577

ARTICLE II
Franchise Requirements
Section 670.040. Unlawful To Operate Without A Franchise.589 [R.O.
2009 §111.011; Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, operate or maintain a
cable system or to provide cable service or other competing multi-channel
video services in the City without a franchise, unless otherwise specifically
authorized under applicable Federal or State law.
Section 670.050. Franchises Non-Exclusive. [R.O. 2009 §111.012;
Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
Any franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter shall be non-exclusive. The
grantor specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional
franchises for a cable television system or any component thereof to any
other person including itself, as it deems appropriate, subject to applicable
Federal and State law.
Section 670.060. Franchises Non-Discriminatory. [R.O. 2009
§111.013; Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
In the event the City grants more than one (1) franchise or similar
authorization for the construction, operation or maintenance of any cable
system to a qualified person in a franchise area, the City's policy shall be to
grant the franchises on terms that are non-discriminatory and competitively
neutral, provided that nothing herein shall be construed as requiring the
use of identical terms or conditions or limit the enforceability of conditions
that are freely negotiated.
Section 670.070. Franchise Territory. [R.O. 2009 §111.014; Ord. No.
01-125, 6-20-2001]
Any franchise shall be valid within the entire franchise area. Unless a
franchise agreement specifically states otherwise, every franchise shall
apply to the entire territorial area of the City.
Section 670.080. Term of Franchise. [R.O. 2009 §111.015; Ord. No.
01-125, 6-20-2001]
No franchise agreement shall have a term in excess of fifteen (15) years.
Section 670.090. Federal, State and City Jurisdiction. [R.O. 2009
§111.016; Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
A. This Chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all
applicable Federal and State laws.
589. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §670.850.
Section
670.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
670.090
100:1579
Section 670.100. Rights Reserved To Grantor. [R.O. 2009 §111.017;
Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
B. In the event that the Federal or State Government discontinues preemption
in any area of cable communications over which it currently
exercises jurisdiction in such manner as to expand rather than limit
municipal regulatory authority, grantor may, if it so elects, adopt rules
and regulations in these areas, after conducting a public hearing
process comparable to that which is provided for in Section 670.720 of
this Chapter and to the extent permitted by law.
C. Grantee's rights are subject to the police powers of the City to adopt
and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety and welfare of
the public. Grantee shall comply with all applicable general laws and
ordinances enacted by the City pursuant to that power.
D. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all franchises granted or
renewed after or simultaneously with the effective date of this Chapter.
This Chapter shall also apply to all existing franchises, to the extent not
inconsistent with the terms of any such franchise or applicable law. A
franchise agreement (including all of grantee's particular rights,
powers, protections, privileges, immunities and obligations associated
therewith as the same exist on the date hereof) shall constitute a legally
binding contract between the grantor and grantee and, as such, cannot
be amended, modified or changed by the grantor without the consent of
grantee in any manner whatsoever, whether by ordinance, rule,
regulation or otherwise, to impose on grantee more stringent or
burdensome requirements or conditions. In the event of any conflict
between the terms and conditions of a franchise agreement and the
provisions of this Chapter and other generally applicable regulatory
ordinances of the City, the specific terms of the franchise agreement
shall control; provided however, that nothing herein contained shall
preclude the City from the proper exercise of its police powers or its
powers of eminent domain.
E. In the event of a change in State or Federal law which by its terms
would require the City to amend this Chapter, the parties may modify
the existing franchise in a mutually agreed upon manner.
F. Grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the
provisions of this Chapter or a franchise agreement by reason of any
failure of the City to enforce prompt compliance.
G. This Chapter and all franchise agreements shall be construed and
enforced in accordance with the substantive laws of the State of
Missouri.
A. In addition to any rights specifically reserved to grantor by this Chapter
or a franchise agreement, grantor reserves to itself every right and
power that is required to be reserved by a provision of any other
ordinance or under any other franchise.
Section
670.090
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
670.100
100:1580
Section 670.110. Franchise Agreement. [R.O. 2009 §111.018; Ord.
No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
Section 670.120. Initial Franchise Applications. [R.O. 2009
§111.019; Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
B. Grantor shall have the right to waive any provision of this Chapter or a
franchise agreement, except those required by Federal or State
regulation, if the grantor determines:
1. It is in the public interest to do so, and
2. The enforcement of such provision will impose an undue hardship
on a grantee or the subscribers.
To be effective, such waiver shall be evidenced by a statement
in writing signed by a duly authorized representative of
grantor. Waiver of any provision in one (1) instance shall not
be deemed a waiver of such provision subsequent to such
instance, nor be deemed a waiver of any other provision of this
Chapter or a franchise agreement unless the statement in its
final form approved by the City Council so recites.
A. Every grantee shall agree to the terms and provisions of a franchise
agreement as negotiated between the grantee and the grantor.
B. In addition to those matters required elsewhere in this Chapter to be
included in the franchise agreement, each franchise agreement must
contain the following express representations by each grantee:
1. Grantee accepts and agrees to all of the provisions of this Chapter
and any supplementary specifications as to construction, operation
or maintenance of the system which may be included in the
franchise agreement.
2. Grantee has examined all of the provisions of this Chapter and
agrees that the Chapter is valid as of the effective date of grantee's
franchise.
3. Grantee recognizes the right of the City to adopt such additional
regulations of general applicability as it shall find necessary in the
exercise of its police power.
C. Every franchise agreement shall contain such further conditions or
provisions as may be negotiated between the City and a grantee, except
that no such conditions or provisions shall be such as to conflict with
any provisions of State or Federal law. In case of conflict or of any
ambiguity between any terms or provisions of a franchise agreement
and this Chapter, the words of the agreement shall control.
A. Any person desiring an initial franchise for a cable system shall file an
application with the City. A reasonable non-refundable application fee
Section
670.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
670.120
100:1581
Section 670.130. Consideration of Initial Applications. [R.O. 2009
§111.020; Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
established by the City shall accompany the application, which shall not
be considered or credited against the collection of applicable franchise
fees. An application for an initial franchise for a cable television system
shall contain, where applicable:
1. A statement as to the proposed franchise area;
2. Resume of prior history of applicant, including the legal, technical
and financial expertise of applicant in the cable television field;
3. List of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if a
partnership or the percentage of stock owned or controlled by each
shareholder, if a corporation;
4. List of officers, directors and managing employees of applicant,
together with a description of the background of each such person;
5. The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of applicant
or any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in
whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by
applicant;
6. A current financial statement of applicant verified by a CPA audit or
otherwise certified to be true, complete and correct to the
reasonable satisfaction of the City;
7. Proposed construction and service schedule; and
8. Any additional information that the City may require for the
administration of the franchise.
A. Upon receipt of any application for an initial franchise, the Mayor shall
prepare a report and make his/her recommendations respecting such
application to the City Council.
B. A public hearing shall be held prior to any initial franchise grant, at a
time and date approved by the Council. Within thirty (30) days after the
close of the hearing, the Council shall make a decision based upon the
evidence received at the hearing as to whether or not the franchise(s)
should be granted and, if granted, subject to what conditions.
C. All applicants for an initial franchise that are awarded a franchise shall
pay the grantor's reasonable costs in reviewing and negotiating a
franchise agreement. The Section 670.120 application fee shall be
credited towards these costs. Such payment shall not constitute a
franchise fee or be credited as such.
Section
670.120
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
670.140
100:1582
Section 670.140. Franchise Renewal. [R.O. 2009 §111.021; Ord. No.
01-125, 6-20-2001]
Franchise renewals shall be in accordance with applicable law including,
but not necessarily limited to, the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984,
as amended. Grantor and a grantee, by mutual consent, may enter into
renewal negotiations at any time during the term of the franchise.
Section 670.150. Grant of Additional Franchise and Competing
Service. [R.O. 2009 §111.022; Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
A. Since competing or overlapping franchises may have an adverse impact
on the public rights-of-way, on the quality and availability of services to
the public and may adversely affect an existing operator's ability to
continue to provide the services and facilities it is presently providing
under a franchise, the City may issue a franchise in an area where
another grantee is operating only following a public hearing to consider
the potential impact which the grant of an additional franchise may
have on the community. In considering whether to grant one (1) or more
additional franchises, the City shall specifically consider and address in
a written report the following issues:
1. The positive and/or negative impact of an additional franchise on
the community.
2. The ability and willingness of the specific applicant in question to
provide cable services to the entire franchise area which is served
by the existing cable operator. The purpose of this Subsection is to
ensure that any competition which may occur among grantees will
be on terms which when taken as a whole do not give a competitive
advantage to one (1) grantee over another.
3. The amount of time it will take the applicant to complete
construction of the proposed system and activate service in the
entire franchise area; and whether the applicant can complete
construction and activation of its system in a timely manner.
4. The financial capabilities of the applicant and its guaranteed
commitment to make the necessary investment to erect, maintain
and operate the proposed cable system for the duration of the
franchise term. In order to ensure that any prospective grantee
does have the requisite current financial capabilities, the City may
request equity and debt financing commitment letters, current
financial statements, bonds, letters of credit or other
documentation to demonstrate to the City's satisfaction that the
requisite funds to construct and operate the proposed system are
available.
5. The quality and technical reliability of the proposed system, based
upon the applicant's plan of construction and the method of
Section
670.140
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
670.150
100:1583
Section 670.160. Permits For Non-Franchised Entities. [R.O. 2009
§111.023; Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
distribution of signals and the applicant's technical qualifications
to construct and operate such system.
6. The experience of the applicant in the erection, maintenance and
operation of a cable television system.
7. The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate one (1) or
more additional cable systems and the potential disruption of those
public rights-of-way and private property that may occur if one (1)
or more additional franchises are granted.
8. The disruption of existing cable television service and the potential
that the proposed franchise would adversely affect the residents of
the City.
9. The likelihood and ability of the applicant to continue to provide
competing cable television service to subscribers within the entire
franchise area for the duration of the franchise.
10. Such other information as the City may deem appropriate to be
considered prior to granting any competing or overlapping
franchise.
A. The City may issue a license, easement or other permit to a person
other than the grantee to permit that person to traverse any portion of
the grantee's franchise area within the City in order to provide cable
service outside, but not within the City. Such license or easement,
absent a grant of a franchise in accordance with this Chapter, shall not
authorize nor permit said person to provide cable service of any type to
any home or place of business within the City nor render any other
service within the City.
B. Such license, easement or permit shall require the payment of fee for
occupancy of the public right-of-way to the extent permitted by
applicable law.
Section
670.150
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
670.160
100:1584
ARTICLE III
Design, Services and Capabilities
Section 670.170. System Design. [R.O. 2009 §111.030; Ord. No.
01-125, 6-20-2001]
Every grantee shall offer service that meets the current and future needs
of the City. In order to ensure compliance with this requirement, grantee
shall, at a minimum, provide that its system and systems facilities as well as
services shall be comparable to other systems of the grantee or its affiliates
in other municipalities throughout St. Charles County. The franchise
agreement shall incorporate a description of the grantee's system including
the general design and capabilities of the system to identify for the City how
the system will meet the current and future cable needs of the City.
Section 670.180. The System. [R.O. 2009 §111.031; Ord. No.
01-125, 6-20-2001]
Every system shall pass by every single-family dwelling unit and multiplefamily
dwelling unit within the franchise area in accordance with line
extension policies set forth in the applicable franchise agreement. Service
shall be provided to subscribers in accordance with the schedules and line
extension policies specified in the applicable franchise agreement.
Section 670.190. Drops To Public Buildings. [R.O. 2009 §111.032;
Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
A. Any site receiving a public building drop as of May 1, 2000, pursuant to
Section 17.A of a previous cable franchise or otherwise receiving a
public building drop and service at no cost, shall continue to receive
service under the same terms throughout the period of any franchise
renewal or extension.
B. Every grantee shall provide installation of at least one (1) cable drop
and one (1) outlet, provide monthly basic cable service and the most
widely subscribed to cable programming service tier, without charge, to
public buildings in accordance with the line extension policies specified
in the applicable franchise agreement or otherwise specified in the
applicable franchise agreement. Accredited schools shall also receive
one (1) cable drop and one (1) outlet. Accredited schools shall include
all schools with grades kindergarten through grade 12 that are
accredited by the State, as well as any additional schools (such as
universities) identified in a franchise agreement. The location of such
cable drops and outlets shall be determined in cooperation with the
management of the building to which the connection is to be made.
Following the City's designation of additional building(s) to receive
cable service, a grantee shall complete construction of the drop and
outlet within sixty (60) days if the City requests construction. Drops and
outlets for other public buildings that are in addition to the one (1) free
drop and outlet required by this Section shall be provided by every
Section
670.170
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
670.190
100:1585
Section 670.200. Use of Grantee Facilities. [R.O. 2009 §111.033;
Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
The City shall have the right to install and maintain, free of charge, excess
space upon the poles and within the underground pipes and conduits of a
grantee any wires and fixtures desired by the City to the extent that such
installation and maintenance does not interfere with existing operations of
a grantee. City will relinquish its use of such poles and conduits upon ninety
(90) days' notice from a grantee that City's use interferes with company's
actual or anticipated use of the same.
Section 670.210. Upgrade of System. [R.O. 2009 §111.034; Ord. No.
01-125, 6-20-2001]
Every grantee shall upgrade its system (herein referred to as the "system
upgrade"), if required, as set forth in its respective franchise agreement.
Section 670.220. Non-Discriminatory Access To Cable Modem
Platform. [R.O. 2009 §111.035; Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
grantee at the cost of each grantee's time and material. Alternatively,
at an institution's request, the institution may add outlets at its own
expense, as long as such installation meets the grantee's standards
which shall be made readily available to any public entity upon request.
C. All such cable service outlets shall not be utilized for commercial
purposes. The City shall take reasonable precautions to prevent any use
of the grantee's cable system in any inappropriate manner or that may
result in loss or damage to the system. Users of such outlets shall hold
the grantee harmless from any and all liability or claims arising out of
their use of such outlets, other than for those claims arising out of
improper installation or faulty equipment.
D. In instances where the drop line from the feeder cable to the public
building exceeds two hundred (200) feet, unless otherwise specified in
the franchise agreement, the grantee may charge for the cost of its
labor and materials.
E. Every grantee that offers two-way interactive broadband services to
subscribers within the City shall provide and install courtesy cable
modems, as specified in the franchise agreement, at every educational
school accredited by the State of Missouri (grades K through 12) and to
all public libraries within the franchise area that are passed by the
portions of the grantee's cable system that are capable of supporting
such two-way services.
A. The City and its residents have an increasing need and desire for
broadband access to the Internet and other on-line services.
Section
670.190
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
670.220
100:1586
Section 670.230. Emergency Alert Capability. [R.O. 2009 §111.036;
Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
Grantee shall at all times provide the system capabilities to comply with the
FCC's Emergency Alert System rules and regulations. Provided, that at a
minimum these capabilities will remain in place even if the FCC at some
future date eliminates the current regulations.
Section 670.240. Periodic Review. [R.O. 2009 §111.037; Ord. No.
01-125, 6-20-2001]
The franchise agreement shall include provisions to provide for a "periodic
review" between the City and a grantee to evaluate changes in law,
technology or service and reasonable procedures for mutually agreed upon
modifications to the franchise agreement to incorporate changes identified
as desirable or necessary as a result of any such periodic review.
B. Grantee may be required to implement "open access" to its cable
system to non-affiliated Internet access service providers if legally
permissible.
Section
670.220
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
670.240
100:1587

ARTICLE IV
Institutional Network and Public Educational and Governmental
Access or "PEG" Access
Section 670.250. Institutional Network, Access Channels. [R.O.
2009 §111.040; Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
Section 670.260. Proof of Performance Testing. [R.O. 2009
§111.041; Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
To ensure high quality service on the institutional network and access
channels, proof of performance testing throughout the system and on all
channels will be made available to the City to the extent required in a
franchise agreement. Every grantee will monitor access channels
throughout the system to determine the level of technical quality of access
channels is in conformance with FCC rules and to ensure that the level of
technical quality on such channels is the same as on other channels. A log
of such monitoring shall be maintained by the grantee for inspection by the
City. In the event that a complaint is made by a programmer of any PEG
access channels, the grantee shall immediately investigate the complaint
and determine whether the grantee is in compliance with the technical
standards set forth in Section 670.280 of this Chapter. The procedures set
forth in Section 670.290 of this Chapter shall apply with respect to technical
testing of access channels.
A. Every grantee shall, to the extent required in its franchise agreement
and subject to applicable law, provide or fund on an equal basis with
other cable providers an institutional network that provides two-way
broadband voice, video and data capabilities for use by governmental,
educational and other publicly-funded or non-profit local community
service organizations identified by the City.
B. Every grantee shall also provide a channel or channels, bandwidth
capacity, service and funding for separate public, educational and
government access channels as specified in their franchise agreement.
All such PEG access channels shall be available to all subscribers as
part of their basic cable service. Given the ongoing changes in the state
of technology as of the effective date of this Chapter, absent the express
written consent of the City, grantee shall transmit PEG access channels
in the format or technology utilized to transmit all of the channels on
the basic cable service tier. Oversight and administration of the PEG
access channels shall be set forth in the franchise agreement. The City
reserves the right to designate a community access corporation or
similar entity to administer one (1) or more of the access channels.
Section
670.250
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
670.260
100:1589

ARTICLE V
Technical Standards and Customer Service Practices
Section 670.270. General Technical Standards and Customer
Service Practices. [R.O. 2009 §111.050; Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
This Chapter incorporates technical standards and establishes customer
service practices that a grantee must satisfy. In addition, a grantee shall
satisfy any additional or stricter customer service requirements established
by FCC regulations or other Federal, State or local law or regulation that
may be adopted or amended from time to time. A grantee shall maintain
such equipment and keep such records as required to comply with all
customer service and technical standards required by these regulations and
other applicable laws. Grantee shall at all times assist and cooperate with
grantor in explaining, interpreting and understanding such reports.
Section 670.280. Technical Standards. [R.O. 2009 §111.051; Ord.
No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
The technical standards used in the operation of a system shall comply, at
minimum, with the technical standards promulgated by the FCC relating to
cable systems pursuant to the FCC's rules and regulations and found in Title
47, Sections 76.601 to 76.617, as may be amended or modified from time
to time, which regulations are expressly incorporated herein by reference.
The most recent results of any tests required by the FCC, this Chapter or
a franchise agreement shall be made available to the City upon written
request.
Section 670.290. Test and Compliance Procedure. [R.O. 2009
§111.052; Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
Tests for a system shall be performed periodically in a manner so as to
conform with FCC specifications. The tests may be witnessed by
representatives of the City and written test reports shall be made available
to the City upon request. If any test locations fail to meet the performance
standards, the grantee shall be required to indicate what corrective
measures have been taken and shall have the site retested.
Section 670.300. Emergency Requirements. [R.O. 2009 §111.053;
Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
Each grantee must provide emergency alert override capabilities in a
manner consistent with the FCC's emergency alert system ("EAS") rules
and consistent with any State and/or regional emergency alert system plans
adopted in response to the FCC's EAS rules that are applicable to the
franchise area.
Section
670.270
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
670.310
100:1591
Section 670.310. Programming Decisions. [R.O. 2009 §111.054;
Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
Each grantee shall provide broad programming from each of the broad
programming categories identified in its franchise agreement. All
programming decisions remain within the sole discretion of each grantee,
provided that each grantee complies with Federal law regarding notice
to grantor and subscribers prior to any channel additions, deletions or
realignments and further subject to the grantee's signal carriage
obligations pursuant to 47 U.S.C. Sections 531—536, as may be amended
and subject to the City's rights pursuant to 47 U.S.C. Section 545, as may
be amended.
Section 670.320. Cable System Office Hours and Telephone
Availability. [R.O. 2009 §111.055; Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
A. Every grantee shall maintain an office within the City, which shall
include a place where subscribers may pay their bills, pick up and
return converter boxes and comparable items and receive information
on the grantee and its services. Such service office shall be open during
normal business hours or as specifically agreed in the franchise
agreement. Every grantee shall also maintain a publicly listed toll-free
or collect call telephone access line that is available to subscribers
twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week. The local or tollfree
numbers including any local office in the City of Saint Charles shall
be listed in all widely utilized local phone directories.
B. Every grantee shall have trained representatives on hand at the office
for walk-in subscriber visits and available to respond to subscriber
inquiries during normal business hours or as specifically agreed in the
franchise agreement. Telephone inquiries may be handled at the
grantee's headend location or at any other customer service office of
the grantee. Calls may also be processed through a grantee's regional
call center, provided that there are no delays or other reductions in
standards, either for telephone answering or in dispatch of repair
technicians. A grantee's regional call center shall meet all customer
service standards for City residents as provided for herein and/or in a
franchise agreement.
C. All employees of the grantee shall give their first name, when
answering an incoming call or inquiry and shall provide their employee
ID number upon request including when working in the field. The
employee shall repeat their company ID number if requested by the
subscriber.
D. Supervisory personnel must use their best efforts to respond to
subscriber requests to speak with a "manager or supervisor" within two
(2) hours of the request under normal operating conditions, during
normal business hours and supervisory personnel will respond no later
than the following business day. The grantee shall keep a report log of
such requests available for review by the City.
Section
670.310
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
670.320
100:1592
E. Subscriber reports of offensive language or conduct towards
subscribers by grantee employees may be a factor in determining the
ability of the grantee to meet the community needs and to evaluate the
performance of the grantee under its franchise.
F. After normal business hours, the telephone access line may be
answered by a service or an automated response system, including an
answering machine. Inquiries received after normal business hours
must be responded to by a trained representative on the next business
day.
G. The grantee shall prepare and distribute to the grantor a calendar of
holidays and business days on which the operator will be closed.
Grantee shall also provide notice to subscribers through answering
service/machine, voice mail messages, bill messages or through its
cable system regarding hours or dates when its offices will not be open.
Such notice shall be provided during the five (5) days prior to the date
the office will be closed. In addition, during such "closed" periods, the
grantee shall provide voice messages and notice on its premises of the
emergency and after hours contact numbers.
H. Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a
customer service representative or automated response unit, including
wait time, shall not exceed sixty (60) seconds. If a call must be placed
on hold or transferred, the time for response by a human customer
service representative shall not exceed an additional sixty (60) seconds.
Under normal operating conditions, these standards shall be met no
less then ninety-five percent (95%) of the time measured daily,
averaged monthly and reported at least semi-annually. Under normal
operating conditions, subscribers shall not receive a busy signal more
than three percent (3%) of the time.
I. Abandonment rates for incoming calls may not exceed five percent
(5%).
J. The period of three (3) hours following major outages (more than
twenty-five percent (25%) of the subscribers) or periods of natural
disasters are not included in the response requirements above,
provided that voice-mail information about the outage has been posted
on phone answering equipment and on any system bulletin board
(assuming outage is not City-wide). The City shall be notified that an
outage is in progress as soon as is reasonably possible, including
beginning and ending times, area of outage, location and cause of
problem.
K. Actions or negligence of the grantee which lead to a high volume of
calls (such as incorrect bills, rate increases, late bills or fees, changes in
service, plant maintenance, missed appointments, etc.) are considered
part of normal operating conditions and are therefore not exempt from
compliance with this Chapter.
Section
670.320
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
670.320
100:1593
Section 670.330. Service Calls and Installations. [R.O. 2009
§111.056; Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
L. Grantee shall respond to all subscriber or user inquiries or complaints
within five (5) business days of the inquiry or complaint, except to the
extent a more stringent standard is set forth for specific types of
activities, inquiries or complaints herein or in the franchise agreement.
1. "Response" to the inquiry or complaint shall include correction of
bills, completion of service calls or installations.
M. If a historical record of complaints demonstrates a clear failure on the
part of a grantee to comply with the above requirements, the grantor
may require the grantee to provide documentation of compliance with
the requirements of this Section.
1. Any grantee subject to such a documentation requirement on a
semi-annual basis shall provide the grantor with reports for hold
time, busy signals and abandonment rate.
2. The grantee and the grantor will meet by the twentieth (20th) of
the month following such intervals in order for the grantee to
submit monthly phone statistics and to explain the report for the
period. If such information is not available, a detailed written
explanation as to why such information is not available and a date
certain upon which such information will be available shall be
provided by the grantee.
The grantor using the remedies and enforcement procedures
of Sections 670.690 through 690.760 of this Chapter may
allow periods of excused non-compliance if the grantee can
provide reasonable documentation that these periods of noncompliance
were not within normal operating conditions. The
grantee will be deemed in compliance if:
a. During a semi-annual period each criterion has been met or
exceeded; or
b. If each criterion has been met or exceeded during four (4)
consecutive months within the semi-annual period.
N. The grantee is encouraged to maintain a customer service home page
on the Internet where customers can obtain information.
A. Under normal operating conditions, each of the following standards
must be met no less than ninety-five percent (95%) of the time as
measured on a quarterly basis:
1. Unless requested by the subscriber, a grantee shall perform service
calls, installations and requested changes in service (upgrades,
downgrades, equipment changes, disconnections) during normal
business hours. Disconnections for non-payment may only be
Section
670.320
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
670.330
100:1594
performed during normal business hours. In addition, maintenance
service capability enabling the prompt location and correction of
substantial system malfunctions or outages shall be available
twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week.
2. At the time an appointment is scheduled, the grantee shall inform
the subscriber of service procedures, required payments and
appointment and/or possible rescheduling/cancellation.
3. If a grantee cannot perform standard installations within seven (7)
business days of request by a subscriber (provided that the
schedule or preferences of the person requesting the standard
installation has not been responsible for the delay), the subscriber
may request and is entitled to receive a free standard installation.
If a grantee fails to provide this free standard installation and the
request was made by the subscriber within thirty (30) days of the
standard installation request, the grantor may direct the grantee to
issue a credit for the standard installation. Failure to comply with
such a directive shall subject a grantee to appropriate enforcement
actions. This Section shall not apply to the introduction of new
products and services when a grantee is utilizing a phased
introduction.
4. The appointment window alternatives for standard installations,
service calls and other installation activities will be within a
maximum four (4) hour time block during normal business hours.
Grantees may schedule service calls and other installation
activities outside of normal business hours for the express
convenience of a subscriber, if so requested.
5. No grantee may cancel an appointment with a subscriber after the
close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled
appointment.
6. If a grantee's representative is running late for an appointment
with a subscriber and will not be able to keep the appointment as
scheduled, the subscriber must be contacted and if the
appointment must be rescheduled, it shall be rescheduled to the
earliest time that is convenient for the subscriber.
7. The grantee may phone the subscriber within the appointment
window to verify that the appointment is still needed. If the
subscriber telephone is answered by a machine or service, the
grantee must leave a message with a direct or separate dispatch
number the subscriber may use to call back to confirm or
reschedule the appointment.
8. Appointments may not be canceled or rescheduled until field
personnel of the grantee make every reasonable effort to verify that
the subscriber or other authorized adult is not at the address for
the appointment, including the following actions:
Section
670.330
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
670.330
100:1595
a. Knock and use the doorbell to alert the subscriber; and
b. Look in the front or back yard as long as such action can be
accomplished without trespassing on the subscriber's property
and without subjecting the grantee's representative to physical
danger (e.g., dogs).
9. Upon verification that a subscriber is not at the address during the
scheduled appointment window, the grantee shall leave a door tag
or similar notice with the name of the person leaving the notice, the
time the person determined that the subscriber was not at home,
and a direct dispatch number the subscriber may call back to
confirm or reschedule an appointment.
10. Any vehicle used for the installation, construction, maintenance or
repair of a cable system shall bear the identification of the
contractor or the applicable grantee in a conspicuous place and
manner.
11. Reconnections due to erroneous disconnection based on billing or
technical errors must be completed at no charge within twenty-four
(24) hours of notification by the affected subscriber.
12. Reconnections after a disconnection attributed to non-payment of
bills shall be completed, after satisfaction of all payment
obligations, in accordance with grantee's standard installation
practices under Section 670.330(3) of this Chapter.
13. Installations or reconnections may not be considered completed
nor may customer be billed for services until all ordered, upgraded
or reconnected services are in full working order.
14. A subscriber's preference as to the point of entry into a residence
shall be observed whenever feasible.
a. Runs in building interiors shall be as unobtrusive as possible
and outlets shall be located for the convenience of the
subscriber.
b. The grantee shall use due care in the process of installation
and shall repair any damage to the subscriber's property
caused by installation work. Such restoration shall be
undertaken as soon as possible after the damage is incurred,
shall be subject to subscriber approval of the corrective action
and grantee shall use its best efforts to complete the corrective
action within no more than thirty (30) days after the damage is
incurred.
c. Should such restoration not be corrected within thirty (30)
days, the grantee shall notify the City and the subscriber as to
the cause for the delay and the date when such action shall be
completed.
Section
670.330
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
670.330
100:1596
Section 670.340. Repairs and Interruptions. [R.O. 2009 §111.057;
Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
15. Failure of the grantee to maintain adequate budget, sufficient staff
or properly trained staff shall not constitute justification for failure
to comply with these provisions.
A. Under normal operating conditions every grantee will begin working on
service interruptions and outages within a reasonable time frame, but
in no event later than twenty-four (24) hours after the service
interruption becomes known. Every grantee must begin actions to
correct other service problems on the business day following
notification of such service problems.
1. Any reports of "no picture/no sound" must be responded to and
repaired within twenty-four (24) hours of such report, including
arrival of another service technician qualified to repair the problem
if the first dispatched technician cannot.
2. Work not requiring the operator to enter subscriber premises (or
property) shall not require the subscriber to be available for an
appointment and shall not be delayed on account of the grantee's
inability to arrange an appointment with the subscriber.
B. Work on all other requests for service, excluding conditions beyond the
control of grantee, must begin by the next business day after
notification of the problem and must ordinarily be completed within
seventy-two (72) hours of the initial request. If for reasons beyond the
grantee's control a longer time for the completion of such repairs is
necessitated, the grantee shall exercise all due diligence to complete
the work in the shortest period of time possible. The lack of appropriate
replacement parts on hand shall not constitute a condition beyond the
grantee's control.
C. Outside repairs to cable plant which cannot be made by the initial
service technician dispatched shall under normal operating conditions
be rescheduled within twenty-four (24) hours of the originally
scheduled service call. The subscriber does not need to be home for
outside plant and line repairs.
D. A grantee may interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest
time possible, including interruption for system upgrade, maintenance
and repair. Routine maintenance shall occur at times that affect the
fewest number of subscribers, generally between 12:00 A.M. and 6:00
A.M., unless the grantee can justify on the basis of reasonable safety
precautions that such maintenance should be performed at a different
time. The grantee shall post override notices on the system's channels
to advise subscribers in advance of planned service interruptions. To
the extent that specific neighborhoods will be affected by a planned
outage, such as during an upgrade, the grantee shall provide advance
notice through telephone calls and/or door hangers.
Section
670.330
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
670.340
100:1597
E. A grantee shall automatically provide a credit equivalent to one-half (½)
day's cable rate for each service interruption exceeding four (4) hours
in any twenty-four (24) hour period, unless it is demonstrated that the
subscriber caused the outage or the outage was planned as part of an
upgrade or other work that occurred between the hours of 12:00 A.M.
and 6:00 A.M. of which the City and the subscriber received
appropriate prior notification. A subscriber is entitled to a full refund
for any cable system or equipment impairment to a pay-per-view event.
These credits and refunds shall be made available upon request by
subscriber.
F. Technicians that are employed by a grantee and capable of performing
service-related emergency repairs and maintenance must be available
twenty-four (24) hours a day, including weekends and holidays.
G. No charge shall be made to a subscriber for any service call relating to
grantee owned and grantee maintained equipment after the initial
installation of cable service unless the problem giving rise to the service
request can be demonstrated by grantee to have been:
1. Caused by the negligence or malicious destruction of cable
equipment by the subscriber; or
2. Problem established as having been non-cable in origin.
H. An "identified outage" is construed as reports of no picture/no sound
from five (5) or more subscribers in close geographic proximity or along
the same trunk or feeder line within twenty (20) minutes of each other.
I. The grantee shall take timely measures to post appropriate messages to
its subscribers regarding identified outages on its automatic response
unit or phone system. Such messages should also provide instructions
for subscribers whose navigation devices may have become
deauthorized as a result of the outage. Periods of natural disasters are
not included in this requirement.
J. Within one (1) hour of an identified outage, service technicians will
respond and use all available means to correct the outage in the
shortest possible amount of time.
K. Cable drop lines, cable trunk lines or any other type of outside wiring
that comprise part of the grantee's cable system that are located
underground shall be placed in such locations pursuant to City Code
and the surrounding ground shall be restored as close as is practical to
its condition immediately prior to such underground construction
activity within seventy-two (72) hours after connection to the cable
system. Except for the grantee's maintenance facilities, no cable drop
line, cable trunk line or any other type of outside wiring shall be
permitted to lay upon the ground within the City, except for the express
purpose of being immediately connected to the cable system of the
grantee. The requirements of this Subsection shall apply to all
Section
670.340
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
670.340
100:1598
Section 670.350. Disconnections, Downgrades and Refunds. [R.O.
2009 §111.058; Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
installation, reinstallation, service or repair commenced by the grantee
within the City during normal operating conditions.
A. If any subscriber fails to pay a properly due monthly subscriber fee or
any other properly due fee or charge, a grantee may disconnect the
subscriber's outlet; provided however, that such disconnection shall not
be effected until after the later of:
1. Thirty (30) days after the due date of said delinquent fee or charge;
or
2. Fifteen (15) days after delivery to subscriber of written notice of
the intent to disconnect.
If a subscriber pays before expiration of the later of (1) or (2),
the grantee shall not disconnect. Provided however, that this
Section does not apply to subscribers disconnected as a result
of insufficient funds.
B. No subscriber may be disconnected without prior notice consisting, at a
minimum, of two (2) of the following types of notices given at least five
(5) business days prior to disconnection.
1. Messages in bold or large type on current bill;
2. Postcards, other mailings or obvious bill stuffers;
3. Phone call or message.
C. If requested, a grantee will allow a subscriber at least fifteen (15) days
to resolve a disputed bill or to conduct an investigation concerning a
lost payment prior to disconnection.
D. No subscriber may be disconnected for non-payment if payment of
outstanding balances is made before the scheduled date for
disconnection, up to and including the last business day before the
scheduled disconnection.
E. No subscriber may be disconnected due to a grantee's failure to timely
or correctly post payments.
F. No subscriber may be disconnected outside of normal business hours or
on Sundays or holidays.
G. Prior to disconnecting service, the technician performing the
disconnection must attempt to reach the subscriber on site by knocking
or ringing at the front door or contacting other residents on the
premises.
Section
670.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
670.350
100:1599
H. In the situation where the subscriber is not home but the residence is in
the care and control of another person, the grantee shall allow such
person to contact the subscriber prior to disconnection.
I. Disconnections for non-payment which are completed in the field must
be accompanied by a door tag which provides notice that the technician
has been present and a telephone number for grantee's customer
service office. Disconnections made remotely by computer require the
grantee to mail information describing the amount of payment in
arrears as of the disconnection date and applicable reconnection
charges and procedures to the subscriber at least five (5) business days
prior to the actual disconnection. After disconnection, upon payment by
the subscriber of all proper charges in full, the grantee shall reinstate
service as provided for herein.
J. Absent extenuating circumstances, a grantee is not required to
reconnect a subscriber with an undisputed outstanding balance.
K. A grantee is permitted to refuse orders for premium or "pay per view"
services from subscribers with chronic non-payment records.
L. A grantee may disconnect subscriber premises that are responsible for
signal leakage in excess of applicable Federal limits. Grantee may
effectuate such disconnection without advance notice, provided that the
grantee shall immediately notify the subscriber with door tags and/or
telephone calls. If the source of the signal leakage is remedied, the
grantee shall reconnect the subscriber at no charge. For purposes of
this Section, use of FCC-approved navigation devices does not in and of
itself constitute signal leakage.
M. Subscribers may request disconnection or a downgrade of cable service
at any time. The grantee may not impose any charge for service
delivered after the requested date of disconnection. As provided under
Federal law, subscribers may request a downgrade at no charge if made
within thirty (30) days of a rate increase.
N. If a grantee fails to provide cable service requested by a subscriber who
is entitled to cable service under a franchise agreement or this Chapter,
the grantee shall, after adequate notification and being afforded the
opportunity to provide the service, promptly refund all deposits or
advance charges paid for the service in question by said subscriber.
O. All grantees must take reasonable steps to ensure that subscribers
understand the terms and obligations of their subscription agreements
in advance.
P. Credits for service shall be issued no later than the subscriber's next
billing cycle after determination that the credit is warranted.
Q. The refund provisions provided for in this Section do not alter a
grantee's responsibility to subscribers under any separate contractual
agreement or relieve a grantee of any other liability.
Section
670.350
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
670.350
100:1600
Section 670.360. Communications Between Grantees and
Subscribers. [R.O. 2009 §111.059; Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
R. Subscribers may be asked, but not required as a condition of any refund
or return of subscriber deposits, to personally return such equipment to
the grantee's office.
S. Refunds for known system outages shall be obtained by request of the
subscriber to the grantee.
T. Nothing in this Chapter shall limit the right of a grantee to deny service
to any household or individual which has a negative credit or service
history with grantee, which may include non-payment of bills, theft or
damage to the grantee's equipment, outstanding balances or threats or
assaults on employees of grantee in the course of their employment. In
the event service is denied, the grantee will give notice to the
subscriber of the right to contact the appropriate authority as
designated by the City.
A. Notifications To Subscribers.
1. Every grantee shall provide written information to subscribers on
each of the following topics at the time of installation, at least
annually to all subscribers, at any time upon request and at least
ten (10) days prior to making significant changes in such
information:
a. Product and services offered;
b. Prices and options for programming services and conditions of
subscription to programming and other services and facilities.
To avoid confusion as to the total cost of cable service, at the
time of subscription for service, upon request all subscribers
must be quoted prices that include franchise fees and any
other fixed costs (such as FCC regulatory fees and public
access support payments). Nothing in this Section prohibits or
restricts use of rates without franchise fees and/or other fixed
cost elements in area-wide advertisements;
c. Installation and maintenance policies including, when
applicable, information regarding the subscriber's home
wiring rights and information describing ownership of internal
wiring during the period service is provided;
d. Instructions on how to use services;
e. Instructions on how to place a service call;
f. Channel positions of programming offered on a system;
g. Billing and complaint procedures, including the name, address
and telephone number of the City;
Section
670.350
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
670.360
100:1601
h. A copy of the service contract if any;
i. The availability of signal control devices and universal remotes
and other compatible equipment (a list of brands and models
shall be provided upon request);
j. The grantee's practices and procedures for protecting against
invasions of privacy pursuant to applicable law;
k. The address and telephone number of the grantee's office to
which complaints may be reported; and
l. The method and/or location by which notification of changes to
services, rates and other alterations will be made to
subscribers and the community.
2. Grantee promotional materials, announcements and advertising of
service to subscribers, including pay-per-view or event
programming, shall conform to applicable laws governing such
advertising and clearly and accurately disclose price terms. In the
case of telephone orders, the grantee shall take appropriate steps
to ensure that price terms are clearly and accurately disclosed to
potential customers before the order is accepted.
3. Subscribers will be given thirty (30) days' advance notice of any
changes in rates, programming services or channel positions; or as
soon as possible through announcements on the cable system and
in writing, if such changes are within the grantees control. All such
notice shall be provided in such a manner as to be realistically
effective in bringing the information to the subscriber's attention.
In addition, every grantee shall notify subscribers thirty (30) days
in advance of any significant changes in other information required
by this Section.
B. Billing.
1. The grantor shall be furnished an advance copy of any changes in
the billing format.
2. Bills must be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be fully
itemized with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and
premium service charges and equipment charges.
3. Bills must clearly show a specific payment due date.
4. If a grantee chooses to itemize as a separate line item on bills,
franchise fees or other government imposed fees attributable to the
total bill, such fees must be shown in accordance with any
applicable law concerning the grantee's ability to itemize such fees.
In delineating the portion of the bill attributable to franchise fees
or other government imposed fees on the grantee, the
nomenclature used in the bill to indicate these elements shall be
Section
670.360
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
670.360
100:1602
Section 670.370. Complaint Log. [R.O. 2009 §111.060; Ord. No.
01-125, 6-20-2001]
Subject to the privacy provisions of 47 U.S.C. Sections 521 et seq., grantor
and every grantee shall prepare and maintain written records of all
complaints made to them and the resolution of such complaints, including
the date of such resolution. Such written records shall be on file at the office
of each grantee. Every grantee shall make available to grantor a written
summary of such complaints and their resolution upon request.
Section 670.380. Parental Control. [R.O. 2009 §111.061; Ord. No.
01-125, 6-20-2001]
Every grantee shall make available to any subscriber upon request a
"lockout" device for blocking both video and audio portions of any
channel(s) of programming entering the subscriber's premises. Such device
may be provided at a rate, if any, authorized by applicable law. The grantee
correct, truthful and reflect the actual source and use of such
funds.
5. Bills must also clearly delineate all activity during the billing
period, including optional charges, rebates and credits. Nothing in
this Section prohibits or restricts a grantee from offering packages
of programming to subscribers and to identify such packages on
the subscriber bill.
6. The billing statement must clearly and conspicuously indicate the
past due date and, if applicable, the action a subscriber must take
to avoid disconnection and a telephone number for the subscriber
to call to make payment arrangements or otherwise resolve a
billing dispute.
7. Negative option billing is prohibited in accordance with applicable
law.
C. Late Payment For Cable Service.
1. Each bill shall specify on its face, if applicable, any fee(s) for late
payment.
2. All processing fees for late payment, however denominated, shall
be consistent with applicable law
D. Construction And Outages. The grantee shall provide messages on its
cable system, to the extent feasible, to advise subscribers in advance of
planned construction or maintenance that will cause or is likely to
cause service interruptions. To the extent that specific neighborhoods
will be effected by a planned outage, such as during an upgrade, the
grantee shall provide not less than two (2) nor more than seven (7)
days' advance notice through telephone calls and/or door hangers.
Section
670.360
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
670.380
100:1603
may, however, require a reasonable security deposit for the use of such a
device.
Section 670.390. Periodic Subscriber Survey. [R.O. 2009 §111.062;
Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
Pursuant to the terms of the individual franchise agreement, the grantor
and grantee may adopt requirements related to the conducting and funding
of periodic subscriber surveys.
Section 670.400. Universal Service and Line Extension Policy. [R.O.
2009 §111.063; Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
Section 670.410. Mobility-Limited Subscribers. [R.O. 2009
§111.064; Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
Upon the request of mobility-limited subscribers, a grantee shall arrange
for delivery, pickup or exchange or replacement of converters or other
equipment at the subscriber's address or by the use of a satisfactory
equivalent means such as provision of a pre-paid postage mailer.
Section 670.420. Customer Service Reporting Requirements. [R.O.
2009 §111.065; Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
A. No resident shall be refused service arbitrarily. The specific line
extension policy for each grantee shall be contained within the
applicable franchise agreement.
B. Each franchise agreement shall establish policies for the extension of
cable service in areas where there is a lesser density of dwelling units
than the proscribed minimum density under the applicable line
extension policy.
A. In addition to the semi-annual reports on telephone service compliance
detailed in Section 670.320(M) of this Chapter, the grantor may require
a grantee to periodically prepare and furnish to grantor semi-annual
reports and any other reasonable information relevant to the grantee's
compliance with the customer service requirements of this Chapter.
Such reports shall include, at minimum, the following:
1. The number of free standard installations that were issued for
failure to arrive on a timely basis for standard installations.
2. Service interruptions report that tracks information on a monthly
basis to include:
a. Total number of service interruptions;
b. Date and time of all service interruptions;
Section
670.380
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
670.420
100:1604
Section 670.430. City Monitoring. [R.O. 2009 §111.066; Ord. No.
01-125, 6-20-2001]
In addition to free outlets, free cable service or services otherwise required
by the franchise, grantee shall provide one (1) service outlet (which shall be
at the Cable Administrator's office at City Hall, unless otherwise specified
by City) that shall receive without charge all non-premium programming
provided by grantee. Such service shall be provided in such a manner that
the City may monitor the programming and use of the cable system for
compliance with the franchise, this Chapter, FCC technical standards and
applicable State and Federal law. The services provided pursuant to this
requirement shall be in a secure office location and not in a location open to
public viewing.
c. Total hours that the system was out-of-service as related to
planned upgrades, maintenance or channel line-up changes
performed by a grantee; and
d. Estimated number of subscribers affected by each incident.
3. Results of any FCC technical or performance testing on the system
required under the terms of this Chapter or the FCC's rules.
Section
670.420
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
670.430
100:1605

ARTICLE VI
Construction Standards
Section 670.440. Right-Of-Way Construction. [R.O. 2009 §111.070;
Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
Prior to commencing any construction in the City, a grantee must obtain all
necessary permits and licenses required by Federal, State and City laws,
ordinances and rules and pay all associated fees. Further, a grantee shall
comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and standards relating to
the construction, operation and maintenance of a cable television system.
Section 670.450. Compliance With Laws. [R.O. 2009 §111.071; Ord.
No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
At a minimum and without limitation, a grantee shall adhere to all Building,
Electrical and Zoning Codes currently or hereafter in force in the City.
The construction, installation and maintenance of the cable system shall
be effectuated by grantee in a manner that is consistent with the laws,
ordinances and construction standards of the State of Missouri, the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration, the National Electrical
Safety Code, National Electrical Code, FCC and the Standards of Good
Engineering Practices for Measurement of Cable Television Cable Systems
of the National Cable Television Association to the extent applicable, as well
as all other applicable laws, rules, regulations and ordinances that may be
modified or amended from time to time. All open connections on splitters,
couplers and other devices shall be properly terminated.
Section 670.460. Minimum Interference. [R.O. 2009 §111.072; Ord.
No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
All of a grantee's construction, installation, operation, repair and
maintenance and the arrangement of its lines, cables and other
appurtenances, on both public and private property, shall be conducted
in such a manner as to cause minimum interference with the rights and
reasonable convenience of the public and any property owners that may be
affected. In the event of any such interference, the City may require the
removal of grantee's lines, cables and appurtenances from the rights-of-way
in question, at the sole expense of the grantee.
Section 670.470. Repair of Property. [R.O. 2009 §111.073; Ord. No.
01-125, 6-20-2001]
Each grantee shall promptly repair and restore any City or private property
which may be damaged as a result of the construction, installation,
operation, repair or maintenance of the cable system. Any such property
damaged or destroyed shall be promptly repaired and restored by the
responsible grantee, at the grantee's sole cost and expense and to the
reasonable satisfaction of the City, to its condition prior to being damaged
or shall be replaced by grantee with equivalent property.
Section
670.440
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
670.480
100:1607
Section 670.480. Erection of Poles Prohibited. [R.O. 2009 §111.074;
Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
Each grantee shall endeavor to use existing utility poles along the rightsof-
way to the extent possible and shall not erect any pole on or along any
rights-of-way when there is an existing aerial utility system without the
City's prior approval. A grantee may obtain the lease of pole space and
facilities from the existing utility pole owners. If additional poles in an
existing aerial route are required, a grantee may negotiate with the utility
for the installation of the needed poles to be installed by the grantee or the
utility. Any such addition shall require the advance written approval of the
City.
Section 670.490. Reservations of Street Rights. [R.O. 2009
§111.075; Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent the City from
constructing sewers, grading, paving, repairing or altering any rights-ofway
or laying down, repairing or removing water mains or constructing or
establishing any other public work. All such work shall be done, insofar as
practicable, in such manner as not to obstruct, injure or prevent the free use
and operation of poles, wires, conduits, conductors, pipes or appurtenances
of the affected grantee(s). If any such property shall interfere with the
construction or repair of any rights-of-way or public improvement, whether
it be construction, repair or removal of a sewer or water main, the
improvement of any rights-of-way or any other public improvement, then
all such property of the affected grantee(s) shall be removed or replaced
in such manner as shall be directed by the City so that the same shall not
interfere with the public works of such City. Such removal or replacement
shall be at the expense of the affected grantee(s), except to the extent funds
are made available under applicable law.
Section 670.500. Underground Installation. [R.O. 2009 §111.076;
Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
In those areas within the City where cable system facilities are currently
placed underground, all cable system facilities shall remain or be placed
underground. In areas where either telephone or electric utility facilities
are above ground at the time of installation, a grantee may install its cable
system facilities above ground, provided that at such time as either electric
or telephone utility facilities are placed underground, the grantee shall
likewise place its cable system facilities without cost to the City. Nothing
contained in this Section shall require a grantee to construct, operate and
maintain underground any ground-mounted appurtenances. Each grantee
shall be in compliance with the Missouri One-Call Program or may make
separate provision for a program ensuring the timely and accurate location
of underground facilities.
Section
670.480
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
670.510
100:1608
Section 670.510. Conduit. [R.O. 2009 §111.077; Ord. No. 01-125,
6-20-2001]
All new trunk and distribution plant which is required to be buried
underground pursuant to Section 670.500 of this Chapter that is required
to cross under major intersections, as identified by the Director of Public
Works or his/her designee, shall be encased in conduit.
Section 670.520. Access To Open Trenches. [R.O. 2009 §111.078;
Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
The grantor agrees to require as a condition of issuing a permit for open
trenching to any utility or developer that the utility or developer give each
grantee at least ten (10) days' advance written notice of the availability of
the open trench and that the utility or developer provide the grantee with
reasonable access to the open trench.
Section 670.530. Aerial Drop Lines. [R.O. 2009 §111.079; Ord. No.
01-125, 6-20-2001]
For subscribers requesting connection requiring a drop in excess of one
hundred fifty (150) feet, unless the franchise agreement specifies otherwise,
a grantee shall extend cable service at a rate not to exceed the grantee's
actual direct incremental cost of installation from its main distribution
system.
Section 670.540. Clearing Poles and Cables. [R.O. 2009 §111.080;
Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
Grantees shall have the right to remove, trim, cut and to keep clear of
its poles, cables, underground conduits and related equipment the trees in
and along the public streets, but, in the exercise of such right, grantees
shall not cut such trees to any greater extent than is reasonably necessary
for the construction, erection, installation, maintenance and use of cable
system equipment. Grantees shall not remove, trim or cut such trees from
any public streets without first providing reasonable notice to the City of its
intention to do so, such notice to be delivered not less than fifteen (15) days
in advance. The grantee shall compensate the City or any private owners of
such trees for any damage caused by such trimming.
Section 670.550. Temporary Disconnections. [R.O. 2009 §111.081;
Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
Each grantee shall be required, at its expense, to protect, support,
temporarily disconnect, relocate in or remove from public streets, lands or
places any property of the affected grantee(s) whenever required by City
upon reasonable written notice by reason of traffic conditions, public safety,
street construction or any other public purpose. If public funds are available
to any person using such street, easement or right-of-way for the purpose
of defraying the cost of any of the foregoing, upon request the grantor shall
assist the affected grantee(s) in making application for such funds.
Section
670.510
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
670.560
100:1609
Section 670.560. Moving Facilities. [R.O. 2009 §111.082; Ord. No.
01-125, 6-20-2001]
Each grantee, on the request of the City or any person holding a building
permit issued by the City or any permit issued by an appropriate State
agency, shall temporarily move its wires, cables, poles or other cable system
facilities to permit the moving of large objects, vehicles, buildings or other
structures. The expense of such temporary moves shall be paid to the
affected grantee(s) by the person requesting the same and the affected
grantee(s) shall have the authority to require such payment in advance.
Every grantee shall be given not less than thirty (30) days' advance notice
to arrange for such temporary moves, unless emergency conditions warrant
otherwise.
Section 670.570. Work Performed By Others. [R.O. 2009 §111.083;
Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
Section 670.580. Duty To Grantee. [R.O. 2009 §111.084; Ord. No.
01-125, 6-20-2001]
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall relieve any person from liability
arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid injuring
a grantee's facilities while performing any work connected with grading,
regrading or changing the line of any rights-of-way or with the construction
or reconstruction of any sewer or water system or utility system.
A. Each grantee shall make available to the City the names and addresses
of any person, other than the grantee, which performs services
pursuant to this Chapter; provided however, that all provisions of this
Chapter remain the responsibility of a grantee.
B. All provisions of this Chapter shall apply to any subcontractors or
others performing any work or services pursuant to the provisions of
this Chapter on behalf of a grantee.
Section
670.560
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
670.580
100:1610
ARTICLE VII
Operation and Maintenance
Section 670.590. Open Books and Records. [R.O. 2009 §111.090;
Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
Each grantee shall cooperate with the grantor with respect to grantor's
administration of this Chapter and its applicable franchise agreement.
Grantor shall have the right to inspect, at any time during normal business
hours, all books, records, maps, plans, income tax returns, financial
statements, service complaint logs, performance test results and other
existing like materials of a grantee that relate to the operation of a grantee's
system and that are reasonably necessary to grantor's enforcement or
administration of this Chapter and/or a franchise agreement. The grantee
shall not be required to maintain any books or records for franchise
compliance purposes longer than three (3) years, except that financial
records necessary to demonstrate compliance with the required franchise
fee payments shall be kept for six (6) years. Upon request, the grantor will
treat designated information disclosed by a grantee as confidential to the
extent permissible under State and Federal law.
Section 670.600. Communications With Regulatory Agencies. [R.O.
2009 §111.091; Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
Copies of all petitions, applications, communications and reports submitted
by each grantee to the FCC, Securities and Exchange Commission or any
other Federal or State regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction
in respect to any matters affecting system operations shall be made
available contemporaneously to grantor upon request. Copies of responses
from the above regulatory agencies to each grantee likewise shall be made
available promptly to grantor upon request. If the City is specifically named
in any such pleading or response, the City shall automatically be furnished
a copy.
Section 670.610. Annual Reports. [R.O. 2009 §111.092; Ord. No.
01-125, 6-20-2001]
A. Upon request, each grantee shall make available to grantor, at the end
of each of the applicable grantee's fiscal years during the term of a
franchise agreement, the following:
1. A revenue statement certified by a representative of the grantee
showing, in accordance with a franchise agreement, the gross
revenues of the grantee for the preceding fiscal year;
2. A current list of names and addresses of each officer and director
and other management personnel of the grantee;
3. A copy of all documents that relate to the grantee's system that
were filed with any Federal, State or local agencies during the
Section
670.590
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
670.610
100:1611
Section 670.620. Index of Reports. [R.O. 2009 §111.093; Ord. No.
01-125, 6-20-2001]
Section 670.630. Additional Reports and Assistance. [R.O. 2009
§111.094; Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
Upon request of the City, each grantee shall prepare additional one-time
reports which are reasonably necessary to the City's proper enforcement of
an agreement adopted pursuant to this Chapter. The City shall require such
reports only through passage of a formal resolution of the City Council. In
addition, upon request, every grantee shall cooperate and assist the grantor
in interpreting and understanding any report required under this Chapter.
Section 670.640. Safety. [R.O. 2009 §111.095; Ord. No. 01-125,
6-20-2001]
preceding fiscal year and that were not previously filed with
grantor;
4. A statement of the grantee's current billing practices and charges;
5. A copy of the grantee's current subscriber service contract; and
6. A copy of annual reports to stockholders, if any, for operating
company and parent company.
All of the above information shall not be required annually
unless there is a change after the first (1st) filing.
B. Grantor and its agents and representatives shall have authority to
arrange for and conduct an audit of the books and records of any
grantee that are reasonably necessary for the enforcement of this
Chapter or a franchise agreement. A grantee shall first be given thirty
(30) days' notice of the audit, the description of and purpose for the
audit and a description, to the best of grantor's ability, of the books,
records and documents that grantor wants to review.
A. Each grantee shall compile and maintain an index of reports, that shall
list all reports, documents and filings, that it has prepared with respect
to the system over the course of the past two (2) years as a result of the
requirements of the FCC or this Chapter, including technical system
testing and proof of performance reports and customer service
compliance measurements, and shall provide a copy of such index of
reports to the grantor every six (6) months and upon request.
B. Each grantee shall make a copy of any reports or documents listed in
the index of reports available to the grantor upon request.
A. Every grantee shall at all times employ the standard of care attendant
to the risks involved and shall install and maintain in use commonly
accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents
Section
670.610
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
670.640
100:1612
Section 670.650. Service Contract and Subscriber Information.
[R.O. 2009 §111.096; Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
that are likely to cause damage, injury or nuisance to the public or to
employees of the grantee.
B. Each grantee shall install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures and
other equipment in accordance with the requirements of all applicable
codes and in such manner that they will not interfere with any
installations of the City or any public utility.
C. All lines, equipment and connections in, over, under and upon the rightof-
way and private property within the City, wherever situated or
located, shall at all times be kept and maintained in a safe and suitable
condition and in good order and repair.
D. Upon completion of any construction, upgrade or rebuild the grantee
shall provide the grantor a copy of all strand-and-trench maps. If all or a
portion of such mapping is in digital form, grantee shall include a copy
of the digital information along with traditional hardcopy maps.
A. Each grantee shall have authority to promulgate such rules,
regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business
as shall be reasonably necessary to enable the grantee to exercise its
rights and perform its obligations under this Chapter and any franchise
agreement and to assure uninterrupted service to all of its subscribers;
provided such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in
conflict with the provisions of this Chapter, a franchise agreement,
Federal, State and/or local law or any applicable rules and regulations.
B. Every grantee shall submit to grantor any subscriber contract that it
utilizes. If no written contract exists, a grantee shall file with the City a
document completely and concisely stating the terms of the residential
subscriber contract offered, specifically including the length of the
subscriber contract. The length and terms of any subscriber contract
shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours.
Section
670.640
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
670.650
100:1613

ARTICLE VIII
General Financial and Insurance Provisions
Section 670.660. Franchise Fee. [R.O. 2009 §111.100; Ord. No.
01-125, 6-20-2001; Ord. No. 07-278, 10-18-2007]
Section 670.670. Security Fund. [R.O. 2009 §111.101; Ord. No.
01-125, 6-20-2001]
Each grantee may be required to maintain a security fund with the City
to ensure compliance with this Chapter and the applicable franchise
agreement in an amount and in a manner as set forth in the grantee's
franchise agreement.
Section 670.680. Bonds, Indemnification and Insurance. [R.O. 2009
§111.102; Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
Each grantee shall maintain bonds and insurance with the City in amounts
and in a manner as set forth in the grantee's franchise agreement. Each
grantee also shall be required to indemnify the City in a manner as set forth
in the grantee's franchise agreement.
A. As compensation for a franchise and in consideration of permission to
use the rights-of-way of the City for the construction, operation and
maintenance of a cable system within the City and to defray the costs of
regulation, each grantee shall pay to grantor an annual amount equal to
five percent (5%) of the grantee's gross revenues, unless otherwise
specified in the franchise agreement.
B. Payments due grantor under this Section shall be computed quarterly,
for the preceding quarter, as of March thirty-first (31st), June thirtieth
(30th), September thirtieth (30th) and December thirty-first (31st).
Each quarterly payment shall be due and payable no later than fortyfive
(45) days after the dates listed in the previous sentence. Each
payment shall be accompanied by a brief report by a grantee showing
the basis for the computation and a "franchise fee worksheet" listing all
of the sources of revenues attributable to the operation of grantee's
system.
C. No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as an accord that the
amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of
payment be construed as a release of any claim grantor may have for
further sums payable under the provisions of this Chapter or a
franchise agreement. All amounts paid shall be subject to audit and
recomputation by grantor.
D. All franchise fee payments received pursuant to this Article shall
constitute general revenue of the City and shall be credited to the
General Fund of the City for such uses as may be provided for in the
budget.
Section
670.660
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
670.680
100:1615

ARTICLE IX
Remedies, Procedures and Due Process
Section 670.690. Administration of Franchise. [R.O. 2009 §111.110;
Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
The City shall be responsible for the continued administration of this
Chapter and all franchise agreements. The City may delegate this authority
from time to time in any manner consistent with applicable law.
Section 670.700. Non-Enforcement By The City. [R.O. 2009
§111.111; Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
A grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of
the provisions of this Chapter or a franchise agreement adopted pursuant
to this Chapter by reason of any failure of the City to enforce prompt
compliance.
Section 670.710. Customer Service Dispute Resolution. [R.O. 2009
§111.112; Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
A. The grantee shall establish procedures for receiving, acting upon and
resolving customer complaints and crediting customer accounts in
accordance with "Schedule A: Credits to Customers" and as otherwise
provided herein without intervention by the grantor. Such procedures
prescribe the manner in which any subscriber may submit a complaint
by telephone or in writing to the grantee that it has violated any
provision of these customer service standards, any terms or conditions
of the customer's contract with the grantee or reasonable business
practices.
1. The grantee's complaint procedure shall be filed with the grantor
prior to its acceptance of the franchise.
2. The grantee's investigation of a subscriber complaint shall be
concluded in no more than fifteen (15) business days after
receiving the complaint, at which time the grantee shall notify the
subscriber of the results of its investigation and its proposed action
or credit. In the case of a billing dispute, a grantee must respond to
a subscriber's telephone inquiry about their bill within three (3)
business days.
3. The grantee shall also notify the subscriber of his/her rights to file a
complaint with the grantor in the event the subscriber is
dissatisfied with the grantee's decision and shall thoroughly
explain the necessary procedures for filing such complaints with
the grantor.
4. The grantee shall report all subscriber complaints that it does not
find valid to the grantor. The grantor will review all complaints
against grantee regarding quality of service, equipment
Section
670.690
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
670.710
100:1617
Section 670.720. Remedies and Enforcement Procedure. [R.O. 2009
§111.113; Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
malfunctions, billing disputes, property damage and matters
included under Schedule A, at such time when a subscriber is
dissatisfied with a proposed decision by the grantee or when a
subscriber has not received a decision within the time allotted
under Subsection (B) of this Section. The subscriber may initiate
the review either by calling the grantor or by filing a written
complaint together with the grantee's written decision, if any, with
the grantor. The subscriber shall make such filing and notification
within twenty (20) days of receipt of grantee's decision or if no
decision was provided, within thirty (30) days after filing the
original complaint with the grantee.
5. If the grantor decides that further evidence is warranted, the
grantor shall require the grantee and the subscriber to submit,
within ten (10) days of notice thereof, a written statement of facts
and arguments in support of their respective positions. The grantee
and subscriber shall produce any additional evidence, which the
grantor may deem necessary to an understanding and
determination of the complaint.
6. The grantor shall issue a determination within fifteen (15) days
after examining the materials submitted, setting forth the basis for
determination. The grantor may extend the time limits for
reasonable cause and may intercede and attempt to negotiate an
informal resolution.
7. If the grantor determines that the subscriber's complaint is valid
and that the grantee did not provide the subscriber with the proper
solution and/or credit, the grantor may reverse any decision by the
grantee in the matter and/or require the grantee to grant a specific
solution as determined by the grantor in its sole discretion and/or
provide the subscriber with the amount of the credit as set forth in
Schedule A.
A. Whenever grantor has reason to believe that a grantee has violated any
provision of a franchise agreement or this Chapter, including the
customer service and telephone availability requirements, grantor shall
first notify the grantee in writing of the violation and demand correction
within a reasonable time, which shall not be less than thirty (30) days. If
a grantee fails to demonstrate to the reasonable satisfaction of grantor
that no violation exists or if grantee fails to correct the violation within
the time prescribed or if a grantee is unable to correct the violation and
fails to commence corrective action within the time prescribed and to
diligently remedy such violation thereafter, the grantee shall then be
given written notice of not less than thirty (30) days of a public hearing
to be held before the Council. Said notice shall indicate with reasonable
specificity the violation alleged to have occurred. This procedure shall
Section
670.710
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
670.720
100:1618
apply to all alleged franchise violations, including those in which
grounds for revocation are considered.
B. At the public hearing, the Council shall hear and consider all relevant
evidence and thereafter render findings and a decision based upon the
evidence.
C. In the event the City finds that a grantee has corrected the violation or
promptly commenced correction of such violation after notice thereof
from grantor and is diligently proceeding to fully remedy the violation
or that no violation has occurred, the proceedings shall terminate and
no penalty or other sanction shall be imposed, except as provided for in
Subsection (H) of this Section.
D. In the event the City finds that a violation exists and that a grantee has
not corrected the same in a satisfactory manner or did not promptly
commence and diligently proceed to correct the violation, the City may
impose penalties and/or liquidated damages from the security fund as
follows:
1. For system construction schedule violations, including, but not
limited to, provisions relating to initial construction schedules and
system upgrade construction schedule, five hundred dollars
($500.00) per day of non-compliance;
2. For all other violations, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day
per violation.
E. If grantor elects to assess penalties or liquidated damages, then such
election shall constitute grantor's exclusive remedy for a period of sixty
(60) days. Thereafter, if a grantee remains in non-compliance, the
grantor may pursue any other available remedy, including franchise
revocation.
F. In the event that a franchise is canceled or terminated by reason of the
default of a grantee, the security fund deposited pursuant to a franchise
agreement shall remain in effect and available to the grantor until all
pending claims or penalties are resolved or settled, after which point
any remaining amounts in the security fund shall revert to the
possession of the grantee.
G. The rights reserved to grantor with respect to the security fund are in
addition to all other rights of grantor, whether reserved by a franchise
agreement, this Chapter or authorized by law and no action, proceeding
or exercise of a right with respect to such security fund shall affect any
other right grantor may have.
H. The foregoing provisions shall not be deemed to preclude the grantor
from obtaining any other available remedies for repeated violations of
the same general type, whether remedied or not.
Section
670.720
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
670.730
100:1619
Section 670.730. Grounds For Revocation. [R.O. 2009 §111.114;
Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
Section 670.740. Right of Appeal. [R.O. 2009 §111.115; Ord. No.
01-125, 6-20-2001]
Section 670.750. Governing Law and Choice of Forum. [R.O. 2009
§111.116; Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
Any dispute arising with respect to this Chapter, or a franchise agreement
granted pursuant to it, shall be subject to review by the State and Federal
courts sitting in Saint Charles County, Missouri.
Section 670.760. Severability. [R.O. 2009 §111.117; Ord. No.
01-125, 6-20-2001]
If any Section, sentence, phrase, provision, paragraph or term of this
Chapter or a franchise granted hereunder is held void or otherwise
rendered unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
provision shall be deemed severable from this Chapter and the franchise
agreement and the remainder of this Chapter and the franchise agreement
shall continue in full force and effect. Nothing in this Section, however, shall
be deemed to limit the grantor or a grantee's ability to assert any claim
regarding the enforceability of this Chapter or the terms of a franchise
agreement on grounds other than that the provision at issue is not
severable, including claims of failure of consideration.
A. In addition to any rights in this Chapter or a franchise agreement,
grantor reserves the right to utilize the above described enforcement
procedure to revoke the franchise and all rights and privileges
pertaining thereto, in the event that any of the following occur and the
City and grantee are not able to mutually agree upon a cure or alternate
remedy:
1. A grantee substantially violates any material provision of this
Chapter or a franchise agreement;
2. A grantee practices an act of fraud or deceit upon the grantor; or
3. A grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts or
is adjudged bankrupt.
A. Upon the imposition of a penalty or revocation decision, a grantee shall
have a period of one hundred twenty (120) days subsequent to the date
of the formal adoption of the decision by the City Council within which
to file an appeal with a court of competent jurisdiction.
B. During any such appeal period, the franchise shall remain in full force
and effect.
Section
670.730
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
670.760
100:1620
ARTICLE X
Foreclosure, Receivership and Abandonment
Section 670.770. Foreclosure. [R.O. 2009 §111.120; Ord. No.
01-125, 6-20-2001]
Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a part of a system or
upon the termination of any lease covering all or part of a system, a grantee
shall notify grantor of such fact and such notification shall be treated as
a notification that a change in control of the grantee has taken place and
the provisions of this Chapter governing the consent to transfer or change
in ownership shall apply without regard to how such transfer or change in
ownership occurred.
Section 670.780. Receivership. [R.O. 2009 §111.121; Ord. No.
01-125, 6-20-2001]
A. Grantor shall have the right to cancel a franchise agreement one
hundred twenty (120) days after the appointment of a receiver or
trustee to take over and conduct the business of a grantee, whether in
receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding,
unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to
the expiration of said one hundred twenty (120) days or unless:
1. Within one hundred twenty (120) days after its election or
appointment, the receiver or trustee has fully complied with all the
provisions of grantee's franchise agreement and this Chapter and
remedied all defaults thereunder; and
2. Such receiver or trustee, within said one hundred twenty (120)
days, has executed an agreement, duly approved by a court having
jurisdiction, whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees
to be bound by each and every provision of this Chapter and the
applicable franchise agreement.
Section
670.770
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
670.780
100:1621

ARTICLE XI
Purchase of System — Sale or Transfer
Section 670.790. Purchase of System. [R.O. 2009 §111.130; Ord. No.
01-125, 6-20-2001]
Section 670.800. Sale or Transfer of Franchise. [R.O. 2009
§111.131; Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
A. If a renewal or extension of the grantee's franchise is denied or the
franchise is lawfully terminated and the City either lawfully acquires
ownership of the cable system or by its actions lawfully effects a
transfer of ownership of the cable system to another person, any such
acquisition or transfer shall be in accordance with and to the extent
permitted by 47 U.S.C. Section 547 as follows:
1. Upon revocation of a franchise, such valuation shall not include any
sum attributable to the value of the franchise itself and plant and
property shall be valued according to its book value at the time of
revocation or the system's initial cost less depreciation and
salvage, whichever of the two (2) is lower.
2. At the expiration of a franchise agreement, such valuation shall be
at fair market value, exclusive of the value attributed to the
franchise itself.
A. No grantee shall sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet or dispose of, in
whole or in part, an interest in or control of a franchise or cable system
or any of the rights or privileges granted by a franchise agreement
without the prior consent of the grantor, which consent shall not be
unreasonably denied or delayed and may be denied only upon a good
faith finding by the grantor that the proposed transferee lacks the legal,
technical or financial qualifications to consummate the transaction and
operate the system so as to perform its obligations under this Chapter
and the applicable franchise agreement. This Section shall not apply to
sales of property or equipment in the normal course of business.
Consent from the grantor shall not be required for a transfer in trust,
mortgage or other instrument of hypothecation, in whole or in part, to
secure an indebtedness or for a pro forma transfer to a corporation,
partnership or other entity controlling, controlled by or under common
control with a grantee.
B. The following events shall be deemed to be a sale, assignment or other
transfer of an interest in or control of a franchise or cable system
requiring compliance with this Section:
1. The sale, assignment or other transfer of all or a majority of a
grantee's assets;
2. The sale, assignment or other transfer of capital stock or
partnership, membership or other equity interests in a grantee by
Section
670.790
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
670.800
100:1623
one (1) or more of its existing shareholders, partners, members or
other equity owners so as to create a new controlling interest in a
grantee;
3. The issuance of additional capital stock or partnership membership
or other equity interest by a grantee so as to create a new
controlling interest in a grantee; and
4. A grantee's agreement to transfer management or operation of the
grantee or the system to an unaffiliated entity. The term
"controlling interest", as used herein, means majority equity
ownership of a grantee.
C. In the case of any sale or transfer of ownership of an interest in or
control of a franchise or cable system, the City shall have one hundred
twenty (120) days to act upon any request for approval of such sale or
transfer that contains or is accompanied by such information as is
required in accordance with FCC regulations and the requirements of
this Chapter and the applicable franchise agreement. If the City fails to
render a final decision on the request within one hundred twenty (120)
days after receipt by the City of all required information, such request
shall be deemed granted unless the requesting party and the City agree
to an extension of the one hundred twenty (120) day period.
D. Grantor reserves any rights it may have to require that a transferee pay
all costs and expenses incurred by grantor in connection with the sale,
assignment or transfer of a franchise including, but not limited, to the
grantor's costs of reviewing the qualifications of any proposed
transferees. Such reimbursement shall not be considered franchise
fees, provided however, that a grantee/transferee may in its discretion
pass through such costs to subscribers.
Section
670.800
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
670.800
100:1624
ARTICLE XII
Rights of Individuals Protected
Section 670.810. Discriminatory Practices Prohibited. [R.O. 2009
§111.140; Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
No grantee shall deny service, deny access or otherwise discriminate
against subscribers, programmers or general citizens on the basis of race,
color, religion, national origin, sex or age. Every grantee shall strictly
adhere to the equal employment opportunity requirements of State and
Federal law. Each grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable
Federal, State and local laws and all executive and administrative orders
relating to non-discrimination.
Section
670.810
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
670.810
100:1625

ARTICLE XIII
Miscellaneous Provisions
Section 670.820. Rate Regulation. [R.O. 2009 §111.150; Ord. No.
01-125, 6-20-2001]
The City reserves the right to regulate rates for basic cable service and
any other services offered over the cable system to the extent permitted
by Federal or State law. Grantee shall be subject to the rate regulation
provisions provided for herein and those of the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) at 47 C.F.R., Part 76.900, Subpart N. The City shall
follow the rules relating to cable rate regulation promulgated by the FCC at
47 C.F.R., Part 76.900, Subpart N.
Section 670.830. Rights Reserved To Grantor. [R.O. 2009 §111.151;
Ord. No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
Upon either final non-appealable determination of non-renewal or
revocation of a franchise, grantor shall have discretion to permit a grantee
by mutual consent to continue to operate the cable system for an extended
period of time agreed upon by the parties. Any such operation of the system
by the grantee shall be in accordance with the terms and conditions of
this Chapter and the applicable franchise agreement and shall provide the
regular subscriber service and any and all of the services that may be
provided at that time.
Section 670.840. Publication of Notices. [R.O. 2009 §111.152; Ord.
No. 01-125, 6-20-2001]
All public notices or ordinances required to be published by grantor under
this Chapter or any franchise agreement shall be published in the official
newspaper of the City. Each grantee shall pay the costs for publication of
its franchise agreement and any amendments thereto, as such publication
is required or authorized by law.
Section 670.850. Penalty. [R.O. 2009 §111.999; Ord. No. 01-125,
6-20-2001; R.O. 2009 Sch. A to Ch. 670]
Any person violating Section 670.040 of this Chapter shall be subject to a
fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day. The payment of such fine
notwithstanding, all such violators shall be subject to all other applicable
provisions of this Chapter to the fullest extent allowed by law including, but
not limited to, the payment of a franchise fee.
Section
670.820
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
670.850
100:1627
Chapter 675
MEDICAL MARIJUANA REGULATIONS
Section
670.850
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
670.850
100:1628
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 675.010. Title. [Ord. No. 19-110, 5-21-2019]
This Chapter shall be known as "The Medical Marijuana Business Ordinance
for the City of St. Charles, Missouri."
Section 675.020. Scope. [Ord. No. 19-110, 5-21-2019]
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply within the municipal boundaries
of the City of St. Charles, Missouri.
Section 675.030. Purpose. [Ord. No. 19-110, 5-21-2019]
It is the purpose of this Chapter to regulate medical marijuana businesses
and related activities to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of
the citizens of the City of St. Charles, Missouri, and to establish reasonable
and uniform regulations to prevent the possible deleterious operation,
location and concentration of medical marijuana businesses within the City
of St. Charles, Missouri. It is not the intent nor effect of this Chapter to
deny access by qualifying patients to medical marijuana as provided by
Amendment 2 which is codified as Article XIV, Section 1 of the Missouri
Constitution. It is neither the intent nor effect of this Chapter to condone
or legitimize the illicit possession, distribution or delivery of any controlled
substance.
Section 675.040. (Reserved)
Section 675.050. Definitions. [Ord. No. 19-110, 5-21-2019]
A. For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
AMENDMENT 2 — A voter-initiated amendment to the Missouri
Constitution adopted November 6, 2018, codified as Section 1 of Article
16 to the Missouri Constitution.
DEPARTMENT — The State of Missouri Department of Health and
Senior Services, or its successor agency.
FACILITY — A medical marijuana cultivation facility, marijuana infused
products manufacturing facility, medical marijuana testing facility or
medical marijuana dispensary facility, or any combination thereof, or
any business related to the possession, sale, use, cultivation or
manufacture of marijuana.
IDENTIFICATION CARD — The card issued by the Missouri
Department of Health and Senior Services that permits a qualified
patient or primary caregiver to purchase medical marijuana.
Section
675.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
675.050
100:1629
Section 675.060. through Section 675.090. (Reserved)
LICENSEE — An entity issued a license or certification by the
Department for the cultivation, manufacture, dispensing, sale, testing,
tracking, and transportation of marijuana for medical use.
MARIJUANA OR MARIHUANA — Cannabis indica, Cannabis sativa,
and Cannabis ruderalis, hybrids of such species, and any other strains
commonly understood, within the scientific community to constitute
marijuana, as well as resin extracted from the plant and marijuanainfused
products. "Marijuana" or "marihuana" does not include
industrial hemp containing a crop-wide average tetrahydrocannabinol
concentration that does not exceed three-tenths of one percent on a dry
weight basis, or commodities or products manufactured from industrial
hemp.
MARIJUANA-INFUSED PRODUCTS — Products that are infused with
marijuana or an extract thereof and are intended for use or
consumption other than by smoking, including, but not limited to,
edible products, ointments, tinctures and concentrates.
MARIJUANA-INFUSED PRODUCTS MANUFACTURING FACILITY —
A facility licensed by the Department to acquire, store, manufacture,
transport, and sell marijuana-infused products to a medical marijuana
dispensary facility, a medical marijuana testing facility, or to another
medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION FACILITY — A facility licensed
by the Department to acquire, cultivate, process, store, transport, and
sell marijuana to a medical marijuana dispensary facility, medical
marijuana testing facility, or to a medical-marijuana-infused products
manufacturing facility.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY FACILITY — A facility licensed by
the Department to acquire, store, sell, transport and deliver marijuana,
marijuana-infused products and drug paraphernalia used to administer
marijuana as provided for in this Section to a qualifying patient, a
primary caregiver, another medical marijuana dispensary facility, a
medical marijuana testing facility, or a medical marijuana-infused
products manufacturing facility.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA TESTING FACILITY — A facility certified by the
Department to acquire, test, certify, and transport marijuana.
PATIENT or QUALIFYING PATIENT — Has the meaning provided in
Amendment 2 and any other related regulations promulgated by the
State of Missouri.
PRIMARY CAREGIVER — Has the meaning provided in Amendment 2
and any other related regulations promulgated by the State of Missouri.
B. In addition to the definitions provided in Subsection (A) of this Section,
the other defined terms in Amendment 2 are incorporated into this
Chapter by reference.
Section
675.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
675.060
100:1630
ARTICLE II
Location, Building And Signage Regulations
Section 675.100. Limitation On Delivery. [Ord. No. 19-110,
5-21-2019]
Each medical marijuana cultivation facility, medical marijuana testing
facility, medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility or
medical marijuana dispensary facility shall be operated from a permanent
location. No facility described in this Section shall be permitted to deliver
or operate from a movable, mobile or transitory location. No medical
marijuana dispensary facility shall dispense marijuana via drive-through
window or lane.
Section 675.110. Permitted Locations. [Ord. No. 19-110, 5-21-2019]
A. A medical marijuana cultivation facility, medical marijuana testing
facility, medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility or
medical marijuana dispensary facility may be located in any of the
following zoning districts subject to compliance with Chapter 400 of
this Code:
1. I-2 Heavy Industrial District;
2. I-1 Light Industrial District; and
3. C-3 Highway Business District.
B. No medical marijuana cultivation facility, medical marijuana testing
facility, medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility or
medical marijuana dispensary facility shall be located at the following
locations:
1. Within one thousand (1,000) feet of a licensed childcare facility;
2. Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any educational institution or
school, college or university, either public or private or church;
3. Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any public park, public pool or
public or private recreational facility;
4. Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any halfway house or
correctional facility;
5. Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any other medical marijuana
cultivation facility, medical marijuana testing facility, medical
marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility or medical
marijuana dispensary facility; or
6. Within any building or structure that contains a residential unit.
C. The distances described in Subsection (B) of this Section shall be
computed by direct measurement from the nearest property line of the
Section
675.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
675.110
100:1631
Section 675.120. Sign Requirements. [Ord. No. 19-110, 5-21-2019]
All exterior signage for a medical marijuana cultivation facility, medical
marijuana testing facility, medical marijuana-infused products
manufacturing facility or medical marijuana dispensary facility shall comply
with the requirements of the City sign code, Chapter 400, Article XVI,
Sections 400.1370 through 400.1860, as amended. In addition, no sign
associated with a marijuana business shall use the word "marijuana,"
"cannabis" or any other word or phrase commonly understood to refer to
marijuana, nor shall any images of the marijuana plant be used in signage.
Section 675.130. Required Warnings To Be Posted. [Ord. No.
19-110, 5-21-2019]
There shall be posted in a conspicuous location in each facility a legible sign
containing the following warnings:
Section 675.140. through Section 675.190. (Reserved)
land used for the above purposes to the nearest portion of the building
housing the medical marijuana cultivation facility, medical marijuana
testing facility, medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing
facility or medical marijuana dispensary facility, using a straight line.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, transmit, give, dispense
or otherwise provide medical marijuana as a home occupation.
E. No facility or the activities within the facility shall emit an odor or in
any way cause a nuisance as set forth in this Code.
A. A warning that diversion of marijuana for non-medical purposes is a
violation of State law;
B. A warning that the use of medical marijuana may impair a person's
ability to drive a motor vehicle or operate machinery, and that it is
illegal under State law to drive a motor vehicle while under the
influence of or impaired by marijuana;
C. A warning that loitering in or around a facility is prohibited;
D. A warning that possession and distribution of marijuana is a violation of
State and Federal law; and
E. A warning that no one under eighteen (18) years of age is permitted
within the facility unless the person is a qualifying patient who is under
the age of eighteen (18) years who has been emancipated by a court
order and a qualifying patient under the age of eighteen (18) years
when accompanied by the qualifying patient's parent or guardian.
Section
675.110
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
675.140
100:1632
ARTICLE III
Limitation on Number, Size, Floor Plan, Hours of Operation, Sale of
Alcohol, Age Restrictions
Section 675.200. Limitation On Number And Size. [Ord. No. 19-110,
5-21-2019]
There shall be no more than four (4) medical marijuana dispensary facilities
in the City, and each facility shall be limited to a floor plan of not greater
than two thousand (2,000) square feet.
Section 675.210. Hours Of Operation. [Ord. No. 19-110, 5-21-2019]
A medical marijuana dispensary facility may open no earlier than 9:00 A.M.
and shall close no later than 7:00 P.M. the same day. A medical marijuana
dispensary facility may be open seven (7) days a week.
Section 675.220. Separation Of Dispensing Area From Waiting
Area. [Ord. No. 19-110, 5-21-2019]
The waiting area and the area of a medical marijuana dispensary facility
where marijuana or marijuana-infused products are physically delivered to
a qualifying patient or primary caregiver shall be separated by a solid wall
and solid door so that persons in the waiting area are obstructed from
observing the delivery of the marijuana or marijuana-infused products to
the qualifying patient or primary caregiver.
Section 675.230. Display Of Marijuana. [Ord. No. 19-110,
5-21-2019]
No marijuana or marijuana-infused product shall be displayed so as to be
visible through glass, windows, or doors by a person of normal visual acuity
standing at the outside perimeter of a facility.
Section 675.240. Sale Of Alcohol Prohibited. [Ord. No. 19-110,
5-21-2019]
The sale or consumption of alcohol within a facility is prohibited.
Section 675.250. Age Restrictions. [Ord. No. 19-110, 5-21-2019]
No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be allowed in any
portion of a medical marijuana cultivation facility, medical marijuana testing
facility, medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility or
medical marijuana dispensary facility, except that a qualifying patient who
is under the age of eighteen (18) years who has been emancipated by
a court order and a qualifying patient under the age of eighteen (18)
years when accompanied by the qualifying patient's parent or guardian.
The entrance to a facility shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice
indicating that persons under the age of eighteen (18) are precluded from
entering the premises.
Section
675.200
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
675.260
100:1633
Section 675.260. Requirement To Display Identification Card;
Failure To Exhibit Identification Card; Possession Or Production Of
Fraudulent Identification Card. [Ord. No. 19-110, 5-21-2019]
Section 675.270. Requirement To Display License. [Ord. No.
19-110, 5-21-2019]
Every facility shall display its State-issued license in a location visible upon
entry into the facility.
Section 675.280. through Section 675.290. (Reserved)
A. A medical marijuana dispensary shall require every qualifying patient
or primary caregiver to display the medical marijuana identification
card or other proof of eligibility of purchase to enter the medical
marijuana dispensary and at the time of each purchase.
B. It shall be unlawful for a qualifying patient or primary caregiver when
in the possession of marijuana to fail to exhibit on the demand of any
Peace Officer a medical marijuana identification card.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, produce, manufacture,
sell, or otherwise distribute a fraudulent document, photocopy, or
image displayed on a mobile electronic device intended to serve as a
medical marijuana identification card.
Section
675.260
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
675.280
100:1634
ARTICLE IV
Packaging and Limitations on Quantity Dispensed
Section 675.300. Packaging And Limitations On Quantity
Dispensed. [Ord. No. 19-110, 5-21-2019]
A medical marijuana dispensary facility shall not dispense more than four
(4) ounces of a usable form of medical marijuana per patient in a thirty-day
period, except as otherwise allowed by law. All marijuana sold or otherwise
distributed shall be in a sealed container. Such packaging shall have a label
that indicates the quantity and advises the purchaser that the marijuana is
intended for use solely by the patient, and that any resale or redistribution
to any third person is a criminal violation.
Section 675.310. through Section 675.400. (Reserved)
Section
675.300
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
675.310
100:1635

ARTICLE V
On-Site Consumption or Cultivation, Sale of Paraphernalia; Disposal
Section 675.410. On-Site Or Public Consumption. [Ord. No. 19-110,
5-21-2019]
It shall be unlawful to consume, inhale or personally use marijuana or
medical marijuana-infused products on or within the premises of a medical
marijuana cultivation facility, medical marijuana testing facility, medical
marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility, medical marijuana
dispensary facility, or in a public place, except that a medical marijuana
testing facility may consume marijuana during the testing process and only
as the consumption relates to the testing process.
Section 675.420. On-Site Cultivation. [Ord. No. 19-110, 5-21-2019]
The growing or cultivation of marijuana on the premises of a medical
marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility, medical marijuana
testing facility or medical marijuana dispensary facility is prohibited.
Section 675.430. Sale Of Paraphernalia. [Ord. No. 19-110,
5-21-2019]
"Paraphernalia" as defined in Section 195.010(17)(1)a through (l)m,
excluding (l)f, RSMo., as may be amended, may lawfully be sold at a medical
marijuana dispensary facility. Such items may not be publicly displayed and
may be sold, displayed and provided only to patients or primary caregivers
of patients.
Section 675.440. Disposal Of Marijuana And Marijuana-Infused
Products. [Ord. No. 19-110, 5-21-2019]
No person shall dispose of marijuana or marijuana-infused products in an
unsecured waste receptacle not in possession or control of a licensee and
designed to prohibit unauthorized access.
Section 675.450. through Section 675.500. (Reserved)
Section
675.410
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
675.450
100:1637

ARTICLE VI
Security
Section 675.510. Security Requirements. [Ord. No. 19-110,
5-21-2019]
Section 675.520. through Section 675.600. (Reserved)
A. A medical marijuana cultivation facility, medical marijuana testing
facility, medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility or
medical marijuana dispensary facility shall provide adequate security
on the premises, including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Surveillance. Security surveillance cameras installed to monitor
each entrance to the facility along with the interior and exterior of
the premises to discourage and to facilitate the reporting and
investigation of criminal acts and nuisance activities occurring at
the premises. Security video shall be preserved for at least ninety
(90) days, and be made available to Law Enforcement Officers upon
demand and without a search warrant.
2. Inventory. All salable inventory of marijuana and marijuana-infused
products must be kept and stored in a secured, locked manner.
3. Safe. A locking safe or secure vault permanently affixed or built
into the premises to store any currency on site. Marijuana, except
for plants that are being grown in a medical marijuana cultivation
facility, and marijuana-infused products shall be secured in a safe
or vault permanently affixed or built into the premises.
4. Lighting. Exterior lighting that illuminates the exterior walls of the
facility premises.
5. Alarm System. Professionally monitored robbery alarm and
burglary alarm systems shall be installed and maintained in good
working condition within the facility at all times.
6. Emergency Contact. Each facility shall provide the Chief of Police
with the name, cellular telephone number, electronic mail address,
and facsimile number of an on-site facility employee to whom the
City may provide notice of any operating problems associated with
the facility. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to keep up
to date the contact information of the facility employee.
7. Access. Only an employee, qualified patient or primary caregiver
shall be permitted in a medical marijuana dispensary facility.
Section
675.510
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
675.520
100:1639

ARTICLE VII
Recordkeeping
Section 675.610. Ledger Required. [Ord. No. 19-110, 5-21-2019]
Section 675.620. through Section 675.700. (Reserved)
A. A medical marijuana dispensary facility shall keep a ledger, for three (3)
years from the creation of the record, which shall record the following
information, and which shall be made available to the City upon
demand:
1. The quantities of medical marijuana dispensed in each transaction;
2. The type of medical marijuana dispensed;
3. The total amount paid by the qualifying patient or primary
caregiver for the transaction for each of the goods or services
provided, before relevant taxes;
4. The qualifying patient or primary caregiver identifying information
permitted by law;
5. Confirmation that the employee confirmed the identity of the
qualifying patient or primary caregiver receiving the medical
marijuana with a valid State-issued identification; and
6. The date and time dispensed.
Section
675.610
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
675.620
100:1641

ARTICLE VIII
Operating Plans
Section 675.710. Operating Plans. [Ord. No. 19-110, 5-21-2019]
Section 675.720. through Section 675.800. (Reserved)
A. As a condition of processing of a business license application, a facility
operator shall provide at the time of filing the business license
application a detailed operations plan and, upon issuance of a license,
shall operate the facility in accordance with the plan. Such plan shall
include:
1. Floor Plan. A plan showing the layout of the facility and the
principal uses of the floor area depicted. A medical marijuana
dispensary facility shall have a lobby waiting area at the entrance
to the center to receive clients, and a separate and secure
designated area for dispensing medical marijuana to qualified
patients or designated primary caregivers. The primary entrance of
any stand-alone facility shall be located and maintained clear of
barriers, landscaping and similar obstructions so that it is clearly
visible from public streets, sidewalks or site driveways.
2. Storage. A facility shall provide a storage plan in compliance with
Section 675.500(A)(2) of this Chapter.
3. Security Plan. A facility shall provide a security plan in compliance
with Section 675.500 of this Chapter.
4. Lighting Plan. A facility shall provide a lighting plan in accordance
with Section 400.570 and any applicable City building code. Such
plan shall also include any illumination for the purposes of
cultivation and any mitigation controls to lessen adverse impacts to
the surrounding properties.
5. Odor Controls. A facility shall provide a plan for the mitigation and
control of odors and other environmental impacts which may
emanate from a facility. Such plan shall describe the ventilation
system for the premises. Appropriate ventilation systems to
prevent any odor of marijuana or fumes from leaving the premises
of a facility or other changes to a facility may be required to abate a
public nuisance. No facility shall emit any odor of marijuana which
is capable of being smelled by a person of ordinary senses outside
the boundary of the lot on which the facility is located.
6. Product and Service Description. A description of the products and
services to be provided by the facility.
7. Employee List. A list of all employees of the facility.
Section
675.710
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
675.720
100:1643

ARTICLE IX
Licenses, Fees and Taxes
Section 675.810. Business License Required; Penalty For Non-
Compliance. [Ord. No. 19-110, 5-21-2019]
Each facility shall at all times possess a current City business license. By
obtaining a City business license, the facility licensee irrevocably consents
to the immediate closure and cessation of operation of the facility in
addition to all other penalties or remedies available by law for the failure to
possess a current City business license.
Section 675.820. Fees And Taxes. [Ord. No. 19-110, 5-21-2019]
At all times, a facility licensee shall remain current and not delinquent on
any real or personal property tax, sales tax or fee.
Section 675.830. Sales Taxes. [Ord. No. 19-110, 5-21-2019]
Each medical marijuana dispensary facility shall pay sales tax on all medical
marijuana, and other tangible personal property subject to sales tax sold at
the facility.
Section 675.840. through Section 675.900. (Reserved)
Section
675.810
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
675.840
100:1645

ARTICLE X
Administration, Enforcement, Violations and Penalties
Section 675.910. Administration And Enforcement. [Ord. No.
19-110, 5-21-2019]
The Police Department and Community Development Department shall be
responsible for administering and enforcement of this Chapter. The Police
Department and Community Development Department are authorized to
inspect any facility to determine compliance with this Chapter.
Section 675.920. Penalty; Revocation Of Business License. [Ord.
No. 19-110, 5-21-2019]
Section 675.930. Injunction. [Ord. No. 19-110, 5-21-2019]
With or without the initiation of criminal prosecution or any other legal
proceedings, the City may apply to the appropriate court for injunctive
relief, which would require the correction or abatement of any violation of
this Chapter. The initiation or exhaustion of one (1) of these enforcement
proceedings shall not be a prerequisite to the initiation of any other of these
enforcement proceedings. Different types of enforcement proceedings may
be pursued concurrently.
Section 675.940. Conflicting Law. [Ord. No. 19-110, 5-21-2019]
All ordinances, codes, regulations and orders or parts thereof in conflict
with the provisions of this Chapter shall not apply.
Section 675.950. No Waiver Of Governmental Immunity. [Ord. No.
19-110, 5-21-2019]
In adopting this Chapter, the City Council is relying on and does not waive
or intend to waive any of the monetary limitations or any other rights,
immunities and protections provided by Sections 537.600 and 537.610
RSMo., as from time to time amended, or any other limitation, right,
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this
Chapter. Upon conviction thereof, such person shall be fined up to the
statutory maximum fine as provided by Missouri law for a municipal
ordinance violation or be punished by imprisonment as provided by
Missouri law for a municipal ordinance violation or be punished by both
such fine and imprisonment. Each day's violation of or failure, refusal or
neglect to comply with any provision of this Chapter shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense. The penalties provided in this Section are
cumulative and in addition to and are separate from any civil action to
enforce this Chapter.
B. Violation of any provision of this Chapter by a licensee shall result in
forfeiture of the licensee's City business license.
Section
675.910
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
675.950
100:1647
immunity, or protection otherwise available to the City, its officers or its
employees.
Section 675.960. No City Liability. [Ord. No. 19-110, 5-21-2019]
By accepting a business license, a facility licensee releases the City, its
officers, elected officials, employees, attorneys and agents from any liability
for injuries, damages or liabilities of any kind that result from any arrest or
prosecution of facility owners, operators, employees, clients or customers
for a violation of City, State or Federal laws, rules or regulations. The
Director of Administration may require a facility licensee to execute a
written instrument confirming the provisions of this Chapter.
Section 675.970. Indemnification Of City. [Ord. No. 19-110,
5-21-2019]
By accepting a business license, a facility licensee, jointly and severally, if
more than one, agrees to indemnify and defend the City, its officers, elected
officials, employees, attorneys, agents, and insurers against all liability,
claims and demands, on account of injury, loss or damage, including,
without limitation, claims arising from bodily injury, personal injury,
sickness, disease, death, property loss or damage, or any other loss of any
kind whatsoever, which arise out of or are in any manner connected with
the operation of a facility that is the subject of Amendment 2. The facility
licensee further agrees to investigate, handle, respond to, and to provide
defense for and defend against, any such liability, claims, or demands at its
expense, and to bear all other costs and expenses related thereto, including
court costs and attorney fees. The Director of Administration may require
a licensee to execute a written instrument confirming the provisions of this
Chapter.
Section 675.980. Other Laws Remain Applicable. [Ord. No. 19-110,
5-21-2019]
The provisions of this Chapter do not protect facility licensees, operators,
employees, customers and clients of a facility from prosecution pursuant to
any laws that may prohibit cultivation, sales, use or possession of controlled
substances. In addition, as of the date of the adoption of this Chapter
the cultivation, sale, possession, distribution and use of marijuana remain
violations of Federal and State law (except for conduct covered by
Amendment 2), and this Chapter affords no protection against prosecution
under such Federal and State laws. Licensees, operators, employees,
customers and clients of a facility assume any and all risk and any and all
liability arising or resulting from the operation of a facility under any City,
State or Federal law. Further, to the greatest extent permitted by law, any
actions taken under the provisions of this Chapter by any public officer or
officers, elected or appointed officials, employees, attorneys and agents of
the City shall not become a personal liability of such person of the City.
Section
675.950
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
675.990
100:1648
Section 675.990. Severability. [Ord. No. 19-110, 5-21-2019]
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the
Sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Chapter are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or Section of
this Chapter shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or
decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall
not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs
and Sections of this Chapter, since the same would have been enacted
by the City Council without the incorporation in this Chapter of any such
unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or Section.
Section
675.990
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
675.990
100:1649
Chapter 700
WATER
Cross References—As to plumbing code, §§500.240 et seq.; as to public
water supply and fire hydrants—subdivision improvements, §405.250.
Section
675.990
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
675.990
100:1650
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 700.010. Combined Waterworks and Sewerage System.
[R.O. 2009 §51.01; CC 1981 §29-1; Ord. No. 76-11, 1-28-1976]
It is declared by the City Council that the existing waterworks and the
existing sewerage system of the City shall be operated and maintained
as a combined waterworks and sewerage system and that such combined
system shall include the entire existing waterworks and the entire existing
sewerage system of the City, together with all future improvements and
extensions thereto, whether to the waterworks or to the sewerage system
or to both.
Section 700.020. Connection of Property Outside City Limits. [R.O.
2009 §51.02; Ord. No. 94-18, 1-30-1994]
Section 700.030. through Section 700.050. (Reserved)590
A. All connections into the water system, whether made directly or
indirectly, of property located outside the City limits shall be made in
accordance with the following provisions:
1. The owners of the land shall submit a petition for annexation of the
land into the City;
2. The parcel of property shall be developed and used in accordance
with the plans for its land use adopted by the City Council and
approved by the Mayor. If no plans for its land use have been
adopted and approved at the time of the application for service,
then the service shall not be permitted until plans have been
adopted and approved; and
3. Except as otherwise provided by the Mayor and City Council, the
parcel of property shall be developed in accordance with City
specifications and standards as though the property were within
the City's limits.
590. Editor’s Note: Former Sections 700.030, Water Main Construction Inspection Fees, and
700.040, Fire Hydrant Permit Fees, were renumbered 3-19-2019 by Ord. No. 19-074. See
now Sections 700.160 and 700.170, respectively.
Section
700.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.030
100:1651

ARTICLE II
Backflow Prevention Devices On Public Water System
Section 700.060. Definitions.591 [R.O. 2009 §51.15; CC 1981 §29-13;
Ord. No. 89-7, 1-17-1989]
For the purposes of this Article, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
AIR-GAP SEPARATION — The unobstructed vertical distance through the
free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet
supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the overflow
level rim of the receptacle and shall be at least double the diameter of the
supply pipe measured vertically above the flood level rim of the vessel, but
in no case less than one (1) inch.
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY — Any water source or system, other than the
public water supply, that may be available in the building or premises.
BACKFLOW — The flow, other than the intended direction of flow, of any
foreign liquids, gases or substance into the public water system.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE — Any device, method or type of
construction intended to prevent backflow into the public water system.
CONSUMER — The owner or person in control of any premises supplied by
or in any manner connected to the public water system.
CONTAINMENT — Protection of the public water supply by installing a
cross-connection control device or air-gap separation on the main service
line to a facility on the downstream side of the water meter.[Ord. No.
18-134, 6-19-2018]
CONTAMINATION — An impairment of the quality of the water by sewage,
process fluids or other wastes to a degree which could create an actual
hazard to the public health through poisoning or through spread of disease
by exposure.
CROSS-CONNECTION — Any physical link between a potable water supply
and any other substance, fluid or source, which makes possible
contamination of the public water supply due to the reversal of flow of the
water in the piping or public water system.
HAZARD, DEGREE OF — An evaluation of the potential risk to public health
and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the public water system.
HAZARD, HEALTH — Any condition, device or practice in the public water
system and its operation which could create or may create a danger to the
health and well-being of the water consumer.
HAZARD, PLUMBING — A plumbing type cross-connection in a consumer's
potable water system that has not been properly protected by a vacuum
breaker, air-gap separation or backflow prevention device.
591. State Law Reference—City sewerage systems and waterworks, ch. 250, RSMo.
Section
700.060
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.060
100:1653
HAZARD, POLLUTIONAL — An actual or potential threat to the physical
properties of the public water system or to the potability of the public water
system or the consumer's potable water system but which would constitute
a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the
system or its appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to health.
HAZARD, SYSTEM — An actual or potential threat of severe damage to the
physical properties of the public water system or the consumer's potable
water system or of a pollution or contamination which would have
protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system.
INDUSTRIAL PROCESS SYSTEM — Any system containing a fluid or
solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated
or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health,
system, pollutional or plumbing hazard if introduced into the public water
supply.
ISOLATION — Protection of a facility service line by installing a crossconnection
control device or air-gap separation on an individual fixture,
appurtenance or system.
POLLUTION — The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic
or biological) in water which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute
a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water to a degree which does not
create an actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely and
unreasonably affect such waters for domestic use.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM — The City's water system supplying water to
the general public which is satisfactory for drinking, culinary and domestic
purposes and meets the requirements of the Missouri Department of
Natural Resources.
SERVICE CONNECTION — The terminal end of a service line from the
public water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service, then
the service connection means the downstream end of the meter.
Section 700.070. Cross-Connections Prohibited.592 [R.O. 2009
§51.16; CC 1981 §29-14; Ord. No. 89-7, 1-17-1989; Ord. No. 10-174
§1, 7-18-2010; Ord. No. 18-134, 6-19-2018]
A. No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to any
premises where actual or potential cross-connections to the public
water system or consumer's water system may exist unless such actual
or potential cross-connections are abated or controlled to the
satisfaction of the Director of Public Works and as required by the laws
and regulations of the Missouri Department of Natural Resources.
B. No connection shall be installed or maintained whereby an auxiliary
water supply may enter the public water system or consumer's water
system unless such auxiliary water supply and the method of
connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the
592. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §100.150.
Section
700.060
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
700.070
100:1654
Section 700.080. Survey and Investigations. [R.O. 2009 §51.17; CC
1981 §29-15; Ord. No. 89-7, 1-17-1989]
Section 700.090. Type of Protection Required. [R.O. 2009 §51.18;
CC 1981 §29-16; Ord. No. 89-7, 1-17-1989]
Director of Public Works and the Missouri Department of Natural
Resources.
C. No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to any
premises in which the plumbing system, facilities and fixtures have not
been constructed and installed using acceptable plumbing practices
considered by the City as necessary for the protection of health and
safety.593
D. (Reserved)
A. The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the
Director of Public Works or an authorized representative for the
performance of surveys and investigations of water use practices within
the consumer's premises to determine whether there are actual or
potential cross-connections to the consumer's water system through
which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into the public water
system.
B. On request by the Director of Public Works or an authorized
representative, the consumer shall furnish information on water use
practices within the consumer's premises.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to conduct periodic
surveys of water use practice on the consumer's premises to determine
whether there are actual or potential cross-connections to the
consumer's water system through which contaminants or pollutants
could backflow into the consumer's water system or the public water
system.
A. The type of protection required by this Article, shall depend upon the
degree of hazard which exists, as follows:
1. An approved air-gap separation shall be installed where the public
water system may be contaminated with substances that could
cause a severe health hazard.
2. An approved air-gap separation or any approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the
public water system may be contaminated with a substance that
could cause a system or health hazard.
593. Editor's Note: Former Subsection (D) regarding Tier 1 status for developers, which
immediately followed, was repealed 6-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-134.
Section
700.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.090
100:1655
Section 700.100. Where Protection Is Required. [R.O. 2009 §51.19;
CC 1981 §29-17; Ord. No. 89-7, 1-17-1989]
3. An approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention device or an approved double-check
valve assembly shall be installed where the public water system
may be polluted with substances that could cause a pollutional
hazard not dangerous to health.
A. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system servicing premises where, in
the judgment of the Director of Public Works or the Missouri
Department of Natural Resources, actual or potential hazards to the
public water system exist. The type and degree of protection required
shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard.
B. An approved air-gap separation or reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention device shall be installed at the service connection or within
any premises where, in the judgment of the Director of Public Works or
the Missouri Department of Natural Resources, the nature and extent
of activities on the premises, or the materials used in connection with
the activities or materials stored on the premises, would present an
immediate and dangerous hazard to health should a cross-connection
occur, even though such cross-connection may not exist at the time the
backflow prevention device is required to be installed. This includes,
but is not limited to, the following situations:
1. Premises have an auxiliary water supply, unless the quality of the
auxiliary supply is acceptable to the Director of Public Works and
the Missouri Department of Natural Resources.
2. Premises having internal cross-connections that are not
correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it
impractical to ascertain whether or not cross-connections exist.
3. Premises where entry is restricted so that inspection for crossconnections
cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at
sufficiently short notice to assure the cross-connections do not
exist.
4. Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being
established or re-established.
5. Premises which, due to the nature of the enterprise therein, are
subject to recurring modification or expansion.
6. Premises on which any substance is handled under pressure so as
to permit entry into the public water supply or where a crossconnection
could reasonably be expected to occur. This shall
include the handling of process waters and cooling waters.
Section
700.090
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
700.100
100:1656
7. Premises where materials of a toxic or hazardous nature are
handled such that if back siphonage or back pressure should occur,
a serious health hazard may result.
C. The following types of facilities fall into one (1) or more of the
categories of premises where an approved air-gap separation or
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device is required by
the Director of Public Works and the Missouri Department of Natural
Resources to protect the public water supply and must be installed at
these facilities unless all hazardous or potentially hazardous conditions
have been eliminated or corrected by other methods to the satisfaction
of the Director of Public Works and the Missouri Department of Natural
Resources. The facilities listed below are not intended to be a complete
list of all facilities affected by this Section. Additional types of facilities
may be added per the judgment of the Director of Public Works. [Ord.
No. 18-134, 6-19-2018]
1. Aircraft and missile manufacturing plants;
2. Automotive plants including those plants which manufacture
motorcycles, automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles and
construction and agricultural equipment;
3. Potable water dispensing stations which are served by a public
water system;
4. Beverage bottling plants including dairies and breweries;
5. Canneries, packing houses, reduction plants and cold storage
plants;
6. Car washes;
7. Chemical, biological and radiological laboratories including those
in high schools, trade schools, colleges, universities and research
institutions;
8. Hospitals, clinics, medical buildings, autopsy facilities, morgues,
mortuaries, nursing homes, convalescent homes and other medical
facilities;
9. Metal or plastic manufacturing, fabrication, cleaning, plating or
processing facilities;
10. Plants manufacturing paper and paper products;
11. Plants manufacturing, refining, compounding or processing
fertilizer, film, herbicides, natural or synthetic rubber, pesticides,
petroleum or petroleum products, pharmaceuticals, radiological
materials or any chemical which would be a contaminant to the
public water system;
Section
700.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.100
100:1657
Section 700.110. Backflow Prevention Devices. [R.O. 2009 §51.20;
CC 1981 §29-18; Ord. No. 89-7, 1-17-1989]
12. Commercial facilities that use herbicides, pesticides, fertilizers or
any chemical which would be a contaminant to the public water
system;
13. Plants processing, blending or refining animal, vegetable or
mineral oils;
14. Commercial laundries and dye works;
15. Sewage, storm water and industrial waste treatment plants and
pumping stations;
16. Waterfront facilities including piers, docks, marinas and shipyards;
17. Industrial facilities which recycle water;
18. Restricted or classified facilities or other facilities closed to the
supplier of water or the Director of Public Works;
19. Fire protection and sprinkler systems;
20. Auxiliary water systems;
21. Irrigation systems with facilities for injection of pesticides,
herbicides or other chemicals or with provisions for creating back
pressure;
22. Portable tanks for transporting water taken from a public water
system;
23. Facilities which have pumped or repressurized cooling or heating
systems that are served by a public water system, including all
boiler systems;
24. Film laboratories;
25. Irrigation systems, separate from domestic systems, such as parks,
playgrounds, cemeteries, golf courses, schools and estates;
26. Underground lawn sprinkling system adjunct to domestic systems;
27. Industries using toxic substances;
28. Stockyards;
29. Hazardous waste storage and/or disposal sites; and
30. Oil and gas production, storage or transmission properties.
A. Any backflow prevention device required by this Article shall be of a
model or construction approved by the Director of Public Works and the
Missouri Department of Natural Resources.
Section
700.100
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
700.110
100:1658
Section 700.120. Installation. [R.O. 2009 §51.21; CC 1981 §29-19;
Ord. No. 89-7, 1-17-1989]
Section 700.130. Inspection and Maintenance. [R.O. 2009 §51.22;
CC 1981 §29-20; Ord. No. 89-7, 1-17-1989; Ord. No. 18-134,
6-19-2018]
1. Air-gap separation to be approved shall be at least twice the
diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically above the top rim
of the vessel, but in no case less than one (1) inch.
2. A double-check valve assembly or a reduced pressure principle
backflow prevention device shall be approved by the Director of
Public Works and shall appear on the current "list of approved
backflow prevention devices" established by the Missouri
Department of Natural Resources.
B. Existing backflow prevention devices approved by the Director of Public
Works at the time of installation and properly maintained shall, except
for inspection and maintenance requirements, be excluded from the
requirements of this Article so long as the Director of Public Works is
assured that they will satisfactorily protect the public water system.
Whenever the existing device is moved from its present location or
requires more than minimum maintenance or when the Director of
Public Works finds that the maintenance constitutes a hazard to health,
the unit shall be replaced by a backflow prevention device meeting the
requirements of this Article.
A. Backflow prevention devices required by this Article shall be installed
at a location and in a manner approved by the Director of Public Works
and shall be installed at the expense of the water consumer.
B. Backflow prevention devices installed on the service line to the
consumer's water system shall be located on the consumer's side of the
water meter, as close to the meter as is reasonably practical, and prior
to any other connection.
C. Backflow prevention devices shall be located so as to be readily
accessible for maintenance and testing, protected from freezing, and
where no part of the device will be submerged or subject to flooding by
any fluid.
A. It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow
prevention devices required by this Article are installed to have
inspections, tests and overhauls made in accordance with the following
schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need.
1. Air-gap separations shall be inspected at the time of installation
and at least every twelve (12) months thereafter.
2. Double-check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested for
tightness at the time of installation and at least every twelve (12)
Section
700.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.130
100:1659
Section 700.140. Discontinuing Service For Violations. [R.O. 2009
§51.23; CC 1981 §29-21; Ord. No. 89-7, 1-17-1989]
months thereafter. They shall be dismantled, inspected internally,
cleaned and repaired whenever needed.
3. Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices shall be
inspected and tested for tightness at the time of installation and at
least every twelve (12) months thereafter. They shall be
dismantled, inspected internally, cleaned and repaired whenever
needed.
B. Inspections, tests and overhauls of backflow prevention devices shall be
made at the expense of the water consumer and shall be performed by a
Missouri certified backflow prevention device tester.
C. Whenever backflow prevention devices required by this Article are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense
of the consumer within fifteen (15) calendar days.
D. The water consumer shall maintain a complete record of each backflow
prevention device from purchase to retirement. This shall include a
comprehensive listing that includes a record of all tests, inspections
and repairs. Records of inspections, tests, repairs and overhauls shall
be forwarded to the Director of Public Works as directed by the Director
of Public Works.
E. Backflow prevention devices shall not be by-passed, made inoperative,
removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization
by the Director of Public Works.
F. The certified backflow prevention tester, hired by the customer, shall
submit test report(s) for each device annually with an administrative
fee of twelve dollars ninety-five cents ($12.95) to a third party
management company selected by the Director of Public Works. The
customer will be deemed in violation if the certified test report is not
received by the water provider within sixty (60) days of the annual
inspection date and shall be assessed a thirty dollar ($30.00) late fee.
A. The Director of Public Works shall deny or discontinue, after reasonable
notice to the occupants thereof, the water service to any premises
wherein any backflow prevention device required by this Article is not
installed, tested and maintained in a manner acceptable to the Director
of Public Works or if it is found that the backflow prevention device has
been removed or by-passed or if an unprotected cross-connection exists
on the premises. If, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, a
serious, immediate threat to public health is posed, then service shall
be discontinued without notice.
B. Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the consumer
has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance
with this Article to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works.
Section
700.130
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
700.140
100:1660
ARTICLE III
Rates, Deposits and Fees
Section 700.150. Water Service Rates, Deposits and Fees
Recommended By The Board of Public Works and Established By
Ordinance. [R.O. 2009 §51.40; Ord. No. 08-89, 5-9-2008; Ord. No.
09-144, 8-5-2009; Ord. No. 10-110 §2, 5-26-2010; Ord. No. 10-235
§1, 11-10-2010]
A. Rates, deposits, fees and charges for water service shall be
recommended by the Board of Public Works and established by
ordinance. The rates and charges for water service as set forth herein
are hereby established and shall be in full force and effect at 12:01 A.M.
on January 1 of each year as follows: [Ord. No. 15-302 §1,
12-15-2015594]
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Customer Classification:
City resident bi-monthly
charge
$5.20 $5.56 $5.95 $6.07 $6.07
City resident rate per 1,000
gallons
$3.40 $3.64 $3.89 $3.97 $3.97
County resident bi-monthly
charge
$6.24 $6.68 $7.14 $7.29 $7.29
County resident rate per
1,000 gallons
$5.54 $5.93 $6.35 $6.47 $6.47
Special bi-monthly charge $5.20 $5.56 $5.95 $6.07 $6.07
Special rate per 1,000
gallons
$3.06 $3.27 $3.57 $3.57 $3.57
B. Effective July 1, 2010, the minimum water meter charge is established
as follows: [Ord. No. 15-302 §1, 12-15-2015595]
Meter Size City Resident Rate
County Resident
Rate
1 inch $10.00 $15.00
1.5 inch $16.00 $24.00
2 inch $28.00 $42.00
3 inch $36.00 $54.00
4 inch $56.00 $84.00
6 inch or larger $70.00 $105.00
594. Editor's Note: Subsection 1 of Ord. No. 15-302 also redesignated former Subsections (B)
through (E) as Subsections (C) through (F), respectively.
595. Editor's Note: Subsection 1 of Ord. No. 15-302 also redesignated former Subsections (B)
through (E) as Subsections (C) through (F), respectively.
Section
700.150
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.150
100:1661
C. Each new owner occupied water service customer shall pay to the City
an initial deposit of fifty dollars ($50.00). Each new tenant water service
customer shall pay to the City an initial deposit of one hundred dollars
($100.00). The deposit shall be returned to the customer when: [Ord.
No. 16-251 §1, 12-6-2016]
1. The customer discontinues water service, in which case the City
shall refund the deposit by first crediting the customer's account to
offset the final bill and then issuing a check for any remaining
amount due to the customer; or
2. The customer has no delinquent water bills during a two (2) year
period, in which case the City shall refund the deposit by crediting
the customer's account to offset subsequent bills.
No customer shall be required to pay a deposit who has
previously owned or leased property in the City within the
preceding five (5) years, paid the deposit, and had the deposit
returned after the two (2) year period.
D. There is established an additional deposit requirement of fifty dollars
($50.00) and a reconnection fee of sixty-five dollars ($65.00) for all
water service reconnections made during regular business hours and a
fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for reconnections not made during
regular business hours. At the time a reconnection is made, the
customer is required to pay to the City the full amount due on the
delinquent bill, the additional fifty dollar ($50.00) deposit and the
reconnection fee. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no owner occupied
deposit account shall exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) and no
tenant water service customer account shall exceed two hundred
dollars ($200.00). For purposes of this Section, regular business hours
are Monday through Friday on days City Hall is open for business and
between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 4:30 P.M. There shall be no fee
charged for emergency reconnection of water service. [Ord. No.
18-160, 7-17-2018]
E. Tap Reschedule Fee. [Ord. No. 18-160, 7-17-2018]
1. Forty eight (48) hours notice is required for scheduling taps.
2. The contractor is responsible for all excavations, shoring or sloping
if needed and site restoration. The City of St. Charles Water
Division reserves the right to deny tapping procedure if unsafe or
hazardous conditions are present.
3. Upon arrival to the site, all material will be inspected by water
division personnel to ensure compliance with material
specifications. If materials are not in compliance or on site and
ready for inspection, the tap must be rescheduled when materials
are in compliance or on site ready for inspection and excavation is
deemed acceptable. A one hundred dollar ($100.00) rescheduling
fee must be paid prior to an appointment being rescheduled, to
Section
700.150
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
700.150
100:1662
avoid any additional charges, the appointment must be cancelled
two (2) hours prior to the scheduled time.
F. Meter Test Fee. Customers may request a water meter to be tested. The
customer can make one (1) request during the life of the meter at no
cost to the customer. Routine testing or testing to confirm any
abnormalities will be done at the discretion of the Water Department.
Customers may be charged one hundred dollars ($100.00) for
additional tests requested by the customer if the meter testing shows
the meter is within AWWA accuracy limits. Customers may witness the
meter test by scheduled appointment only at the Public Works Facility.
[Ord. No. 18-160, 7-17-2018596]
G. There is established an additional fee equal to ten percent (10%) of the
water service bill, or a minimum of five dollars ($5.00), for the late
payment of the water service bill.
H. Effective September 1, 2009, water tap-on fees are established as
follows: [Ord. No. 18-160, 7-17-2018]
Water Meter Size City Resident Rate
County Resident
Rate
3/4 inch $1,000.00 $2,000.00
1 inch $1,600.00 $3,200.00
1.5 inch $2,300.00 $4,600.00
2 inch $3,900.00 $7,800.00
3 inch $8,600.00 $17,200.00
4 inch $15,400.00 $30,800.00
6 inch $34,300.00 $68,600.00
8 inch $41,400.00 $82,800.00
10 inch and larger $154,000.00 $308,000.00
Unmetered and main
extensions
$2,000.00 $4,000.00
Sprinkler systems that run off a domestic tap with more than 20
sprinkler heads are subject to a 50% increase in the rates listed above.
I. Water tap-on fees shall not be assessed for construction projects of the
City.
J. Effective January 1, 2018, the annual fee for customers with unmetered
fire protection based on the size of the fire line shall be as follows:
[Ord. No. 17-252, 11-21-2017]
596. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 18-160 also redesigned former Subsections (E), (F) and (G) as
Subsections (G), (I) and (J), respectively.
Section
700.150
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.150
100:1663
Section 700.155. Collection Of The Missouri Primacy Fee. [Ord. No.
19-074, 3-19-2019]
The Department of Finance is authorized to collect on behalf of the State
of Missouri the annual Missouri primacy fee as imposed by Section
640.100.5(2), RSMo., as amended. The Department of Finance shall collect
the applicable fee from each customer and shall remit the fee to the State
of Missouri as required by law.
Section 700.160. Water Main Construction Inspection Fees.597 [R.O.
2009 § 51.03; Ord. No. 94-273, 10-19-1994; Ord. No. 19-074,
3-19-2019]
A water main inspection fee of eighty dollars ($80.00) per day shall be
deposited with the City prior to the commencement of construction. This
fee shall be charged at the rate of three hundred (300) linear feet of water
main per day. In addition to the inspection fee, the contractor shall also
obtain a construction permit at a charge of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
This charge is not refundable. Such fees collected shall be deposited in the
Street Maintenance and Improvement Fund of the City.
Section 700.170. Fire Hydrant Permit Fees. [R.O. 2009 § 51.05; Ord.
No. 99-408, 12-9-1999; Ord. No. 06-129, 5-18-2006; Ord. No.
19-074, 3-19-2019]
Tap Size at Water Main Annual Fee
2 inch or less $30.00
3 inch $100.00
4 inch $125.00
6 inch $275.00
8 inch $500.00
10 inch $775.00
12 inch $1,100.00
A. A fire hydrant permit shall be required for the jetting of streets in
subdivisions and construction projects, for jetting sewer lines, storm
sewers, etc.
B. A fire hydrant permit shall also be required for watering newly placed
sod and/or grass seed in all residential, commercial and industrial
developments and for filling swimming pools.
C. A fire hydrant permit shall be issued only to contractors who are
licensed in and by the City of St. Charles and residents of the City of St.
597. Editor's Note: Former Section 700.160, Repair and Replacement of Water Lines, was
renumbered 3-19-2019 by Ord. No. 19-074. See now Section 700.390.
Section
700.150
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
700.170
100:1664
Section 700.180. through Section 700.190. (Reserved)
Charles. Notification of connection to fire hydrant must be provided
twenty-four (24) hours in advance.
D. The fees are as follows:
1. Non-refundable/non-transferable fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per
day, plus fifty dollars ($50.00) for each additional day.
2. For larger developments, the fees are as follows:
a. Residential areas: fifty dollars ($50.00) per day plus five dollars
($5.00) per lot.
b. Industrial and commercial areas: fifty dollars ($50.00) per day
plus five dollars ($5.00) per ten thousand (10,000) square feet
of land being developed.
3. For swimming pools to be filled by the City at the request of
residential property owners, the fee is fifty dollars ($50.00) per
pool plus the cost per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water to fill
the pool as calculated by the resident providing dimensions of the
pool.
a. Scheduling depends on availability and work load, but requires
forty-eight (48) hours' notice.
b. The resident must complete a waiver of liability for damages
form prior to filling.
c. Pool filling will only occur during normal weekday working
hours.
E. The City will waive the permit fee for licensed contractors who work
under contract with the City performing work on a City-funded project.
F. An approved reduced-pressure-principle backflow prevention device
must be provided by the contractor, and proof of testing within the last
twelve (12) months must be submitted before a permit will be issued.
Section
700.170
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.180
100:1665

ARTICLE IV
Water Conservation
Section 700.200. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 12-150 §1, 8-22-2012]
Whenever the water supply of the City is low, or whenever the pressure
maintained in the water towers or water mains of the City is low, due to
conditions of drought or other emergencies which may arise, it shall be the
duty of the Mayor to issue a proclamation or proclamations stating the facts
and prohibiting any person from using City water for any purpose other
than for essential health, safety, and welfare needs.
Section 700.205. Forms of Proclamation. [Ord. No. 12-150 §1,
8-22-2012]
As heretofore provided, the Mayor shall implement provisions of this Article
to the extent and for such periods as he or she deems necessary for the
protection of human life and safety. Such proclamations shall be in effect
for periods at the Mayor's discretion. In the proclamations, the Mayor may
provide for a scheduled implementation of restrictions on water use, or
may direct such immediate and total restrictions as are provided for in
this Article. The Mayor may issue proclamations amending any previous
proclamation issued under this Article. The Mayor may rescind or revoke
any proclamations made should the emergency causing such action be
resolved.
Section 700.210. Notice. [Ord. No. 12-150 §1, 8-22-2012]
Any proclamation issued pursuant to this Article shall be posted in at least
two (2) public places within the City and shall also be published at least
once in a newspaper generally circulated within the City.
Section 700.215. Effective Dates of Proclamation. [Ord. No. 12-150
§1, 8-22-2012]
Any proclamation issued pursuant to this Article shall take effect
immediately upon it being posted and published, and shall be in full force
and effect until rescinded or revoked by the Mayor.
Section 700.220. Coordination With Government Agencies. [Ord.
No. 12-150 §1, 8-22-2012]
During the time of a water emergency as proclaimed by the Mayor, the
Director of Public Works and Water System Manager shall maintain close
coordination with the Missouri Department of Natural Resources and such
other agencies of the Federal, State, or other local governments as may
have the ability to assist the City during its period of emergency.
Section
700.200
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.230
100:1667
Section 700.230. Application of Regulation — Person, Firms,
Corporation or Institutions. [Ord. No. 12-150 §1, 8-22-2012]
This Article shall apply to all persons, including governmental bodies, using
water both within and outside the municipal boundaries of the City, and
regardless of whether any person, firm, corporation, limited liability
company, partnership or institution using water shall have a contract for
water service with the City.
Section 700.235. Certain Uses May Be Prohibited. [Ord. No. 12-150
§1, 8-22-2012]
A. When a proclamation pursuant to this Article is in effect, the following
uses, but not limited to, and withdrawals of water by any person may be
prohibited:
1. "Watering yards", namely, the sprinkling, watering, or irrigating of
shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, ground covers, plants, vines,
gardens, vegetables, flowers, or any other vegetation;
2. "Washing mobile equipment", namely, the washing of automobiles,
trucks, trailers, trailer-houses, boats, or any other type of mobile
equipment;
3. "Cleaning outdoor surfaces ", namely, the washing of sidewalks,
driveways, filling station aprons, porches and other outdoor
surfaces;
4. "Cleaning buildings", namely, the washing of the outside of
dwellings and of the inside and outside of office and other
commercial buildings;
5. "Cleaning equipment and machinery", namely, the washing and
cleaning of any business or industrial equipment and machinery;
6. "Swimming pools", namely, swimming and wading pools not
employing a filter and recirculating system;
7. "Ornamental fountains", namely, the operation of any ornamental
fountain or other structure making a similar use of water;
8. "Escape through defective plumbing", namely, the escape of water
through defective plumbing, which shall mean the knowing
permission for defective plumbing to remain out of repair;
9. "Sale to bulk haulers", namely, the sale of water to non-metered
customers hauling the same to out-of-town consumers;
10. "Sale to out-of-town consumer", namely, all bulk or tank sale, coinoperated
facilities where water is sold to persons hauling the same
for their own use;
Section
700.230
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
700.235
100:1668
Section 700.240. Conservation Plan Required of Large Commercial,
Industrial, Institution, Governmental Subdivision, Water Districts.
[Ord. No. 12-150 §1, 8-22-2012]
It may be required that within a certain time as specified in the Mayor's
proclamation and after the posting of the proclamation all customers with
a two (2) inch water meter, or larger, (excluding meters strictly for fire
protection) shall submit a water conservation plan in writing to the Director
of Public Works or designee for approval. Said plan shall incorporate all
uses prohibited in Section 700.235 and shall immediately upon approval be
put into effect. Said plan shall only be approved if average consumption is
reduced by specified percentage. Failure to submit said plan shall result in
the penalty provisions of this Article being enacted immediately.
Section 700.245. Restrictions On Business, Institutional and
Industrial Uses. [Ord. No. 12-150 §1, 8-22-2012]
In times of emergency any restrictions imposed on the consumption of
water within the City shall be levied against industrial, institutional, and
business users, with the Director of Public Works or designee hereby
empowered to limit the consumption of water by industrial, institutional,
and business users to the amount used by such users during the
corresponding month of the year previous to the emergency, a fraction
thereof, or may suspend such services entirely when, in the Director of
Public Works opinion, the welfare of the City so warrants. If no previous
year consumption data is available or if the business requests a different
base, the Director of Public Works or designee may establish a formula
establishing a consumption average.
Section 700.250. Exception For Businesses Necessary To Public
Welfare. [Ord. No. 12-150 §1, 8-22-2012]
When a proclamation pursuant to this Article is in effect curtailing the
usage of water by business or industrial customers, provisions may be made
to allow water usage by those businesses and industries that are, in the
11. "Automatic or commercial car washes", namely, commercial coinoperated
car wash or any other type of mobile equipment
commercial washing operation;
12. "Cooling water", namely, no water is to be used for cooling
machinery, air-conditioning, or heating unless said water is
recycled within a closed system;
13. "Dust control", namely, no water is to be used for the control of
dust; and
14. "Use from a fire hydrant", namely, no use of water from a fire
hydrant, public or privately owned, except for fighting fires, human
consumption, or for quality reasons.
Section
700.235
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.250
100:1669
Director of Public Work's or designee's opinion, necessary for the public
health, safety, and welfare.
Section 700.255. Providing of Necessary Usage Data. [Ord. No.
12-150 §1, 8-22-2012]
It shall be the responsibility of the Water System Manager to keep current
and have available such records of water usage as may be necessary to
implement the provisions of this Article, including the amount of water
available for sale by the City and that normally consumed by its customers.
Section 700.260. Residential Use of Water. [Ord. No. 12-150 §1,
8-22-2012]
The restrictions herein imposed on the consumption of water within the
City shall apply to residential users to the extent that the Director of Public
Works or designee may also restrict the usage to certain hours of the day,
divide the City into sections for the purpose of alternating water service on
a scheduled basis, besides making applicable to such customers provisions
of the preceding Sections of this Article. The Director of Public Works or
designee is also hereby empowered to limit the consumption by residential
users to the amount used by such users during the corresponding month
of the year previous to the emergency, a fraction thereof, or may suspend
such services entirely when, in the Director of Public Works or designee's
opinion, said customer does not intend to practice water conservation at
the expense and general welfare of other citizens. If no previous year
consumption data is available, the Director of Public Works or designee
shall establish a formula establishing a consumption average.
Section 700.265. Exception To Maintain Sanitation. [Ord. No.
12-150 §1, 8-22-2012]
Notwithstanding provisions hereinafter set forth, the Director of Public
Works or designee shall have the authority to permit a reasonable use of
water in any case necessary to maintain adequate health and sanitation
standards.
Section 700.270. Penalty — Termination of Water Service. [Ord. No.
12-150 §1, 8-22-2012]
It shall be unlawful for a person to violate the provisions of this Article. A
person violating the provisions of this Article shall be subject to the penalty
as set forth in Section 100.150. For a second (2nd) violation of this Article,
the Director of Public Works or designee may have said customer's water
service disconnected at the water main and all costs of said disconnection
shall be payable by said customer. Reinstatement of said service shall be at
the discretion of the Director of Public Works or designee.
Section 700.280. through Section 700.290. (Reserved)
Section
700.250
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
700.280
100:1670
ARTICLE V
Bulk Water
Section 700.300. Definitions. [Ord. No. 13-002 §1, 1-11-2013]
For the purpose of this Article, the following words shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
BULK WATER DISPENSING STATION — The City facility where water
purchased from the City for transport is dispensed by the gallon into a bulk
transportation container.
BULK WATER HAULER — A person or business that possesses a valid
permit to purchase water for transport in bulk quantities from the City; said
bulk quantities being dispensed at the Bulk Water Dispensing Station.
BULK WATER HAULER PERMIT — The permit issued by the City that allows
the holder thereof to purchase water in bulk quantities from the City for
transport from the Bulk Water Dispensing Station.
Section 700.310. Bulk Water Dispensing — Access Limited To
Permit Holders — No Vested Right. [Ord. No. 13-002 §1, 1-11-2013]
The City may operate a Bulk Water Dispensing Station for the sale of water
by the gallon. Dispensing of water from the Bulk Water Dispensing Station
is limited to bulk water haulers. There shall be no contractual, property
or vested right to access, use or purchase water from the Bulk Water
Dispensing Station. The City may discontinue, limit or terminate water
distribution from the Bulk Water Dispensing Station at any time, with or
without notice.
Section 700.320. Bulk Water Fee. [Ord. No. 13-002 §1, 1-11-2013]
There is hereby established a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per one thousand
(1,000) gallons or fraction thereof for the purchase of water from the Bulk
Water Dispensing Station.
Section 700.330. Bulk Water Hauler Permit Application. [Ord. No.
13-002 §1, 1-11-2013]
A. Application. A person desiring to purchase water for transport in bulk
quantities from the bulk water dispensing station shall make
application with the Department of Public Works for a bulk water hauler
permit.
B. Contents. The application for a bulk water hauler permit shall include:
1. The name and the address of the applicant. If the entity is a
corporation, the name and address of its president; for a limited
liability company, its manager; and other form of business, the
responsible person.
Section
700.300
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.330
100:1671
Section 700.340. Issuance — Transfer — Renewal. [Ord. No. 13-002
§1, 1-11-2013]
2. The address of the physical location of the applicant's business or
site of operation.
3. The make, model, year, vehicle identification number and license
plate of the motor vehicle that will transport water from the Bulk
Water Dispensing Station. The type and size of the container that
will hold bulk water. A description of the device and methodology
used to safeguard against contamination and cross-contamination;
and description of bulk container cleaning and disinfection
measures.
4. A certification that the bulk water hauler has procured and
deposited with the Department of Public Works, Water Division,
proof of an insurance policy issued by an insurance company
licensed to do business in Missouri insuring the bulk water hauler
against liability imposed by law for damage on account of personal
injuries sustained by any person arising out of the ownership,
maintenance or use of a motor vehicle in the amounts required by
Section 303.020(10), RSMo., as amended, as proof of financial
responsibility.
5. A certification that the bulk water hauler has procured and
deposited with the Department of Public Works, Water Division,
proof of an insurance policy issued by an insurance company
licensed to do business in Missouri insuring the bulk water hauler
against liability imposed by law for damage on account of
contaminating water during transport and delivery by the bulk
water hauler in at least the amounts set forth annually by the State
of Missouri, Director of Insurance as the Sovereign Immunity
Limits for liability awards.
6. A certification and endorsement in a form acceptable to the City
that the bulk water hauler will indemnify and hold harmless the
City of St. Charles from any claims from contamination occurring
during the transportation of bulk water by the bulk water hauler.
7. The applicant shall obtain a business license pursuant to Chapter
605 prior to the issuance of the permit.
C. Permit Fee. The fee for a Bulk Hauler Permit shall be fifty dollars
($50.00) per each registered vehicle, fifty dollars ($50.00) per each
registered bulk container per year or fraction thereof and there shall be
no pro-ration of the permit fee.
A. Issuance—Form—Term. Upon the completion of the bulk water hauler
permit application, the payment of the permit fee and the filing of proof
of liability insurance, a bulk water hauler permit shall be issued to an
applicant. All bulk water hauler permits shall be signed by the Mayor or
Section
700.330
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
700.340
100:1672
Section 700.350. Suspension and Revocation. [Ord. No. 13-002 §1,
1-11-2013]
Section 700.360. Tampering Unlawful. [Ord. No. 13-002 §1,
1-11-2013]
It shall be unlawful to tamper with the City's bulk water dispensing unit.
Section 700.370. Bulk Water Hauler Solely Responsible For Safe
Transport. [Ord. No. 13-002 §1, 1-11-2013]
The City assumes no liability for the bulk water hauler's means and methods
and, as such, the bulk water hauler is solely responsible for assuring water
designee and shall indicate the issuance date and the name of the
permittee. Bulk water hauler permits expire on December thirty-first
(31st) following the date of issuance.
B. Transfer. A bulk water hauler permit shall not be assignable or
transferable.
C. Renewal. A bulk water hauler shall re-apply for a bulk water hauler
permit annually. Bulk water hauler permits shall be issued upon reapplication
in accordance with Section 700.330. The permit fee for a
renewal shall be paid before January first (1st). The renewal permit
shall be dated January first (1st) of the year in which issued and shall
expire on December thirty-first (31st) of that same year.
A. Suspension. The Director of Public Works may immediately suspend a
bulk water hauler permit when the:
1. Bulk water hauler fails to comply with the liability insurance
requirements of Section 700.330;
2. Water Systems Manager finds evidence that the bulk water hauler
has tampered with the Bulk Water Dispensing Station;
3. Water Systems Manager finds evidence that the bulk water hauler
has exposed the Bulk Water Dispensing Station to crosscontamination
due to the condition of equipment or its connection
to the Bulk Water Dispensing Station; or
4. Water System Manager finds evidence that the bulk water hauler is
utilizing non-registered vehicles and bulk containers to receive and
dispense water purchased in bulk quantities.
B. Revocation. The Director of Public Works may revoke a bulk water
hauler permit if a permittee fails to correct any of the deficiencies
stated in Subsection (A) of this Section after five (5) days' notice
thereof. The Director of Public Works may also revoke a permittee's
bulk water hauler permit for repeat violations of the deficiencies stated
in Subsection (A) of this Section.
Section
700.340
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.370
100:1673
purchased in bulk quantities is safely transported and dispensed free from
biological contamination and meeting disinfection standards for the
purpose for which it shall be used.
Section 700.380. (Reserved)
Section
700.370
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
700.380
100:1674
ARTICLE VI
Water Line Repair Program
[Ord. No. 13-172 §1, 9-3-2013]
Section 700.390. Repair And Replacement Of Water Lines. [Ord. No.
12-123 § 1, 7-25-2012; Ord. No. 19-074, 3-19-2019]
At the election of November 6, 2012, the notes of the City of St. Charles
authorized a fee not to exceed twelve dollars ($12.00) per year on
residential property for each water service line providing water service
within the City of St. Charles to residential property having four (4) or fewer
dwelling units for the purpose of paying for the costs of necessary water
service line repairs or replacements.
Section 700.400. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Article, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
DEPARTMENT — The City of St. Charles Public Works Department.
DIRECTOR — The City of St. Charles Public Works Director or his/her
designee.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Real estate within the City, identified by a
single locator number and which the St. Charles County Assessor's office
classifies as: Class 1: Single-Family Residence (R), Class 13: Duplex (R),
Class 14: Condo Residential (R), Class 19: Single Unit Apartment (R), Class
31: Residential Triplex (R), Class 41: 4 Units (R). "Residential property"
shall also mean a bed-and-breakfast as defined in Section 400.050 of this
Code, provided that said bed-and-breakfast is carried on entirely within the
dwelling unit by a member of the family residing in the dwelling unit.
WATER LINE — That portion of a residential property's water piping that
runs between the foundation of the residential property and a water meter,
or first shutoff valve, not including filters, pumps or other equipment. It
also does not include a water line located under any part of any building or
within exterior walls.
WATER LINE REPAIR — The patching or replacement of a defective water
line, including associated digging and the replacement of dirt and seeding
of affected areas. "Water line repair" shall not include replacement of
landscaping or ornamental structures, but shall include replacement of
structural facilities required for safe occupancy of a residence or safe use
of a property, such as sidewalks, driveways and pavement.
Section 700.410. Water Line Repair Fee.
There is hereby imposed upon all eligible residential property within the
City served by City water service an annual fee of twelve dollars ($12.00)
for the purposes of water line repair.
Section
700.390
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.420
100:1675
Section 700.420. Water Line Repair Fund. [Ord. No. 18-156,
7-17-2018]
There is hereby established a special revenue fund, to be designated as
the "Water Line Repair Fund," in which shall be deposited all monies
collected by the St. Charles County Collector of Revenue pursuant to the
fee authorized by Section 700.410. All monies received thereby shall be
deposited in this fund upon receipt, together with all interest generated
on deposited funds, and shall stand appropriated upon receipt for payment
of costs reasonably associated with and necessary to administer and carry
out the defective water line repairs provided for by the Water Line Repair
Program. The Finance Director shall administer and disburse funds from
this fund upon authorization of the Public Works Director. A program
participant may recover one hundred percent (100%), not to exceed three
thousand dollars ($3,000.00), of the authorized costs incurred for water line
repair.
Section 700.430. Application for Participation in Water Line Repair
Program.
A. Persons who wish to participate in the Water Line Repair Program shall
complete an application on forms to be created and provided by the
Public Works Department. In order to be eligible for participation in the
program, an applicant shall, in addition to any other requirements
imposed by the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Section
700.470:
1. Provide satisfactory proof of ownership or consent to repair by the
owner(s) of all premises on, over and under which water service
repairs are to be effected;
2. Provide copies of paid St. Charles County real and personal
property tax bills and make payment of all past due City bills;
3. Provide written certification that neither the applicant(s), the
owner(s) nor anyone on their behalf will make any claim against or
seek any relief from the City arising out of or in connection with any
work done or any action taken in connection with the Water Line
Repair Program. The applicant shall further certify the applicant's
acknowledgment that the City is not responsible for the acts of the
contractor making the water line repairs and that the applicant
shall indemnify the City and hold it harmless from any and all
claims arising out of the applicant's participation in, and work
performed and actions taken in connection with, the Water Line
Repair Program;
4. Certify that applicant has the authority to and does consent to the
performance of the water line repair work on and about the
property described in the application, that the applicant will not
interfere with the work to be performed by the contractor selected
by applicant and that applicant shall reimburse the City for all
Section
700.420
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
700.430
100:1676
Section 700.440. Applicant Solicitation of Bids for Water Line
Repairs.
Upon determination by the Director that an applicant is eligible to
participate in the Water Line Repair Program, the applicant shall contact a
sufficient number of City-licensed contractors so that a minimum of three
(3) competitive bids will be obtained for each repair project.
Section 700.450. Determination of Amount Reimbursable To
Applicant.
The applicant shall submit at least three (3) bids to the Director. The amount
which the City shall reimburse to the applicant shall be a portion of the bid
amount submitted by the lowest responsible bidder. In determining "lowest
responsible bidder," in addition to price, the Director shall consider: the
ability, capacity or skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the
service required; whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide
the service promptly or within the time specified without delay or
interference; the character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder; the quality of performance of previous contracts
or services; the previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws
and ordinances relating to the contract or service; the sufficiency of the
financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or
provide the services; the quality, availability of the supplies or contractual
services to the particular use required; the ability of the bidder to provide
future maintenance and service for the use of the subject to the contract;
and the number and scope of conditions attached to the bid.
Section 700.460. Program Limitations.
Administration of the Water Line Repair Program shall be contingent upon
the availability of funding collected or anticipated to be collected pursuant
to the annual water line repair fee imposed by Section 700.410. In addition
to the requirements for Water Line Repair Program participation set forth
in Section 700.430, an applicant must provide satisfactory proof that the
applicant has paid the annual water line repair fee or that the applicant
will pay the annual water line repair fee if not yet annually billed for the
expenses incurred by the City on applicant's behalf in the event
that applicant withdraws permission to proceed or otherwise
interferes with performance of work authorized under this
program; and
5. Certify that applicant understands and acknowledges that water
line repair includes only the patching or replacement of a defective
water line, including associated digging and the replacement of
dirt and seeding of affected areas, and does not include
replacement of landscaping or ornamental structures but only
replacement of structural facilities required for safe occupancy of a
residence or safe use of property.
Section
700.430
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.460
100:1677
calendar year in which the applicant desires to participate in the Water Line
Repair Program.
Section 700.470. Program Rules and Regulations.598
The Director, with the approval of the Mayor, shall promulgate rules and
regulations to carry out the purposes and intent of the Water Line Repair
Program to protect the public safety, health and welfare and to administer
the program in an effective, efficient and timely manner.
598. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 18-156, enacted 7-17-2018, set out rules and regulations
governing this program. Said rules are held on file in the City offices.
Section
700.460
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
700.470
100:1678
Chapter 705
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
Cross References—As to final plat data, §405.290; as to obstructing sewers,
gutters and the like, §215.030; as to plumbing code, §§500.240 et seq.
Section
700.470
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
700.470
100:1679

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 705.010. Combined Waterworks and Sewerage System.
[R.O. 2009 §52.01; CC 1981 §29-1; Ord. No. 76-11, 1-28-1976]
It is declared by the City Council that the existing waterworks and the
existing sewerage system of the City shall be operated and maintained
as a combined waterworks and sewerage system, and that such combined
system shall include the entire existing waterworks and the entire existing
sewerage system of the City, together with all future improvements and
extensions thereto, whether to the waterworks or to the sewerage system
or to both.
Section 705.020. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §52.02; CC 1981 §29-33;
Ord. No. 79-47, 5-16-1979; Ord. No. 07-158, 6-8-2007]
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Board created under Sections 125.570
et seq. of this Code of Ordinances.
BOD — Denotes biochemical oxygen demand, the quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius (20°C) expressed in
milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five (5) feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the public or
private sewer or other place of disposal.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer designed and intended to receive and
convey sewage, storm water, including roof and street drainage and
unpolluted wastewater and cooling water.
COMMON LATERAL — A lateral serving more than one (1) property or unit
owner, including the potential for same.[Ord. No. 13-178 §4, 9-24-2013]
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any system of
condensation, air-conditioning, cooling, refrigeration or other, but which
shall be free from odor and oil. It shall contain no polluting substances
which would produce BOD or suspended solids each in excess of ten (10)
milligrams per liter.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A system that is utilized for
one (1) building lot.
Section
705.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
705.020
100:1681
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
LATERAL — A private sewer pipe from a building drain to the public sewer
with no other common sewer tributary to it, including the connection to the
sewer.[Ord. No. 13-178 §4, 9-24-2013]
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface or ground water.
NORMAL SEWAGE — Waters or wastes having:
OFFICIAL NOTICE — The notice issued by the Superintendent upon
determination that the private or individual sewage disposal system is
causing a nuisance or health hazard.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
PRIVATE SEWER — A sewer controlled by a private company.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public or private sewers, with no particle greater than one-half
(½) inch in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have
equal rights and is controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residence,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with
such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times
the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal
operation.
A five (5) day biochemical oxygen demand not greater than three
hundred (300) milligrams per liter; and
1.
Containing not more than three hundred (300) milligrams per liter of
suspended solids.
2.
Section
705.020
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
705.020
100:1682
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
UNPOLLUTED WATER OR WASTES — Any water or waste containing none
of the following: free or emulsified grease or oil; acid or alkali; phenols
or other substances imparting taste and odor in receiving waters; toxic or
poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution; and noxious
or odorous gases. It shall contain not more than one thousand (1,000)
milligrams per liter of dissolved solids, of which not more than two hundred
fifty (250) milligrams per liter shall be as chloride, with permissible volume
subject to review by the Water Pollution Control Department; and not more
than ten (10) milligrams per liter each of suspended solids and BOD. The
color shall not exceed fifty (50) units. (The unit of color being that produced
by one (1) milligram per liter platinum, in the form of chloroplatinate ion.)
The pH shall be between six and five-tenths (6.5) and nine and five-tenths
(9.5). Discharges shall not elevate or depress the average cross sectional
temperature of the watercourse by more than five degrees Fahrenheit (5°F).
Section 705.030. Depositing Objectionable Waste On Public or
Private Property.599 [R.O. 2009 §52.03; CC 1981 §29-34; Ord. No.
79-47, 5-16-1979]
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
Section 705.040. Discharge of Polluted Waters To Natural Outlet.600
[R.O. 2009 §52.04; CC 1981 §29-35; Ord. No. 79-47, 5-16-1979]
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City, or
in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any sewage or other polluted
waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance
with subsequent provisions of this Article.
Section 705.050. Tampering With Sewerage Structure or
Equipment.601 [R.O. 2009 §52.05; CC 1981 §29-36; Ord. No. 79-47,
5-17-1979]
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
destruction of public property.
599. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §705.360.
600. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §705.360.
601. Cross References—As to offenses against property, §§215.010 et seq.; as to penalty,
§705.360.
Section
705.020
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
705.060
100:1683
Section 705.060. Authority of Authorized City Personnel To Enter
Premises. [R.O. 2009 §52.06; CC 1981 §§29.37—29.39; Ord. No.
79-47, 5-16-1979]
Section 705.070. City Not Responsible For Damages — Limited
Authority to Resolve Claims. [Ord. No. 16-112 §1, 5-17-2016; Ord.
No. 16-166 §1, 8-16-2016]
A. Limited To Waste Discharge. The Director of Public Works or his/her
designee and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
The Director of Public Works or his/her designee or his/her
representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes
including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other
industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind of
source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste
treatment.
B. Observance Of Company Safety Rules, Indemnification Of
Company—Exception. While performing the necessary work on private
properties referred to in Subsection (A) of this Section, the Director of
Public Works or his/her designee or duly authorized employees of the
City shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established
by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or
death to the City employees and the City shall indemnify the company
against loss or damage to its property by City employees and against
liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and
sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or
failure of the company to maintain safe conditions.
C. Property Through Which City Holds Properly Executed Easement
Compliance With Terms Pertaining To Property. The Director of Public
Works or his/her designee and other duly authorized employees of the
City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the City holds a properly
executed easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any
portion of the sewage works lying within such easement. All entry and
subsequent work, if any, on such easement shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the properly executed easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
A. As a condition of furnishing sanitary sewer service, the City shall not be
responsible for damages for any failure to remove wastewater from a
customer's premises, for backup of wastewater into a customer's
premises or for interruption of service for any reason. The City shall not
be liable for damages resulting to a customer or any other person,
unless due to the negligence of the City and in the absence of any
Section
705.060
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
705.070
100:1684
contributory negligence on the part of the customer or any other
person. The City shall not be liable for damages caused by an
interruption of sewer service or for damages caused by defective piping
or appliances on a customer's premises or for any defect in a customer's
sewer lateral line.
B. Overcharged Sanitary Sewer Line. Notwithstanding the provisions of
Subsection (A), upon receipt of a damage claim that the Director of
Public Works determines is the result of an overcharged sanitary sewer
line, the City, in its sole discretion and subject to appropriation of funds,
may pay an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00) to settle the claim; provided, that no insurance proceeds,
FEMA or SEMA reimbursement or payment from another source is
available to pay the claim; the City is released from liability for the
claim; and subject to the direction of the Director, a backwater valve is
installed in accordance with the Backwater Valve Program as set forth
in Sections 705.370 to 705.420.
C. Clogged Sanitary Sewer Line.
1. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection (A), upon receipt of a
damage claim that the Director of Public Works determines is the
result of a clogged sanitary sewer line, the City, in its sole
discretion and subject to appropriation of funds, may pay an
amount not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per
occurrence for the actual documented cost to clean up damage
caused by the clogged sanitary sewer line and may pay up to ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per occurrence to repair damage or
compensate for damaged personal property caused by the clogged
sanitary sewer line; provided:
a. The claimant used a City preapproved contractor or a
contractor acceptable to the Director to clean up the damage;
b. The amount paid by the City to repair the damage or
compensate for damaged personal property does not exceed
the actual documented total cost to repair the damage and the
adjusted, actual cash value of personal property damaged as
determined by the City's third party claims administrator;
c. The claimant fully releases the City from liability for the claim;
and
d. Subject to the direction of the Director, a backwater valve is
installed in accordance with the Backwater Valve Program as
set forth in Sections 705.370 to 705.420.
2. In no case shall a claimant receive compensation from the City and
proceeds from an insurance policy for the same damage.
Section
705.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
705.070
100:1685

ARTICLE II
Building Sewers and Connections
Section 705.080. Permit Required.602 [R.O. 2009 §52.20; CC 1981
§29-52; Ord. No. 79-47, 5-16-1979; Ord. No. 10-174 §2, 7-18-2010;
Ord. No. 13-178 §4, 9-24-2013]
No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use,
alter or disturb any public or private sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the Director of Public Works. All
plans for sanitary sewer construction shall be approved by the Director
of Public Works. A developer achieving Tier 1 status under the Green
Point Rating System Guide established in Section 500.280(L) may make
application to the Department of Public Works for the use of a Green Point
Rating System Alternative to the requirements of Section 705.080 as set
forth in the "Development Guide: Infrastructure Alternatives for St. Charles
GPRS Projects" on file with the City Clerk.
Section 705.085. Vacuum Sanitary Sewer Systems Prohibited;
Effective Date. [Ord. No. 13-178 §4, 9-24-2013]
After September 27, 2013, the construction of vacuum sanitary sewer
systems is prohibited in the City.
Section 705.090. Classification — Application — Fee.603 [R.O. 2009
§52.21; CC 1981 §29-53; Ord. No. 79-47, 5-16-1979; Ord. No.
92-256, 10-21-1992]
A. There shall be two (2) classes of sewer building permits:
1. For residential and commercial service, and
2. For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
B. In either case, the owner or his/her agent shall make application on a
special form furnished by the City. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the Director of Public Works or
his/her designee.
C. A sewer inspection fee of eighty dollars ($80.00) per day shall be
deposited with the City prior to the commencement of construction.
This fee shall be charged at the rate of three hundred (300) linear feet
of sewer per day. In addition to the inspection fee, the contractor shall
also obtain a construction permit at a charge of one hundred dollars
($100.00). This charge is not refundable.
602. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §705.360.
603. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §705.360.
Section
705.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
705.100
100:1687
Section 705.100. Installation and Connection Costs — Liability of
Owners and Contractors.604 [R.O. 2009 §52.22; CC 1981 §29-54; Ord.
No. 79-47, 5-16-1979]
Section 705.110. Authorization of Sanitary System Connection.
[R.O. 2009 §52.23; CC 1981 §29-55; Ord. No. 79-47, 5-16-1979; Ord.
No. 13-178 §4, 9-24-2013]
All connections to the sanitary sewer system must be approved in writing
by the Director of Public Works.
A. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify
the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
B. It shall be unlawful for any plumber, drain-layer, contractor or any other
person constructing a sewer, a house or building connection or an
industrial connection sewer connected to a sanitary sewer to leave such
connection open, unsealed or incomplete in such manner that will
permit storm or surface water to enter into any sanitary sewer within
the service area of the Public Works Department. All such openings
shall be tightly sealed at all points whenever work is not actually in
progress on such sewer or connection. Failure to comply with this
Section shall result in a minimum fine of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) per day.
A. Connection to Gravity Sanitary Sewer Main.
1. Connection to sanitary sewer main.
a. Applications for the subdivision of land into lots and the
resubdivision of land, under Chapter 405, shall connect said
subdivision to the public sanitary sewer system and provide a
plan to the Public Works Department showing such proposed
connections, including laterals.
b. Laterals shall not cross a property line and must be connected
to the public sanitary sewer system in City easement or public
right-of-way. Where the receiving public sanitary sewer system
is across the street or alley, the private lateral may extend
directly across the street or alley to it. Private laterals are not
to utilize public easements or public rights-of-way for distances
over eighty (80) feet or to cross at diagonals beyond equivalent
length. Such crossings are to be kept to a minimum. For all
installations and repairs within the right-of-way, a clean-out
shall be installed in the right-of-way that is located within one
(1) foot of the property served, and in addition to any clean-out
604. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §705.360.
Section
705.100
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
705.110
100:1688
required by the Plumbing Code. [Ord. No. 17-084 § 1,
4-18-2017]
c. Private sewers serving two (2) or more lots are not allowed.
Laterals shall not serve multiple properties beyond the
property in which the lateral originates, except where
otherwise allowed in this section as a common lateral. A
common lateral will only be allowed for a building of same use,
vertically stacked condominiums (i.e., one owned unit above a
unit owned by another, all residential or commercial). For sideby-
side, non-vertically stacked condominium units, each unit
shall have its own lateral and each lateral shall be connected
directly to the public sanitary sewer system. In all other cases,
each building shall be provided with a separate lateral for each
use from the building to the public sanitary sewer system as
described above. Freestanding commercial leaseholds which
could become outlots and any leaseholds which could become
separately owned (unstacked) will each be connected
separately to the public sanitary sewer system. Legally
recorded consolidation of multiple properties into one (1)
property is an acceptable method of eliminating non-compliant
common laterals. Laterals shall be installed in accordance with
the City Building Code and in a manner consistent with the
City Code of Ordinances.
2. Exemptions.
a. An exemption from the requirements of Section 705.110(A)(1)
by the owner of land where there are practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardship, other than financial hardship or
economic cost, in the physical ability to carry out the
requirements of this section by reason of the natural contour of
publicly owned land at the lot or surrounding area, location of
a lot or a planned sanitary sewer main extension, shall be
requested in writing to the Director of Public Works.
b. The Director of Public Works shall investigate the exemption
request and shall approve, deny or modify the request. An
exemption shall not be for a period of time longer than the
condition at the property that justified the exemption exists.
Changes in conditions at the property may result in the
Director of Public Works reviewing the exemption and
revoking or modifying the exemption. An owner of land may
appeal the denial of a request to the City Council. Said appeal
shall be filed with the City Clerk within thirty (30) days of the
date the denial is made. The City Council may affirm, reverse
or modify the Director of Public Works' denial. Nothing in this
section shall be construed or interpreted to convey or provide
any property right, contract right or cause of action to a
property owner regarding an exemption.
Section
705.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
705.110
100:1689
Section 705.120. Connection With Property Lying Outside City.605
[R.O. 2009 §52.24; CC 1981 §29-56; Ord. No. 79-47, 5-16-1979; Ord.
No. 94-18, 1-30-1994; Ord. No. 04-194, 8-13-2004; Ord. No. 05-52,
2-4-2005; Ord. No. 07-158, 6-8-2007]
B. Sanitary Sewer Force Main.
1. Connection to sanitary sewer force main. A connection to a sanitary
sewer force main shall only be permitted if an extension of a gravity
sanitary sewer main is determined not to be practical by the
Director of Public Works. A plan shall be provided identifying the
proposed access to the public sanitary sewer system for all
proposed subdivision and resubdivision of land. The connection of a
lateral to a sanitary sewer force main shall be made in accordance
with this Chapter and require a backflow prevention device to
protect private property from sewage backup. The backflow
prevention device shall be the sole responsibility of the property
owner, and the City shall not be responsible for any damages that
may occur as a result of the failure of the backflow prevention
device. All mathematical calculations related to the design of a
backflow prevention device or a private grinder pump shall be
sealed by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Missouri.
C. Vacuum Sanitary Sewer Main.
1. Connection to vacuum sanitary sewer main. An application to
connect to a vacuum sanitary sewer system main shall provide a
plan showing proposed access to the existing public vacuum
sanitary sewer system for all proposed subdivision and
resubdivision of land under Chapter 405. All additional connections
to existing public vacuum sanitary sewer systems shall be made in
accordance with this Chapter. Extensions of the vacuum sanitary
sewer main shall be reviewed and approved in writing by the Board
of Public Works and Missouri Department of Natural Resources.
2. Vacuum Canisters. Vacuum canisters shall have a visual inspection
pipe that provides for the inspection and maintenance of the sump
area. The mechanical components of the vacuum canister shall be
at an elevation to allow service from the surface without requiring
confined space entry.
A. All connections of property outside the City limits directly into the
sanitary sewer shall be made in accordance with the following
provisions:
1. Persons owning property outside City limits and desiring to connect
to the sanitary sewer system of the City shall file an application
with the Public Works Department. The application form shall
605. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §705.360.
Section
705.110
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
705.120
100:1690
clearly state that the user recognizes that he/she is subject to the
City's sewer user ordinance and system of user charges.
2. Persons connecting to the sanitary sewer system shall pay such
connection fees as may be established by the Board of Public Works
and approved by the City Council at the time the application is filed
(see Section 705.220).
3. The Board of Public Works shall establish regulations and
guidelines for the connection to the sanitary sewer system. If the
applicant meets the requirements of this Chapter and the
regulations and guidelines established by the Board of Public
Works, then the Public Works Department may grant the permit for
connection to the sanitary sewer system.
4. All connections to the sanitary sewer system shall be made in
accordance with the terms and provisions of this Chapter and the
Plumbing Code of the City and shall be made subject to the same
permits, inspections, permit fees, inspection fees and all other
requirements required for connections within the City.
B. All connections of property outside the City limits indirectly into the
sanitary sewer system, such as through another public or private party,
shall be made in accordance with the following provisions:
1. The person desiring the connection shall first obtain the written
consent of the public or private party owning the sewer facility
between the City sewer system and the party desiring to connect.
2. The party desiring to connect shall then make application to the
Public Works Department in the manner as is provided in Section
705.090 for permits to connect with the sewage system of the City.
C. All fees and charges shall be paid before final approval is given for
connection to the sanitary sewer system.
D. Nothing contained in this Article shall be construed as prohibiting the
City from entering into a contract, agreement or license for connections
to the sanitary sewer system.
E. The City reserves the right to cut off or disconnect any connection made
under the provisions of this Section in the event the charges or fees
required by this Article become delinquent or in the event of a violation
of the provisions of this Article or in the event that the Director of
Public Works determines that connections made under the provisions of
this Section are an unreasonable burden on the capacity and operation
of the sanitary sewer system.
F. It is the intent of this Section that property lying within the City shall be
given first consideration for connections and use of the sanitary sewer
system in all cases and at all times that the Director of Public Works can
determine the adequacy of the connection.
Section
705.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
705.120
100:1691
Section 705.130. Excavations Guarded — Restoring Disturbed
Streets. [R.O. 2009 §52.25; CC 1981 §29-57; Ord. No. 79-47,
5-16-1979]
All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of
the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City.
Section 705.140. Constructing or Maintaining Privy or The Like
Prohibited.606 [R.O. 2009 §52.26; CC 1981 §29-69; Ord. No. 79-47,
5-16-1979]
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct, install
or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, lagoon or other
facilities intended or used for the disposal of sewage. Acceptable portable
privies used on construction work may be used upon approval of the
Director of Public Works or his/her designee.
Section 705.150. Connections With Private Sewers. [R.O. 2009
§52.27; CC 1981 §29-70; Ord. No. 79-47, 5-16-1979]
Whenever any person shall desire to connect with and use any private
sewer located in any public street or alley within the City, he/she shall first
obtain the written consent of the party owning or controlling the premises
drained by such sewer or his/her authorized agent. He/she shall then make
application to the Board of Public Works in the same manner as is provided
for licenses or permits to connect with the public sewers, at the same time
presenting the written consent of the owners of the sewer, which shall be
left on file in the office of the Public Works Department.
G. All connections into the sanitary sewer system, whether made directly
or indirectly, of property located outside the City limits shall be made in
accordance with the following provisions:
1. The owners of the land shall submit a petition for annexation of the
land into the City;
2. The parcel of property shall be developed and used in accordance
with the plans for its land use adopted by the City Council and
approved by the Mayor. If no plans for its land use have been
adopted and approved at the time of the application for service,
then the service shall not be permitted until plans have been
adopted and approved; and
H. Except as otherwise provided by the Mayor and City Council, the parcel
of property shall be developed in accordance with City specifications
and standards as though the property were within the City's limits.
606. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §705.360.
Section
705.120
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
705.160
100:1692
Section 705.160. Board of Public Works Rule-Making Power. [R.O.
2009 §52.28; Ord. No. 07-158, 6-8-2007]
The Board of Public Works is authorized to make appropriate rules and
regulations concerning private or individual sewage disposal. The
provisions of Section 705.170 shall be incorporated into those rules and
regulations.
Section 705.170. Permit Requirements For Construction of Private
or Individual Sewage Disposal System. [R.O. 2009 §52.29; CC 1981
§§29.72—29.73; Ord. No. 79-47, 5-16-1979]
A. Application—Fee. Before commencement of construction of a private or
individual sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written
permit signed by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee. The
application for such permit shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the
Director of Public Works or his/her designee. A permit and inspection
fee shall be paid to the City at the time the application is filed according
to the rate schedule in Section 705.090.
B. Effective Upon Completion Of Approved Installation Final Inspection. A
permit for a private or individual sewage disposal system shall not
become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of
the Director of Public Works or his/her designee. He/she shall be
allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any
event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the Director of Public
Works or his/her designee when the work is ready for final inspection
and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall
be made within twenty-four (24) hours of the receipt of notice by the
Director of Public Works or his/her designee.
Section
705.160
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
705.170
100:1693

ARTICLE III
Storm Water and Industrial Wastes
Section 705.180. Discharge To Sanitary Sewer Prohibited.607 [R.O.
2009 §52.40; CC 1981 §29-102; Ord. No. 79-47, 5-16-1979]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water,
surface water, ground water, roof runoff, interior or exterior foundation
drains, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted
industrial process water to any sanitary sewer.
Section 705.190. Action of Superintendent When Discharge
Unacceptable. [R.O. 2009 §52.41; CC 1981 §29-103; Ord. No. 79-47,
5-16-1979]
Section 705.200. Grease, Oil, Sand Interceptors and Other
Drainage.608 [R.O. 2009 §52.42; CC 1981 §29-104; Ord. No. 79-47,
5-16-1979]
A. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the deleterious
substances or possess deleterious characteristics enumerated in the
Board's rules and regulations and which in the judgment of the Director
of Public Works or his/her designee may have a deleterious effect upon
the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters or which
otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
Director of Public Works or his/her designee may:
1. Reject the wastes;
2. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
3. Require control over the quantities and rate of discharge; or
4. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under
the provisions of Section 700.120.
B. If the Director of Public Works or his/her designee permits the
pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation
of the plans and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval
of the Director of Public Works or his/her designee and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
A. Grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Director of Public Works or his/her designee, they are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in
excessive amount or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful
607. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §705.360.
608. Cross Reference—As to penalty, §705.360.
Section
705.180
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
705.200
100:1695
Section 705.210. Industrial Waste Surcharge. [R.O. 2009 §52.43; CC
1981 §29-105; Ord. No. 79-47, 5-16-1979; Ord. No. 05-322,
12-30-2005]
ingredients except that such interceptors or traps shall not be required
for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors and drains
shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning
and inspection.
B. Grease and oil interceptors or traps shall be constructed of impervious
material capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature.
C. They shall be of a substantial construction, water-tight and equipped
with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight
and water-tight, unless otherwise authorized by the Public Works
Department.
D. When installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps shall be
maintained by the owner, at his/her expense, in continuously efficient
operation at all times.
E. If the drainage from any gasoline filling station, garage, refining plant,
chemical plant, packing house, slaughterhouse, lard rendering
establishment, dairy, steam engine, steam boiler, steam plant or any
other establishment shall cause a deposit or obstruction or damage to
any public sewer, the Director of Public Works or his/her designee shall
cause such deposit or obstruction to be removed promptly or cause
such damage to be repaired, keeping an account of the cost of such
work including material, labor and supervision and shall certify an
account of such cost to the person from whose establishment or
premises the material causing such deposit, obstruction or damage
came and if such person shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay the sum
specified to the City within thirty (30) days after demand has been
made, the person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
A. Every six (6) months each industrial user connected to the City's
sanitary sewer system shall, when requested, deliver to the Director of
Public Works the "Industrial Waste Surcharge Questionnaire" provided
by the Director of Public Works such data as is required on the
questionnaire.
B. When, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, verification of data
reported on the industrial waste surcharge questionnaire is required,
wastewater discharges from an industry may be sampled for an
extended period by the City or an authorized representative. In any
event, composite samples will be collected from the premise
wastewaters on an annual basis as a check on reported data. The
analytical information obtained from such sampling, if substantially
different, may be used in lieu of that information reported by the
industry. If determined necessary to obtain additional wastewater data,
Section
705.200
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
705.210
100:1696
an extended comprehensive sampling by the City or an authorized
representative may be conducted and the analytical results obtained
also used in lieu of reported values for each wastewater discharge. In
the event such comprehensive sampling by the City or an authorized
representative is deemed necessary, all costs for such sampling to
include installation of hydraulic flow measuring devices, personnel
costs for on-site sampling of wastewaters and laboratory work involved
shall be borne by the plant or premise.
C. The City or an authorized representative shall have the right to enter
and set up, on company property, such devices necessary to conduct a
gauging and sampling operation and to begin such operation upon
presentation of proper identification on arrival without advance notice
to the company. While performing the work, the City or an authorized
representative shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the company.
Section
705.210
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
705.210
100:1697

ARTICLE IV
Rates, Fees and Charges
Section 705.220. Sewer Service Rates Recommended By Board of
Public Works and Established By Ordinance. [R.O. 2009 §52.55; CC
1981 §29-85; Ord. No. 79-47, 5-16-1979; Ord. No. 90-24, 2-7-1990;
Ord. No. 04-194, 8-13-2004; Ord. No. 07-158, 6-8-2007; Ord. No.
09-144, 8-5-2009; Ord. No. 10-110 §1, 5-26-2010]
A. Rates and charges for the use and services of the sanitary sewer system
shall be recommended by the Board of Public Works and established by
ordinance. The rates and charges shall be made and collected against
each lot, parcel of land or premises which may have any active sewer
connection with the sanitary sewer system or which may actively
discharge sewage or industrial waste, either directly or indirectly, into
such sewer system or any part thereof, unless the City was otherwise
contractually obligated to a different rate and charge before the
effective date of Ordinance No. 79-47, May 16, 1979. The rates and
charges for sewer service as set forth herein are hereby established and
shall be in full force and effect at 12:01 A.M. on January 1 of each year
as follows: [Ord. No. 15-302 §2, 12-15-2015; Ord. No. 18-160,
7-17-2018]
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Customer Classification:
City resident bi-monthly charge $5.68 $6.13 $6.56 $7.02 $7.23
City resident rate per 1,000
gallons
$5.05 $5.45 $5.84 $6.25 $6.43
County resident bi-monthly
charge
$6.81 $7.35 $7.87 $8.42 $8.67
County resident rate per 1,000
gallons
$7.88 $8.51 $9.10 $9.74 $10.03
Special bi-monthly charge $5.68 $6.13 $6.56 $7.02 $7.23
Special rate per 1,000 gallons $5.05 $5.45 $5.84 $6.25 $6.43
B. Tap-on fees, user charges and surcharges shall be recommended by the
Board of Public Works and established by ordinance. Effective
September 1, 2009, sewer tap-on fees are established as follows: [Ord.
No. 18-160, 7-17-2018]
Water Meter Size City Resident Rate
County Resident
Rate
All residential $1,000.00 $2,000.00
3/4 inch $1,000.00 $2,000.00
1 inch $1,699.00 $3,398.00
Section
705.220
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
705.220
100:1699
Section 705.225. Summer Sewer Billing Adjustment For Residential
Customers. [Ord. No. 12-155 §1, 8-22-2012]
Water Meter Size City Resident Rate
County Resident
Rate
1.5 inch $3,031.00 $6,062.00
2 inch $4,736.00 $9,472.00
3 inch $8,744.00 $17,488.00
4 inch $14,711.00 $29,422.00
6 inch $28,351.00 $56,702.00
8 inch $51,368.00 $102,736.00
10 inch $82,655.00 $165,310.00
12 inch and larger Case by Case Case by Case
C. Sewer tap-on fees shall not be assessed for construction projects of the
City.
A. Eligibility For Summer Sewer Billing Adjustment. All City residential
sewer customers are eligible for a summer sewer billing adjustment. A
residential sewer customer shall include only single- family units,
whether attached or unattached, and apartments.
B. Sewer Bills To Which Summer Sewer Billing Adjustments Apply.
Summer sewer billing adjustments apply to City residential customer
sewer bills sent out during the months of July, August, September and
October. [Ord. No. 19-175, 9-3-2019]
C. Calculation Of "Average Winter Usage". The "average winter usage" of
a City residential sewer customer shall be calculated using two (2)
billing periods with ending water usage readings in the months of
December, January, February, March or April of the prior year. If there
are three (3) ending water usage readings in these months, then the
first two (2) readings are used to calculate the average winter usage.
D. Summer Sewer Billing Adjustments. If a residential sewer customer's
water usage during a summer billing period is less than the "average
winter usage", then the customer's sewer charge shall be calculated
and billed based on the actual water usage. Where a City residential
sewer customer's "average winter usage" is less than water usage billed
during a summer billing period, then the sewer charge shall be adjusted
and the customer shall be billed using the "average winter usage" as
follows:
1. Average winter usage shall be calculated as set forth in Subsection
(C) and reduced to a daily usage rate; and
2. The daily usage rate shall be multiplied by the number of days in
the current billing cycle.
Section
705.220
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
705.225
100:1700
Section 705.230. Billing and Payment. [R.O. 2009 §52.56; CC 1981
§29-86; Ord. No. 79-47, 5-16-1979; Ord. No. 04-194, 8-13-2004; Ord.
No. 07-158, 6-8-2007]
Bills for sewage charges shall be prepared by the Finance Department and
shall be presented to the users of the sanitary sewer system of the City at
the same time and in the same manner as all bills for water usage. All bills
and charges for such sewage services shall be payable at the same time and
in the same place as are the bills and charges for water usage.
Section 705.240. Discontinuance of Water Service Upon Non-
Payment. [R.O. 2009 §52.57; CC 1981 §29-87; Ord. No. 79-47,
5-16-1979; Ord. No. 03-203, 8-25-2003; Ord. No. 04-194, 8-13-2004;
Ord. No. 07-158, 6-8-2007]
If any charge for sewage and/or water services shall not be paid within
ten (10) days after such charge shall become due and payable, the Finance
Department shall have the authority to immediately instruct the Water
Systems Manager to immediately discontinue all water services furnished
to such delinquent user while such indebtedness remains unpaid.
Section 705.250. Owner and Occupant Liable For Payment. [R.O.
2009 §52.58; CC 1981 §29-88; Ord. No. 79-47, 5-16-1979; Ord. No.
03-203, 8-25-2003; Ord. No. 04-194, 8-13-2004; Ord. No. 07-158,
6-8-2007]
Where actual water usage readings are not available or are not accurate or
reliable for the calculation of the average winter usage then the readings
from the next previous year shall be used. In the event no readings are
available for the average winter usage calculation, a City-wide average
winter usage shall be used.
A. Sewage and/or water services shall be deemed to be furnished to both
the occupant and owner of any lot, parcel of land or premises receiving
such sewage and/or water services and shall be deemed an obligation of
both the occupant and the owner of any such lot, parcel of land or
premises. The Finance Department may request the City Attorney to
sue the owner or occupant on behalf of the City in a civil action to
recover any sums due for such services, plus a reasonable attorney's fee
to be fixed by the court.
B. An owner otherwise liable for sums for services under Subsection (A)
shall be absolved from liability for such sums, and recovery of such
sums shall only be sought from an occupant, provided that the owner
and the occupant fulfill each of the following conditions, as applicable:
1. The owner registers the lot, parcel of land or premises receiving
sewage and/or water services as a rental property with the City;
2. The occupant of the registered rental property provides to the City
a copy of the occupant's lease agreement with the owner and
Section
705.225
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
705.250
100:1701
Section 705.260. (Reserved)
provides sufficient proof of identification that the occupant is the
lessee named in the lease agreement; and
3. The occupant pays a cash only deposit in an amount to be set
pursuant to Section 125.600.
Section
705.250
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
705.260
100:1702
ARTICLE V
Sewer Lateral Repair Program
Section 705.270. Definitions. [R.O. 2009 §52.60; Ord. No. 02-149,
6-24-2002; Ord. No. 03-317, 12-5-2003; Ord. No. 04-137, 7-12-2004]
For the purposes of this Article, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
DEPARTMENT — The City of St. Charles Public Works Department.
DIRECTOR — The City of St. Charles Public Works Director or his/her
designee.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Real estate within the City, identified by a
single locator number and which the St. Charles County Assessor's office
classifies as: Class 1 — Single-Family Residence (R), Class 13 — Duplex (R),
Class 14 — Condo Residential (R), Class 19 — Single Unit Apartment (R),
Class 31 — Residential Triplex (R), Class 41 — 4 Units (R), Class 54 — 5
Units (R) or Class 64 — 6 Units (R). Residential property shall also mean a
bed and breakfast as defined in Section 400.050 of this Code, provided that
said bed and breakfast is carried on entirely within the dwelling unit by a
member of the family residing in the dwelling unit.
SEWER LATERAL — That portion of a residential property's sanitary sewer
piping that runs between the foundation of the residential property and a
sewer main, not including treatment tanks, pumps or other equipment. It
also does not include a line located under any part of any building or within
exterior walls.
SEWER LATERAL REPAIR — The patching or replacement of a defective
sewer lateral line, including associated digging and the replacement of
dirt and seeding of affected areas. Sewer lateral repair shall not include
replacement of landscaping or ornamental structures but shall include
replacement of structural facilities required for safe occupancy of a
residence or safe use of a property, such as sidewalks, driveways and
pavement.
Section 705.280. Sewer Lateral Repair Fee. [R.O. 2009 §52.61; Ord.
No. 02-149, 6-24-2002; Ord. No. 03-317, 12-5-2003; Ord. No. 10-145
§1, 7-8-2010; Ord. No. 11-237 §1, 11-16-2011; Ord. No. 12-196 §1,
11-8-2012; Ord. No. 13-164; §1, 9-3-2013; Ord. No. 16-183 §1,
9-20-2016; Ord. No. 19-226, 10-15-2019]
There is hereby imposed upon all residential property within the City served
by City sewer an annual fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) for the purposes of
sewer lateral repair.
Section
705.270
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
705.290
100:1703
Section 705.290. Sewer Lateral Repair Fund. [R.O. 2009 §52.62;
Ord. No. 02-149, 6-24-2002; Ord. No. 10-145 §2, 7-8-2010; Ord. No.
18-155, 7-17-2018]
There is hereby established a special revenue fund, to be designated as
the Sewer Lateral Repair Fund, in which shall be deposited all monies
collected by the St. Charles County Collector of Revenue pursuant to the
fee authorized by Section 705.280. All monies received thereby shall be
deposited in this fund upon receipt, together with all interest generated on
deposited funds, and shall stand appropriated upon receipt for payment of
costs reasonably associated with and necessary to administer and carry out
the defective lateral sewer line repairs provided for by the Sewer Lateral
Repair Program. The Finance Director shall administer and disburse funds
from this fund upon authorization of the Public Works Director. A program
participant may recover ninety percent (90%), not to exceed seven thousand
five hundred dollars ($7,500.00), of the authorized costs incurred for sewer
lateral repair.
Section 705.300. Application For Participation in Sewer Lateral
Repair Program. [R.O. 2009 §52.63; Ord. No. 02-149, 6-24-2002]
A. Persons who wish to participate in the Sewer Lateral Repair Program
shall complete an application on forms to be created and provided by
the department. In order to be eligible for participation in the program,
applicant shall, in addition to any other requirements imposed by the
rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Section 705.340:
1. Provide satisfactory proof of ownership or consent to repair by the
owner(s) of all premises on, over and under which sewer lateral
repairs are to be effected. Provide copies of paid St. Charles County
real and personal property tax bills and make payment of all past
due City bills;
2. Provide written certification that neither the applicant(s), the
owner(s) nor anyone on their behalf will make any claim against or
seek any relief from the City arising out of or in connection with any
work done or any action taken in connection with the Sewer Lateral
Repair Program. Applicant shall further certify applicant's
acknowledgment that the City is not responsible for the acts of the
contractor making the sewer lateral repairs and that applicant shall
indemnify the City and hold it harmless from any and all claims
arising out of the applicant's participation in, and work performed
and actions taken in connection with, the Sewer Lateral Repair
Program;
3. Provide written certification of a properly licensed master plumber
or master drainlayer that the sewer lateral has been cabled and
that cabling did not resolve the problem. The certification shall not
be dated more than six (6) months prior to the date of application;
Section
705.290
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
705.300
100:1704
Section 705.310. Applicant Solicitation of Bids For Sewer Lateral
Repairs. [R.O. 2009 §52.64; Ord. No. 02-149, 6-24-2002]
Upon determination by the Director that an applicant is eligible to
participate in the Sewer Lateral Repair Program, the applicant shall contact
a sufficient number of City licensed contractors so that a minimum of three
(3) competitive bids will be secured for each repair project.
Section 705.320. Determination of Amount Reimbursable To
Applicant. [R.O. 2009 §52.65; Ord. No. 02-149, 6-24-2002]
The applicant shall submit at least three (3) bids to the Director. The
amount which the City shall reimburse to the applicant shall be the bid
amount submitted by the lowest responsible bidder. In determining "lowest
responsible bidder", in addition to price, the Director shall consider: the
ability, capacity or skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the
service required; whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide
the service promptly or within the time specified without delay or
interference; the character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder; the quality of performance of previous contracts
or services; the previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws
and ordinances relating to the contract or service; the sufficiency of the
financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or
provide the services; the quality, availability of the supplies or contractual
services to the particular use required; the ability of the bidder to provide
4. Provide a written statement from a properly licensed master
plumber or master drainlayer advising of the nature and location of
the problem, in such detail that Director may adequately determine
both the nature of the problem and the bidding requirements for
sewer lateral repair;
5. Certify that applicant has the authority to and does consent to the
performance of sewer lateral repair work on and about the
property described in the application, that applicant will not
interfere with the work to be performed by the contractor selected
by Director, and that applicant shall reimburse the City for all
expenses incurred by the City on applicant's behalf in the event
that applicant withdraws permission to proceed or otherwise
interferes with performance of work authorized under this
program; and
6. Certify that applicant understands and acknowledges that sewer
lateral repair includes only the patching or replacement of a
defective sewer lateral line, including associated digging and the
replacement of dirt and seeding of affected areas, and does not
include replacement of landscaping or ornamental structures but
only replacement of structural facilities required for safe
occupancy of a residence or safe use of property.
Section
705.300
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
705.320
100:1705
future maintenance and service for the use of the subject to the contract;
and the number and scope of conditions attached to the bid.
Section 705.330. Program Limitations. [R.O. 2009 §52.66; Ord. No.
02-149, 6-24-2002; Ord. No. 03-317, 12-5-2003; Ord. No. 10-145 §1,
7-8-2010]
Administration of the Sewer Lateral Repair Program shall be contingent
upon the availability of funding collected or anticipated to be collected
pursuant to the annual sewer lateral repair fee imposed by Section 705.280.
In addition to the requirements for Sewer Lateral Repair Program
participation set forth in Section 705.300, an applicant must provide
satisfactory proof that the applicant has paid the annual sewer lateral repair
fee or that the applicant will pay the annual sewer lateral repair fee if not
yet annually billed for the calendar year in which the applicant desires to
participate in the Sewer Lateral Repair Program.
Section 705.340. Program Rules and Regulations.609 [R.O. 2009
§52.67; Ord. No. 02-149, 6-24-2002; Ord. No. 07-162, 6-11-2007]
The Director with the approval of the Mayor shall promulgate rules and
regulations to carry out the purposes and intent of the Sewer Lateral Repair
Program to protect the public safety, health and welfare and to administer
the program in an effective, efficient and timely manner.
Section 705.350. Violation. [R.O. 2009 §52.98; CC 1981 §29-40; Ord.
No. 79-47, 5-16-1979]
A. Any person found to be violating any provision of this Chapter, except
Section 705.060(B), shall be served by the Director of Public Works or
his/her designee with written notice stating the nature of the violation
and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction
thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such
notice, permanently cease all violations.
B. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in Subsection (A) of this Section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall
be deemed a separate offense.
C. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall become
liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the City by
reason of such violation.
D. The Director of Public Works is authorized to seek an injunction or
other remedy to enjoin or prohibit any violation of any provision of this
Chapter. This remedy shall be in addition to prosecution of a violation of
609. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 18-155, enacted 7-17-2018, set out rules and regulations
governing this program. Said rules are held on file in the City offices.
Section
705.320
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
705.350
100:1706
Section 705.360. Penalty. [R.O. 2009 §52.99]
Any person who violates any provision of Section 705.350 of this Code shall
be subject to the penalty set forth in Section 100.150.
this Chapter pursuant to Subsection (B) of this Section or any other
available remedy. [Ord. No. 18-053, 3-6-2018]
Section
705.350
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
705.360
100:1707

ARTICLE VI
Backwater Valve Program
Section 705.370. Definitions. [Ord. No. 16-113 §1, 5-17-2016]
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BACKWATER VALVE — A valve installed in the sanitary lateral either in a
basement or outdoors with a one-way flapper mechanism, which is designed
to close automatically during overcharge conditions to prevent water from
backing up through a sanitary lateral and floor drain into a basement.
DEPARTMENT — The City of St. Charles Public Works Department.
DIRECTOR — The City of St. Charles Public Works Director or his/her
designee.
SEWER LATERAL — That portion of a property's sanitary sewer piping
inside and outside a building between the basement floor drain and a sewer
main, not including treatment tanks, pumps or other equipment.
Section 705.380. Application For Participation in Backwater Valve
Program. [Ord. No. 16-113 §1, 5-17-2016]
A. A residential or commercial property owner who desires to participate
in the Backwater Valve Program shall complete an application on forms
to be created and provided by the Department. In order to be eligible
for participation in the program, each applicant shall, in addition to any
other requirements imposed by the rules and regulations adopted
pursuant to Section 705.420, provide the following:
1. Satisfactory proof of ownership or consent to repair by the
owner(s) of all premises on, over and under which are to be
effected backwater valve installation;
2. Copies of paid St. Charles County real and personal property tax
bills and make payment of all past due City bills;
3. Written certification that neither the applicant(s), the owner(s) nor
anyone on their behalf will make any claim against or seek any
relief from the City arising out of or in connection with any work
done or any action taken in connection with the Backwater Valve
Program, including certifying the applicant's acknowledgment that
the City is not responsible for the acts of the contractor installing
the backwater valve and that applicant shall indemnify the City and
hold it harmless from any and all claims arising out of the
applicant's participation in, and work performed and actions taken
in connection with, the Backwater Valve Program;
4. Proof that an overcharged sewer main condition resulted in one (1)
or more sewer backups;
Section
705.370
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
705.380
100:1709
Section 705.390. Applicant Solicitation of Bids For Backwater Valve
Installation. [Ord. No. 16-113 §1, 5-17-2016]
Upon determination by the Director that an applicant is eligible to
participate in the Backwater Valve Program, the applicant shall contact a
sufficient number of City licensed contractors so that a minimum of three
(3) competitive bids will be secured for each installation project.
Section 705.400. Determination of Amount Reimbursable to
Applicant. [Ord. No. 16-113 §1, 5-17-2016]
5. Certify that applicant has the authority to and does consent to the
performance of work on and about the property described in the
application, that applicant will not interfere with the work to be
performed by the contractor selected by Director, and that
applicant shall reimburse the City for all expenses incurred by the
City on applicant's behalf in the event that applicant withdraws
permission to proceed or otherwise interferes with performance of
work authorized under this program;
6. Certify that applicant understands and acknowledges that the
Backwater Valve Program includes only installation of a backwater
valve, including associated digging and the replacement of: a)
concrete basement floor, or b) dirt and seeding of affected areas,
and does not include replacement of furniture, decorative fixtures,
carpeting or other floor coverings, landscaping or ornamental
structures but only replacement of structural facilities required for
safe occupancy of a residence or safe use of property;
7. Certify that applicant understands and assumes full responsibility
for maintenance and operation of the installed backwater valve
including required inspections by trained personnel; and
8. Execute a release in a form approved by the City Attorney resolving
any pending sewer backup claims and foreclosing the filing of
future sewer back up claims.
A. The applicant shall submit at least three (3) bids to the Director. The
amount which the City shall reimburse to the applicant shall be eighty
percent (80%) of the bid amount submitted by the lowest responsible
bidder. In any case, the City's reimbursement obligations shall not
exceed three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00).
B. In determining "lowest responsible bidder," in addition to price, the
Director shall consider: the ability, capacity or skill of the bidder to
perform the contract or provide the service required; whether the
bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly or
within the time specified without delay or interference; the character,
integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder;
the quality of performance of previous contracts or services; the
previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and
Section
705.380
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
705.400
100:1710
Section 705.410. Appropriation Condition Precedent to Program
Availability. [Ord. No. 16-113 §1, 5-17-2016]
Administration of the Backwater Valve Program shall be contingent upon
the annual appropriation of funds for administration of the program in the
City's budget.
Section 705.420. Program Rules and Limitations. [Ord. No. 16-113
§1, 5-17-2016]
The Director with the approval of the Mayor shall promulgate rules and
regulations to carry out the purposes and intent of the Backwater Valve
Program to protect the public safety, health and welfare and to administer
the program in an effective, efficient and timely manner.
ordinances relating to the contract or service; the sufficiency of the
financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract
or provide the services; the quality, availability of the supplies or
contractual services to the particular use required; the ability of the
bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the
subject to the contract; and the number and scope of conditions
attached to the bid.
Section
705.400
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
705.420
100:1711
Chapter 710
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEMS
Section
705.420
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
705.420
100:1712
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 710.010. Purpose And Policy. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1,
9-20-2017610]
A. This Chapter sets forth uniform requirements for Users of the Publicly
Owned Treatment Works for the City of St. Charles (the City) and
enables the City to comply with all applicable State and Federal laws
including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code Sections 1251 et
seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code of Federal
Regulations Part 403).
B. The objectives of this Chapter are:
1. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works that will interfere with its operation;
2. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works that will pass through the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or
otherwise be incompatible with the Publicly Owned Treatment
Works;
3. To protect both Publicly Owned Treatment Works personnel who
may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their
employment and the general public;
4. To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and
sludge from the Publicly Owned Treatment Works;
5. To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance, and improvement of the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works; and
6. To enable the City to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal
requirements, and any other Federal or State laws to which the
Publicly Owned Treatment Works is subject.
C. This Chapter shall apply to all Users of the Publicly Owned Treatment
Works. This Chapter authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge
permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement
activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires User
reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable
distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.
D. This Chapter is a supplement to Sections 705.180, et seq., and all
amendments thereto. All existing permits and connections are hereby
incorporated. All other Chapters and parts of other Chapters
610. Editor's Note: Former Chapter 710, Wastewater Collection And Treatment Systems,
containing Sections 710.010 through 710.760, was repealed 9-20-2017 by Ord. No. 17-184.
Section
710.010
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.010
100:1713
Section 710.020. Administration. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
Except as otherwise provided herein, the Director of Public Works shall
administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this Chapter. Any
powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Director of Public Works may
be delegated by the Director of Public Works to duly authorized personnel.
Section 710.030. Abbreviations. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
The following abbreviations, when used in this Chapter, shall have the
following designated meanings:
BOD Biochemical Oxygen Demand
BMP Best Management Practice
BMR Baseline Monitoring Report
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
CSR Code of State Regulations
CIU Categorical Industrial User
COD Chemical Oxygen Demand
EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Gpd gallons per day
IU Industrial User
mg/l milligrams per liter
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
NSCIU Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User
POTW Publicly Owned Treatment Works
RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIU Significant Industrial User
SNC Significant Non-compliance
TSS Total Suspended Solids
U.S.C. United States Code
Section 710.040. Definitions. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The State of Missouri is the Approval Authority.
inconsistent or conflicting with any part of this Chapter are hereby
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict.
Section
710.010
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
710.040
100:1714
AUTHORIZED OR DULY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER
—
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPs — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to implement the prohibitions listed in Section 710.050(A) and
(B) [40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b)]. BMPs include treatment requirements,
operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or
leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures for five (5) days at twenty degrees Centigrade (20°
C.), usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l).
CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER — An Industrial User subject to a
categorical Pretreatment Standard or categorical Standard.
If the User is a corporation:
The President, Secretary, Treasurer or a Vice President of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other
person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions
for the corporation; or
a.
The manager of one (1) or more manufacturing, production, or
operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make
management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated
facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making
major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct
other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental
compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure
that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to
gather complete and accurate information for wastewater
discharge permit requirements; and where authority to sign
documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.
b.
1.
If the User is a partnership limited liability company, or sole
proprietorship: a general partner, manager, or proprietor, respectively.
2.
If the User is a Federal, State or local governmental facility: a director
or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their
designee.
3.
The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3) above may
designate another Duly Authorized Representative if the authorization
is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to
the City.
4.
Section
710.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.040
100:1715
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL
STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category of Users and which
appear in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405 — 471.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or COD — A measure of the oxygen
required to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water.
CITY — The City of St. Charles, MO.
CITY COUNCIL — City Council of St. Charles or a Duly Authorized
Representative.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The City.
DAILY MAXIMUM — The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a
pollutant collected during a calendar day.
DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT — The maximum allowable discharge limit of
a pollutant during a calendar day. Where Daily Maximum Limits are
expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharges
over the course of the day. Where Daily Maximum Limits are expressed
in terms of concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average
measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements
taken that day.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS — The person designated by the City to
supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties
and responsibilities by this Chapter, or a Duly Authorized Representative.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional
Water Management Division Director or other duly authorized official of
said agency.
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge that is not a "New Source."
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a wastestream without
regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to
exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE — The introduction of pollutants
into the POTW from any non-domestic source.
INSTANTANEOUS LIMIT — The maximum concentration of a pollutant
allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any
discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow
rate and the duration of the sampling event.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW,
its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or
disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the City's NPDES
permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance
with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued
Section
710.040
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
710.040
100:1716
thereunder or any more stringent State or local regulations: Section 405 of
the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred
to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any State
regulations contained in any State sludge management plan prepared
pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA); the Clean
Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection,
Research and Sanctuaries Act.
LOCAL LIMIT — Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the
City upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general and
specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b).
MEDICAL WASTE — Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and
blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and
dialysis wastes.
MONTHLY AVERAGE — The sum of all "daily discharges" measured during
a calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured
during that month.
MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT — The highest allowable average of "daily
discharges" over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all "daily
discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the number of
"daily discharges" measured during that month.
NEW SOURCE —
Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is
(or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed Pretreatment Standards
under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source
if such Standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that
Section, provided that:
The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a
site at which no other source is located; or
a.
The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the
process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an Existing Source; or
b.
The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially
independent of an Existing Source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing
plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the
same general type of activity as the Existing Source, should be
considered.
c.
1.
Construction on a site at which an Existing Source is located results
in a modification rather than a New Source if the construction does
not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the
2.
Section
710.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.040
100:1717
NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used for cooling which does not
come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product, or finished product.
PASS THROUGH — A discharge of pollutant which cannot be treated
adequately by the POTW and therefore exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation
of any requirement of the City's NPDES permit, including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation.
PERSON — Any individual, limited liability company, partnership, copartnership,
firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company,
trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity or their legal
representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all Federal,
State, and local governmental entities.
pH — A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in
standard units.
POLLUTANT — Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, Medical Wastes,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural
and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH,
temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity or odor).
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants
criteria of Section (1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or
adds to existing process or production equipment.
Construction of a New Source as defined under this paragraph has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
(1)
Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or
facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or
installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
(2)
a.
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its
operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial
loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies
do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph.
b.
3.
Section
710.040
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
710.040
100:1718
into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means,
except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an
applicable Pretreatment Standard.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a User, other than a
Pretreatment Standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARD or STANDARDS — Prohibited discharge
standards, categorical Pretreatment Standards, and Local Limits.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES —
Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these
prohibitions appear in Section 710.050 of this Chapter.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW — A "treatment works,"
as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1292), which is
owned by the City. This definition includes any devices or systems used
in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage
or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances, which convey
wastewater to a treatment plant.
SEPTIC TANK WASTE — Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
SEWAGE — Human excrement and gray water (household showers,
dishwashing operations, etc.).
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — Except as provided in paragraphs (3)
and (4) of this Section, a Significant Industrial User is:
1. A User subject to categorical Pretreatment Standards; or
A User that:
Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd or
more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact
cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater);
a.
Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent
(5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic
capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or
b.
Is designed as such by the City on the basis that it has a reasonable
potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for
violating any Pretreatment Standard or Requirement.
c.
2.
The City may determine that an Industrial User subjected to categorical
Pretreatment Standards is a Non-Significant Categorical Industrial
User rather than a Significant Industrial User on a finding that the
Industrial User never discharges more than one hundred (100) gallons
per day (gpd) of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact
cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically
3.
Section
710.040
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.040
100:1719
SLUG LOAD or SLUG DISCHARGE — Any discharge at a flow rate or
concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge
standards in Section 710.050 of this Chapter. A Slug Discharge is any
Discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an
accidental spill or a non-customary batch Discharge, which has reasonable
potential to cause Interference or Pass Through, or in any other way violate
the POTW's regulations, Local Limits, or Permit conditions.
STORM WATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including
snowmelt.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS OR SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total
suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water,
wastewater, or other liquid and which is removable by laboratory filtering.
USER or INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of indirect discharge.
WASTEWATER — Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage
from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and
manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated,
which are contributed to the POTW.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT — That
portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal
sewage and industrial waste.
included in the Pretreatment Standard) and the following conditions
are met:
The Industrial User, prior to the City's finding, has consistently
complied with all applicable categorical Pretreatment Standards
and Requirements;
a.
The Industrial User annually submits the certification statement
required in Section 710.421(B) [see 40 CFR 403.12(q)], together
with any additional information necessary to support the
certification statement; and
b.
The Industrial User never discharges any untreated concentrated
wastewater.
c.
Upon a finding that a User meeting the criteria in Subsection (2) has
no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation
or for violating any Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, the City
may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition
received from an Industrial User, and in accordance with procedures in
40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such User should not be considered
a Significant Industrial User.
4.
Section
710.040
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
710.040
100:1720
ARTICLE II
General Sewer Use Requirements
Section 710.050. Prohibited Discharge Standards. [Ord. No. 17-184
§ 1, 9-20-2017]
A. General Prohibitions. No User shall introduce or cause to be introduced
into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes Pass Through
or Interference. These general prohibitions apply to all Users of the
POTW whether or not they are subjected to categorical Pretreatment
Standards or any other National, State or local Pretreatment Standards
or Requirements.
B. Specific Prohibitions. No User shall introduce or cause to be introduced
into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
1. Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°
F.) (sixty degrees Celsius (60° C.)) using the test methods specified
in 40 CFR 261.21;
2. Wastewater having a pH less than five (5.0) or more than twelve
(12.0), otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW
or equipment;
3. Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause
obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in Interference but in
no case solids greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension;
4. Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, will cause Interference with the POTW. In no case shall
a Slug Load have a flow rate or contain concentration or qualities of
pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than fifteen (15)
minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour
concentration, quantities or flow during normal operation. Where
necessary, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, the owner
shall provide, at his/her expense, such preliminary treatment as
may be necessary to:
a. Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to three hundred
(300) parts per million by weight, or
b. Reduce the suspended solids to three hundred (300) parts per
million by weight, or
c. Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or
wastes, or
d. Pay the required surcharge as established by ordinance.
Section
710.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.050
100:1721
5. Wastewater which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment
plant resulting in Interference, but in no case wastewater which
causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant
to exceed one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit (104° F.) (forty
degrees Celsius (40° C.));
6. Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
origin, in amounts that will cause Interference or Pass Through;
7. Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems;
8. Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the Director of Public Works in accordance with
Section 710.140 of this Chapter;
9. Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater
which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to
prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;
10. Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to
the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the City's NPDES
permit;
11. Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in
compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations;
12. Storm water, surface water, ground water, artisan well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
deionized water, non-contact cooling water, and unpolluted
wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the Director of Public
Works;
13. Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes; Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized
by the Director of Public Works in a wastewater discharge permit;
14. Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant's effluent to violate the NPDES permit
receiving water quality standards or fail a toxicity test;
15. Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may
cause excessive foaming in the POTW;
16. Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than one hundred (100) mg/l;
17. Wastewater causing two (2) readings on an explosion hazard meter
at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the
Section
710.050
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
710.050
100:1722
Section 710.060. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
[Ord. No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
POTW, of more than five percent (5%) or any single reading over
ten percent (10%) of the Lower Explosive Limit of the meter; or
18. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the
POTW to be in non-compliance with EPA sludge use or disposal
criteria, guidelines or regulations; any criteria, guidelines or
regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to
the RCRA, SWDA, the Clean Water Act, the Toxic Substance Control
Act or State regulations applicable to the sludge management
method being used.
C. When the Director of Public Works determines that a User(s) is
contributing to the POTW, any of the above enumerated substances in
such amounts as to interfere with the operation of the POTW, the
Director of Public Works shall advise the User(s) of the impact of the
contribution on the POTW and develop effluent limitation(s) for such
User to correct the interference with the POTW.
D. Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this Section shall
not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be
discharged to the POTW.
A. The categorical Pretreatment Standards found at 40 CFR Chapter 1,
Subchapter N, Parts 405 — 471 are hereby incorporated.
1. Where a categorical Pretreatment Standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in
wastewater, the Director of Public Works may impose equivalent
concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c).
2. When the limits in a categorical Pretreatment Standard are
expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production,
the Director of Public Works may convert the limits to equivalent
limitations expressed either in mass of pollutant discharged per
day or effluent concentration for purposes of calculating effluent
limitations applicable to individual Industrial Users.
3. When wastewater subject to a categorical Pretreatment Standard
is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same Standard, the
Director of Public Works shall impose an alternate limit using the
combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
4. A User may obtain a variance from a categorical Pretreatment
Standard if the User can prove, pursuant to the procedural and
substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its
discharge are functionally different from the factors considered by
EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard.
Section
710.050
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.070
100:1723
Section 710.070. State Pretreatment Standards. [Ord. No. 17-184
§ 1, 9-20-2017]
Users must comply with State of Missouri Pretreatment Standards codified
at 10 CSR 20-6.100.
Section 710.080. Local Limits. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
A. The Director of Public Works is authorized to establish Local Limits
pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5(c).
B. The following pollutant limits are established to protect against Pass
Through and Interference. No person shall discharge wastewater
containing in excess of the following Maximum Allowable Discharge
Limits:
1. Areas serviced by the Missouri River Wastewater Treatment
Facility:
1.00 mg/l Arsenic
0.22 mg/l Cadmium
5.0 mg/l Chromium
3.0 mg/l Copper
1.0 mg/l Cyanide
0.5 mg/l Lead
0.3 mg/l Mercury
2.0 mg/l Nickel
1.0 mg/l Silver
3.2 mg/l Zinc
2. Areas serviced by the Mississippi River Wastewater Treatment
Facility:
1.00 mg/l Arsenic
2.0 mg/l Cadmium
5.0 mg/l Chromium
3.0 mg/l Copper
1.0 mg/l Cyanide
0.5 mg/l Lead
0.3 mg/l Mercury
2.0 mg/l Nickel
1.0 mg/l Silver
5.0 mg/l Zinc
Section
710.070
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
710.080
100:1724
Section 710.090. City's Right Of Revision. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1,
9-20-2017]
The City reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater
discharge permits, more stringent Standards or Requirements on
discharges to the POTW consistent with the purpose of this Chapter.
Section 710.100. Dilution. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
No User shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt
to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless
expressly authorized by an applicable Pretreatment Standard or
Requirement. The Director of Public Works may impose mass limitations on
Users who are using dilution to meet applicable Pretreatment Standards or
Requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is
appropriate.
3. And/or water or wastes containing emulsified and grease
exceeding, on analysis, an average of one hundred (100) milligrams
per liter (eight hundred thirty-four (834) pounds per million
gallons) of hexane soluble matter. The poundage permitted per day
from any establishment may be subsequently limited depending
upon hexane soluble content of the sewage delivered to the sewage
treatment works.
4. The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is
discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances
are for "total" metal unless indicated otherwise. The Director of
Public Works may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in
place of, the concentration-based limitations above.
C. The Director of Public Works may develop Best Management Practices
(BMPs), by Ordinance or wastewater discharge permits, to implement
Local Limits and the requirements of Section 710.050.
Section
710.080
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.100
100:1725

ARTICLE III
Pretreatment Of Wastewater
Section 710.110. Pretreatment Facilities. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1,
9-20-2017]
Section 710.120. Additional Pretreatment Measures. [Ord. No.
17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
A. Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with
this Chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical
Pretreatment Standards, Local Limits and the prohibitions set out in
Section 710.050 of this Chapter within the time limitations specified by
EPA, the State, or the Director of Public Works, whichever is more
stringent.
B. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and
maintained at the User's expense. Detailed plans describing such
facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the Director of
Public Works for review, and shall be acceptable to the Director of
Public Works before such facilities are constructed. The review of such
plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the User from
the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a
discharge acceptable to the City under the provisions of this Chapter.
A. Whenever deemed necessary, the Director of Public Works may require
Users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate
that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers,
relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage
wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and require such other
conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the
User's compliance with the requirements of this Chapter.
B. The Director of Public Works may require any person discharging into
the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their
expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure
equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued
solely for flow equalization.
C. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Director of Public Works, they are necessary for the
proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease
and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for
residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity
approved by the Director of Public Works and shall comply with the
City's Oil and Grease Management Program, Article XV of this Chapter,
and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired,
in accordance with the City's Oil and Grease Management Program, by
the User at the User's expense.
Section
710.110
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.120
100:1727
Section 710.130. Accidental Discharge/Slug Control Plans. [Ord.
No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
Section 710.140. Hauled Water. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
D. Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection
meter.
A. At least once every two (2) years, the Director of Public Works shall
evaluate whether each Significant Industrial User needs an accidental
discharge/slug control plan or other action to control Slug Discharges.
The Director of Public Works may require any User to develop, submit
for approval, and implement such a plan or take such other action that
may be necessary to control Slug Discharges. Alternatively, the Director
of Public Works may develop such a plan for any User. An accidental
discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:
1. Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
2. Description of stored chemicals;
3. Procedures for immediately notifying the Director of Public Works
of any accidental or Slug Discharge, as required by Section
710.350 of this Chapter; and
4. Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or Slug
Discharge. Such procedures, include, but are not limited to,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer
of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site
runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or
equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants,
including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
A. Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations
designed by the Director of Public Works, and at such times as are
established by the Director of Public Works. Such waste shall not
violate Sections 710.050 through 710.100 of this Chapter or any other
requirements established by the City. The Director of Public Works may
require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge
permits.
B. The Director of Public Works shall require haulers of industrial waste to
obtain wastewater discharge permits. The Director of Public Works may
require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater
discharge permits. The Director of Public Works also may prohibit the
disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial
waste is subject to all other requirements of the Chapter.
Section
710.120
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
710.140
100:1728
C. Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by the Director of Public Works. No load may be discharged
without prior consent of the Director of Public Works. The Director of
Public Works may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure
compliance with applicable Standards. The Director of Public Works
may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of
any load prior to discharge.
D. Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every
load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of
the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names
and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of
waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected
waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous
wastes.
Section
710.140
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.140
100:1729

ARTICLE IV
Wastewater Discharge Permits
Section 710.150. Wastewater Analysis. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1,
9-20-2017]
When requested by the Director of Public Works, a User must submit
information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within sixty
(60) days of the request. The Director of Public Works is authorized to
prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require Users to
update this information.
Section 710.160. Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirement. [Ord.
No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
Section 710.170. Wastewater Discharge Permitting — Existing
Connections. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
Any User required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was
discharging water into the POTW prior to the effective date of this Chapter
and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within
ninety (90) days after said date, apply to the Director of Public Works for
a wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with Section 710.190 of this
Chapter except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued
by the Director of Public Works.
Section 710.180. Wastewater Discharge Permits — New
Connections. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
Any User required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to
begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit
prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application
A. No Significant Industrial User shall discharge wastewater into the
POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the
Director of Public Works, except that a Significant Industrial User that
has filed a timely application pursuant to Section 710.170 of this
Chapter may continue to discharge for the time period specified
therein.
B. The Director of Public Works may require other Users to obtain
wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of
this Chapter.
C. Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge
permit shall be deemed a violation of this Chapter and subjects the
wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in Sections
710.470 through 710.590 of this Chapter. Obtaining a wastewater
discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply
with all Federal and State Pretreatment Standards or Requirements or
with any other requirements of Federal, State and local law.
Section
710.150
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.180
100:1731
for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with Section 710.190
of this Chapter, must be filed at least ninety (90) days prior to the date upon
which any discharge will begin or recommence.
Section 710.190. Wastewater Discharge Permit Application
Contents. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
A. All Users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must
submit a permit application. The Director of Public Works may require
all Users to submit as part of an application the following information:
1. Identifying Information.
a. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operator and owner.
b. Contact information, including description of activities,
facilities, and plant production processes on the premise.
2. Environmental Permits. A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility.
3. Description Of Operations.
a. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production
(including each product produced by type, amount, processes,
and rate of production), and standard industrial classifications
of the operation(s) carried out by such User. This description
should include a schematic process diagram, which indicates
points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.
b. Types of waste generated, and a list of all raw materials and
chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could
accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW.
c. Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and
proposed or actual hours of operation.
d. Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day).
e. Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and
details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by
size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge,
showing all pipe sizes, manholes and location of sanitary and
storm sewers leaving the building or premises, together with
all connections to lateral sanitary and storm sewers.
4. Time and duration of discharges.
5. The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit.
6. Flow Measurement. Information showing the measured average
daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from
Section
710.180
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
710.190
100:1732
Section 710.200. Application Signatories And Certification. [Ord.
No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to
allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in Section
710.060(C)(40 CFR 403.6(e)).
7. Measurements Of Pollutants.
a. The categorical Pretreatment Standards applicable to each
regulated process and any new categorically regulated
processes for Existing Sources.
b. The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration, and/or mass, where required by the Standard or
by the Director of Public Works, of regulated pollutants in the
discharge from each regulated process.
c. Instantaneous, Daily Maximum, and long-term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported.
d. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and
shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in
Section 710.390 of this Chapter. Where the Standard requires
compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the
User shall submit documentation as required by the Director of
Public Works or the applicable Standards to determine
compliance with the Standard.
e. Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures
set out in Section 710.400 of this Chapter.
8. Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the Director
of Public Works to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit
application.
B. A permit fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year must
accompany the permit application. Not-for-profit charitable and
religious organizations, as well as educational institutions, are exempt
from fees associated with the permit application.
C. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be
returned to the User for revision.
A. All wastewater discharge permit applications, User reports and
certification statements must be signed by an Authorized
Representative of the User and contain the certification statement in
Section 710.421(A).
B. If the designation of an Authorized Representative is no longer accurate
because a different individual or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, a new written authorization
Section
710.190
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.200
100:1733
Section 710.210. Wastewater Discharge Permit Decisions. [Ord. No.
17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
satisfying the requirements of this Section must be submitted to the
Director of Public Works prior to or together with any reports to be
signed by an Authorized Representative.
C. A facility determines to be a Non-Significant Categorical User by the
Director of Public Works pursuant to Section 710.040 must annually
submit the signed certification statement in Section 710.421(B).
A. The Director of Public Works will evaluate the data furnished by the
User and may require additional information. Within ninety (90) days of
receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the
Director of Public Works will determine whether or not to issue a
wastewater discharge permit. The Director of Public Works may deny
any application for a wastewater discharge permit.
B. No wastewater discharge permit shall be issued by the POTW to any
person or Industrial User whose discharge of material to sewers,
whether shown upon his/her application or determination after
inspection and testing conducted by the POTW, is not in conformity with
POTW ordinances and regulations or whose application is incomplete or
does not comply with the requirements of Sections 710.150 through
710.210 of this Chapter. The POTW shall state the reason or reasons for
denial in writing, which shall be mailed or personally delivered to the
applicant within ten (10) days after denial.
Section
710.200
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
710.210
100:1734
ARTICLE V
Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance
Section 710.220. Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration. [Ord. No.
17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period,
not to exceed five (5) years from the effective date of the permit. A
wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five (5)
years, at the discretion of the Director of Public Works. Each wastewater
discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.
Section 710.230. Wastewater Discharge Permit Contents. [Ord. No.
17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
A. A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are
deemed reasonably necessary by the Director of Public Works to
prevent Pass Through or Interference, protect the quality of the water
body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and
safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against
damage to the POTW.
1. Wastewater discharge permits must contain:
a. A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit
issuance date, expiration date and effective date;
b. A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable
without prior notification to the City in
accordance with Section 710.260 of this Chapter and
provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a
copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;
c. Effluent limits, including Best Management Practices, based
on applicable Pretreatment Standards;
d. Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping
requirements. These requirements shall include an
identification of pollutants (or Best Management Practice) to
be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and
sample type based on Federal, State and local law;
e. A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of Pretreatment Standards and Requirements, and
any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not
extend the time for compliance beyond that required by
applicable Federal, State or local law;
f. Requirements to control Slug Discharge, if determined by the
Director of Public Works to be necessary.
Section
710.220
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.230
100:1735
Section 710.240. Wastewater Discharge Permit Appeals. [Ord. No.
17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
2. Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited
to, the following conditions:
a. Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time
of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and
equalization;
b. Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control or construction of appropriate containment
devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the
introduction of pollutants into the treatment works;
c. Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plans or other special conditions including
management practices necessary to adequately prevent
accidental, unanticipated or non-routine discharges;
d. Development and implementation of waste minimization plans
to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
e. The unit charge or schedule of User charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharge to the POTW;
f. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection
and sampling facilities and equipment, including flow
measuring devices;
g. A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge
permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for
compliance with all applicable Federal and State Pretreatment
Standards, including those which become effective during the
term of the wastewater discharge permit; and
h. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Director of
Public Works to ensure compliance with this Chapter, and
State and Federal laws, rules and regulations.
A. The Director of Public Works shall provide public notice in a newspaper
of general circulation within the City of the issuance of a wastewater
discharge permit. Any person, including the User, may petition the
Director of Public Works to reconsider the terms of a wastewater
discharge permit within thirty (30) days of notice of its issuance.
1. Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be
a waiver of the administrative appeal.
2. In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this
objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in
the wastewater discharge permit.
Section
710.230
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
710.240
100:1736
Section 710.250. Wastewater Discharge Permit Modification. [Ord.
No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
Section 710.260. Wastewater Discharge Permit Transfer. [Ord. No.
17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
3. The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
4. If the Director of Public Works fails to act within thirty (30) days, a
request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied.
Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to
issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater
discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions
for purposes of judicial review.
A. The Director of Public Works may modify a wastewater discharge
permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following
reasons:
1. To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State or local
Pretreatment Standards or Requirements;
2. To address significant alterations or additions to the User's
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the
time of wastewater discharge permit issuance;
3. A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
4. Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat
to the City's POTW, POTW personnel, or the receiving waters;
5. Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit;
6. Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required
reporting;
7. Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical Pretreatment
Standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
8. To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater
discharge permit; or
9. To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new
owner or operator where requested in accordance with Section
710.260.
A. Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or
operator only if the permittee gives at least thirty (30) days' advance
notice to the Director of Public Works and the Director of Public Works
Section
710.240
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.260
100:1737
Section 710.270. Wastewater Discharge Permit Revocation. [Ord.
No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the
Director of Public Works must include a written certification by the new
owner or operator which:
1. States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent
to change the facility's operations and processes;
2. Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
3. Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
wastewater discharge permit.
B. Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater
discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer.
A. The Director of Public Works or City Council may revoke a wastewater
discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the
following reasons:
1. Failure to notify the Director of Public Works of significant changes
to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
2. Failure to provide prior notification to the Director of Public Works
of changed conditions pursuant to Section 710.340 of this Chapter;
3. Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application;
4. Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification statements;
5. Tampering with monitoring equipment;
6. Refusing to allow the Director of Public Works timely access to the
facility premises and records;
7. Failure to meet effluent limitations;
8. Failure to pay fines;
9. Failure to pay sewer charges;
10. Failure to meet compliance schedules;
11. Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application;
12. Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility; or
13. Violation of any Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this Chapter.
Section
710.260
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
710.270
100:1738
Section 710.280. Wastewater Discharge Permit Reissuance. [Ord.
No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
A User with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for
wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit
application, in accordance with Section 710.190 of this Chapter, a minimum
of one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the expiration of the User's
existing wastewater discharge permit.
Section 710.290. Regulation Of Waste Received From Other
Jurisdictions. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
This Chapter shall apply to the POTW and all Users outside of the
jurisdictional boundaries of the POTW who are, by contract or agreement
with the POTW, Users of the POTW.
B. Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of
operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge
permits issued to a particular User are void upon the issuance of a new
wastewater discharge permit to that User.
Section
710.270
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.290
100:1739

ARTICLE VI
Reporting Requirements
Section 710.300. Baseline Monitoring Reports. [Ord. No. 17-184
§ 1, 9-20-2017]
A. Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a
categorical Pretreatment Standard, or the final administrative decision
on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is
later, existing Categorical Industrial Users currently discharging to or
scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the Director of
Public Works a report which contains the information listed in
Subsection (B) below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement
of their discharge, New Sources, and sources that become Categorical
Industrial Users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable
categorical Standard, shall submit to the Director of Public Works a
report which contains the information listed in Subsection (B) below. A
New Source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to
meet applicable categorical Standards. A New Source also shall give
estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be
discharged.
B. Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.
1. All information required in Section 710.190(A)(1)(a), Section
710.190(A)(2), Section 710.190(A)(3)(a), and Section
710.190(A)(6).
2. Measurement Of Pollutants.
a. The User shall provide the information required in Section
710.190(A)(7)(a) through (d).
b. The User shall take a minimum of one (1) representative
sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the
requirements of this Subsection.
c. Samples should be taken immediately downstream from
pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately
downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment
exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated
wastewater prior to pretreatment the User should measure the
flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the
combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e) to evaluate
compliance with the Pretreatment Standards. Where an
alternative concentration or mass limit has been calculated in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) this adjusted limit along with
supporting data shall be submitted to the Control Authority.
d. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
Section 710.390.
Section
710.300
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.300
100:1741
Section 710.310. Compliance Schedule Progress Reports. [Ord. No.
17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
e. The Director of Public Works may allow the submission of a
baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as the
data provides information sufficient to determine the need for
industrial pretreatment measures.
f. The baseline report shall indicate the time, date, and place of
sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such
sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles
and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW.
3. Compliance Certification. A statement, reviewed by the User's
Authorized Representative as defined in Section 710.040 and
certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
Pretreatment Standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if
not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or
additional pretreatment is required to meet the Pretreatment
Standards and Requirements.
4. Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will
be required to meet the Pretreatment Standards, the shortest
schedule by which the User will provide such additional
pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The completion date
in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable Pretreatment Standard. A
compliance schedule pursuant to this Section must meet the
requirements set out in Section 710.310 of this Chapter.
5. Signature And Report Certification. All baseline monitoring reports
must be certified in accordance with Section 710.421(A) of this
Chapter and signed by an Authorized Representative as defined in
Section 710.040.
A. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule
required by Section 710.300(B)(4):
1. The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to
the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required
for the User to meet the applicable Pretreatment Standards (such
events, include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for
major components, commencing and completing construction, and
beginning and conducting routine operation);
2. No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months;
3. The User shall submit a progress report to the Director of Public
Works no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the
schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum,
Section
710.300
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
710.310
100:1742
Section 710.320. Reports On Compliance With Categorical
Pretreatment Standard Deadline. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical Pretreatment Standards, or in the case of a New
Source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the
POTW, any User subject to such Pretreatment Standards and Requirements
shall submit to the Director of Public Works a report containing the
information described in Section 710.190(A)(6) and (7) and 710.300(B)(2)
of this Chapter. For Users subject to equivalent mass or concentration
limits established in accordance with the procedures in Section 710.060,
this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the User's long-term
production rate. For all other Users subject to categorical Pretreatment
Standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit
of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include
the User's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All
compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section
710.421(A) of this Chapter. All sampling will be done in conformance with
Section 710.400.
Section 710.330. Periodic Compliance Reports. [Ord. No. 17-184
§ 1, 9-20-2017]
whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the
reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by
the User to return to the established schedule; and
4. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such
progress reports to the Director of Public Works.
A. All Significant Industrial Users shall, at a frequency determined by the
Director of Public Works but in no case less than twice per year (in June
and December), submit a report indicating the nature and
concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by
Pretreatment Standards and the measured or estimated average and
maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the
Pretreatment Standard requires compliance with a Best Management
Practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the User must
submit documentation required by the Director of Public Works or the
Pretreatment Standard necessary to determine the compliance status
of the User. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and
certified in accordance with Section 710.421(A) of the Chapter.
B. All wastewater samples must be representative of the User's discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at
all times. The failure of a User to keep its monitoring facility in good
working order shall not be grounds for the User to claim that sample
results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
Section
710.310
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.330
100:1743
Section 710.340. Reports Of Changed Conditions. [Ord. No. 17-184
§ 1, 9-20-2017]
Section 710.350. Reports Of Potential Problems. [Ord. No. 17-184
§ 1, 9-20-2017]
C. If a User subject to the reporting requirement in this Section monitors
any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more
frequently than required by the Director of Public Works, using the
procedures described in Section 710.400 of this Chapter, the results of
this monitoring shall be included in the report.
A. Each User must notify the Director of Public Works of any planned
significant changes to the User's operations or system which might
alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least ninety (90)
days before the change.
1. The Director of Public Works may require the User to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed
condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge
permit application under Section 710.190 of this Chapter.
2. The Director of Public Works may issue a wastewater discharge
permit under Section 710.210 of this Chapter or modify an existing
wastewater discharge permit under Section 710.250 of this
Chapter in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed
conditions.
A. In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental
discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a noncustomary
batch discharge, a Slug Discharge or Slug Load, that may
cause potential problems for the POTW, the User shall immediately
telephone and notify the Director of Public Works of the incident. This
notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste,
concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the
User.
B. Within five (5) days following such discharge, the User shall, unless
waived by the Director of Public Works, submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken
by the User to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification
shall not relieve the User of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability
which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural
resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such
notification relieve the User of any fines, penalties or other liability
which may be imposed pursuant to this Chapter.
C. A notice shall be permanently posted on the User's bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of
a discharge described in Subsection (A) above. Employers shall ensure
Section
710.330
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
710.350
100:1744
Section 710.360. Reports From Unpermitted Users. [Ord. No.
17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
All Users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall
provide appropriate reports to the Director of Public Works as the Director
of Public Works may require.
Section 710.370. Notice Of Violation/Repeat Sampling And
Reporting. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
If sampling performed by a User indicates a violation, the User must notify
the Director of Public Works within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming
aware of the violation. The User shall also repeat the sampling and analysis
and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the Director of Public Works
within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. The User is not
required to resample if the Director of Public Works monitors at the User's
facility at least once a month or if the Director of Public Works samples
between the User's initial sampling and when the User receives the result
of this sampling.
Section 710.380. Notification Of The Discharge Of Hazardous
Waste. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are
advised of the emergency notification procedure.
D. Significant Industrial Users are required to notify the Director of Public
Works immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential
for a Slug Discharge.
A. Any User who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify
the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and
State hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the
POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a
hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include
the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the
EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous,
batch, or other). If the User discharges more than one hundred (100)
kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the
notification also shall contain the following information to the extent
such information is known and readily available to the User: an
identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an
estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the
wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation
of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be
discharged during the following twelve (12) months. All notifications
must take place no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the
discharge commences. Any notification under this Subsection need be
submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However,
notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under Section
Section
710.350
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.380
100:1745
Section 710.390. Analytical Requirements. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1,
9-20-2017]
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as
part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part
136 and amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable
categorical Pretreatment Standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain
sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where
the EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques
are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall
be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable
sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the
Director of Public Works or other parties approved by EPA.
710.340 of this Chapter. The notification requirement in this Section
does not apply to pollutants already reported by Users subject to
categorical Pretreatment Standards under the self-monitoring
requirements of Sections 710.300, 710.320, and 710.330 of this
Chapter.
B. Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of Subsection (A) above
during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen
(15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e).
Discharge of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of non-acute hazardous
wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous
wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a onetime
notification. Subsequent months during which the User discharges
more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require
additional notification.
C. In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) identifying additional
characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance
as a hazardous waste, the User must notify the Director of Public
Works, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director,
and State hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such
substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such
regulations.
D. In the case of any notification made under this Section, the User shall
certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity
of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.
E. This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this Chapter, a permit issued
thereunder, or any applicable Federal or State law.
Section
710.380
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
710.400
100:1746
Section 710.400. Sample Collection. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1,
9-20-2017]
Section 710.410. Date Of Receipt Of Reports. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1,
9-20-2017]
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.
A. Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on
data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed
during the period covered by the report, based on data that is
representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period.
1. Except as indicated in Subsection (B) and (C) below, the User must
collect wastewater samples using twenty-four-hour flowproportional
composite collection techniques, unless timeproportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by
the Director of Public Works. Where time-proportional or grab
sampling is authorized by the Director of Public Works, the samples
must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including
appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and
appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during
a twenty-four-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis
as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides, the samples may
be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics
and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the
laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by
the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA
methodologies may be authorized by the City, as appropriate. In
addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with
Instantaneous Limits.
2. Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total
phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained
using grab collection techniques.
3. For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and
ninety-day compliance reports required in Section 710.300 and
710.320 [40 CFR 403.12(b) and (d)], a minimum of four (4) grab
samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and
grease, sulfide, and volatile organic compounds for facilities for
which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which
historical sampling data are available, the Director of Public Works
may authorize a lower minimum. For reports required by Section
710.330 [40 CFR 403.12(e) and 403.12(h)], the Industrial User is
required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess
and assure compliance with applicable Pretreatment Standards
and Requirements.
Section
710.400
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.420
100:1747
Section 710.420. Record Keeping. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this Chapter shall retain,
and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information
obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this Chapter,
and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring
activities undertaken by the User independent of such requirements, and
documentation associated with Best Management Practices established
under Section 710.180(C). Records shall include the date, exact place,
method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the
samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses;
the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses.
These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years.
This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation
concerning the User or the City, or where the User has been specifically
notified of a longer retention period by the Director of Public Works.
Section 710.421. Certification Statement. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1,
9-20-2017]
A. Certification Of Permit Applications, User Reports And Initial
Monitoring Waiver. The following certification statement is required to
be signed and submitted by Users submitting permit applications in
accordance with Section 710.200; Users submitting baseline
monitoring reports under Section 710.300(B)(5); Users submitting
reports on compliance with the categorical Pretreatment Standard
deadlines under Section 710.320; and Users submitting periodic
compliance reports required by Section 710.330. The following
certification statement must be signed by an Authorized Representative
as defined in Section 710.040:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with
a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather
and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the
person or persons who manage the system or those persons directly
responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is,
to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete.
I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false
information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for
knowing violations."
B. Annual Certification For Non-Significant Categorical Industrial Users. A
facility determined to be a Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User
by the Director of Public Works pursuant to Section 710.040 and
710.200(C) must annually submit the following certification statement
signed in accordance with the signatory requirements in 710.040. This
certification must accompany an alternative report required by the
Director of Public Works:
Section
710.420
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
710.421
100:1748
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible
for managing compliance with the categorical Pretreatment Standards
under 40 CFR _____, I certify that, to the best of knowledge and belief
that during the period from _____, _____ to _____, _____ [months, days,
year]:
(a) The facility described as __________
[facility name] met the definition of a Non-Significant Categorical
Industrial User as described in 710.040;
(b) The facility complied with all applicable Pretreatment Standards
and requirements during this reporting period; and
(c) The facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total
categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting
period.
This compliance certification is based on the following information.
Section
710.421
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.421
100:1749

ARTICLE VII
Compliance Monitoring
Section 710.430. Right Of Entry — Inspection And Sampling. [Ord.
No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
Section 710.440. Search Warrants. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
If the Director of Public Works has been refused access to a building,
structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this Chapter, or
that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection
and sampling program of the City designed to verify compliance with this
Chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall
public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the Director of
A. The Director of Public Works shall have the right to enter the premises
of any User to determine whether the User is complying with all
requirements of this Chapter and any wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the Director of Public Works
ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of
any additional duties.
1. Where a User has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the User
shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so
that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the Director of
Public Works will be permitted to enter without delay for the
purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
2. The Director of Public Works shall have the right to set up on the
User's property, or require installation of, such devices as are
necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the User's
operations.
3. The Director of Public Works may require the User to install
monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and
proper operating condition by the User at its own expense. All
devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be
calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
4. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the User at the written or verbal request of the
Director of Public Works and shall not be replaced. The costs of
clearing such access shall be borne by the User.
5. Unreasonable delays in allowing the Director of Public Works
access to the User's premises shall be a violation of this Chapter.
Section
710.430
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.440
100:1751
Public Works may seek issuance of a search warrant from the Circuit Court
of St. Charles County or Municipal Court of the City of Saint Charles.
Section
710.440
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
710.440
100:1752
ARTICLE VIII
Confidential Information
Section 710.450. Confidential Information. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1,
9-20-2017]
Information and data on a User obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and
monitoring programs, and from the Director of Public Works' inspection
and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction,
unless the User specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Director of Public Works that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production
entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable State law. Any such
request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or
data. When requested and demonstrated by the User furnishing a report
that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report
which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available
immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the
NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not
be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public
without restriction.
Section
710.450
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.450
100:1753

ARTICLE IX
Publication Of Users In Significant Non-Compliance
Section 710.460. Publication Of Users In Significant Non-
Compliance. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
A. The Director of Public Works shall publish annually, in a newspaper of
general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the
jurisdictions served by the POTW, a list of Users which, during the
previous twelve (12) months, were in Significant Non-Compliance with
applicable Pretreatment Standards and Requirements. The term
"Significant Non-Compliance" shall be applicable to all Significant
Industrial Users (or any other Industrial User that violates Subsections
(3), (4), or (8) below) and shall mean:
1. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of wastewater
measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any
magnitude) a numeric Pretreatment Standard or Requirement,
including Instantaneous Limits;
2. Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of wastewater
measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a sixmonth
period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric
Pretreatment Standard or Requirement including Instantaneous
Limits multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats,
oils and grease and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
3. Any other discharge violation of a Pretreatment Standard or
Requirement that the Director of Public Works determines has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges,
Interference or Pass Through, including endangering the health of
POTW personnel or the general public;
4. Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent
endangerment to the public or to the environment or has resulted
in the Director of Public Works' exercise of its emergency authority
to halt or prevent such a discharge;
5. Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater
discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
6. Failure to provide within forty-five (45) days after the due date any
required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on
compliance with categorical Pretreatment Standard deadlines,
periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;
7. Failure to accurately report non-compliance; or
Section
710.460
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.460
100:1755
8. Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of Best
Management Practices, which the Director of Public Works
determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of
the local pretreatment program.
Section
710.460
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
710.460
100:1756
ARTICLE X
Administrative Enforcement Remedies
Section 710.470. Notification Of Violation. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1,
9-20-2017]
When the Director of Public Works has probable cause to believe that a
User has violated or continues to violate any provision of this Chapter,
a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, the Director of Public Works may
serve upon that User a written Notice of Violation. Within fifteen (15) days
of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan
for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific
required actions, shall be submitted by the User to the Director of Public
Works. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the User of liability for
any violations occurring before or after receipt of the Notice of Violation.
Nothing in this Section shall limit the authority of the Director of Public
Works to take any action, including emergency actions or any other
enforcement action, without first issuing a Notice of Violation.
Section 710.480. Consent Orders. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
The City may enter into Consent Orders, assurances of compliance, or other
similar documents establishing an agreement with any User responsible for
non-compliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by
the User to correct the non-compliance within a time period specified by
the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the
administrative orders issued pursuant to Sections 710.500 and 710.510 of
this Chapter and shall be judicially enforceable.
Section 710.490. Show Cause Hearing. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1,
9-20-2017]
A. The City may order a User which has violated or continues to violate
any provision of this Chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement,
to appear before the City and show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the
User specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed
enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the
User show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be
taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10)
days prior to hearing. Such notice may be served on any Authorized
Representative of the User.
B. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the User.
Section
710.470
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.500
100:1757
Section 710.500. Compliance Orders. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1,
9-20-2017]
Section 710.510. Cease And Desist Orders. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1,
9-20-2017]
Section 710.520. Administrative Fines. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1,
9-20-2017]
A. When the City finds that a User has violated or continues to violate any
provision of this Chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement,
the City may issue an order to the User responsible for the discharge
directing that the User come into compliance within a specified time. If
the User does not come into compliance within the time provided,
sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities,
devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly
operated.
B. Compliance orders in addition, may contain other requirements to
address the non-compliance, including additional self-monitoring and
management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants
discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the
deadline for compliance established for a Pretreatment Standard or
Requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the User of liability
for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a
compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking
any other action against the User.
A. When the Director of Public Works finds that a User has violated or
continues to violate any provision of this Chapter, a wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment
Standard or Requirement, or that the User's past violations are likely to
recur, the City may issue an order to the User directing it to cease and
desist all such violations and directing the User to:
1. Immediately comply with all requirements; and
2. Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
B. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the User.
A. When the Director of Public Works finds that a User has violated or
continues to violate any provision of this Chapter, a wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment
Standard or Requirement, the Director of Public Works may fine such
User in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
Such violations shall be assessed on a per-violation, per-day basis. In
Section
710.500
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
710.520
100:1758
Section 710.530. Emergency Suspensions. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1,
9-20-2017]
the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines
shall be assessed for each day during the period of the violation.
B. A late fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) will be imposed on any User that has
failed to submit any requirement of this Chapter within ten (10) days of
the due date. A re-inspection fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) will be
charged to any User whom, upon inspection by the City, was found to
have an unsatisfactory feature requiring additional inspections by the
City to confirm compliance. All other Administrative Fines shall take
into consideration the type, severity, and number of violations, as well
as the duration of non-compliance.
C. Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the User.
A. The Director of Public Works may immediately suspend a User's
discharge, after notifying the User, whenever such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably
appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment
to the health or welfare of persons. The Director of Public Works may
also immediately suspend a User's discharge, after notice and
opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of
the POTW or which presents or may present an endangerment to the
environment.
1. Any User notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a User's failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
Director of Public Works may take such steps as deemed necessary,
including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent
or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or
endangerment to any individuals. The Director of Public Works may
allow the User to recommence its discharge when the User has
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works
that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the
termination proceedings in Section 710.540 of this Chapter are
initiated against the User.
2. A User that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and
the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the
Director of Public Works prior to the date of any show cause or
termination hearing under Sections 710.490 or 710.540 of this
Chapter.
B. Nothing in this Section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior
to any Emergency Suspension under this Section.
Section
710.520
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.540
100:1759
Section 710.540. Termination of Discharge. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1,
9-20-2017]
A. In addition to the provisions in Section 710.270 of this Chapter, any
User who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge
termination:
1. Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
2. Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
3. Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
4. Refusal of reasonable access to the User's premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
5. Violation of the pretreatment standards in Sections 710.050
through 710.100 of this Chapter.
B. Such User will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge
and be offered an opportunity to show cause under Section 710.490 of
this Chapter why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of
this option by the City shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking
any other action against the User.
Section
710.540
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
710.540
100:1760
ARTICLE XI
Judicial Enforcement Remedies
Section 710.550. Injunctive Relief. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
When the Director of Public Works has probable cause to believe that a
User has violated or continues to violate any provision of this Chapter,
a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, the City may petition the Circuit
Court of St. Charles County or Municipal Court of the City of Saint Charles
for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate,
which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater
discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this Chapter
on activities of the User. The City may also seek such other action as is
appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the
User to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief
shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against a User.
Section 710.560. Civil Penalties. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
Section 710.570. Criminal Prosecution. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1,
9-20-2017]
A. A User who has violated or continues to violate any provision of this
Chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or
any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement shall be liable to the
City for a maximum civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term
average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the
period of the violation.
B. The City may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other
expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling
and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred
by the City.
C. In determining the amount of civil liability, the Court shall take into
account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of
the violation, any economic benefit gained through the User's violation,
corrective actions by the User, the compliance history of the User, and
any other factor as justice requires.
D. Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a User.
A. A User who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this
Chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or
any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more
Section
710.550
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.570
100:1761
Section 710.580. Remedies Non-Exclusive. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1,
9-20-2017]
The remedies provided for in this Chapter are not exclusive. The City
may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant
User. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in
accordance with the City's Enforcement Response Plan. However, the City
may take other action against any User when the circumstances warrant.
Further, the Director of Public Works is empowered to take more than one
(1) enforcement action against any non-compliant User.
than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day, or
imprisonment for not more than three (3) months, or both.
B. A User who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the
POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of at
least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or be subject to imprisonment
for not more than three (3) months, or both. This penalty shall be in
addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property
damage available under State law.
C. A User who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or
certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other
documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this
Chapter, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or
who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required under this Chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than
three (3) months, or both.
D. In the event of a second conviction, a User shall be punished by a fine of
not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day,
or imprisonment for not more than three (3) months, or both.
Section
710.570
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
710.580
100:1762
ARTICLE XII
Supplemental Enforcement Action
Section 710.590. Water Supply Severance. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1,
9-20-2017; Ord. No. 18-053, 3-6-2018]
Whenever a User has violated or continues to violate any provision of
this Chapter, Chapter 705, a wastewater discharge permit, order issued
hereunder, any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, or discharges
sewage into the storm water system, water service to the User may be
severed. Service will recommence, at the User's expense, only after the
User has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.
Section
710.590
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.590
100:1763

ARTICLE XIII
Affirmative Defenses To Discharge Violations
Section 710.600. Upset. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
A. For the purposes of this Section, "upset" means an exceptional incident
in which there is unintentional and temporary non-compliance with
categorical Pretreatment Standards because of factors beyond the
reasonable control of the User. An upset does not include noncompliance
to the extent caused by operational error, improperly
designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of
preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
B. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for
non-compliance with categorical Pretreatment Standards if the
requirements of Subsection (C), below, are met.
C. A User who desires to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating
logs, or other relevant evidence that:
1. An upset occurred and the User can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
2. The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation
and maintenance procedures; and
3. The User has submitted the following information to the Director of
Public Works within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of
the upset [if this information is provided orally, a written
submission must be provided within five (5) days]:
a. A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;
b. The period of non-compliance, including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the non-compliance is
expected to continue; and
c. Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the non-compliance.
D. In any enforcement proceeding, the User seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
E. Users shall have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance
with categorical Pretreatment Standards.
F. Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary
to maintain compliance with categorical Pretreatment Standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
Section
710.600
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.600
100:1765
Section 710.610. Bypass. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This
requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the
primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or
fails.
A. For the purposes of this Section.
1. The word "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of
wastestreams from any portion of a User's treatment facility.
2. The words "severe property damage" means substantial physical
damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which
causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent
loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to
occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not
mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
B. A User may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
Pretreatment Standards or Requirements to be violated, but only if it
also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These
bypasses are not subject to the provision of Subsections (C) and (D) of
this Section.
C. Bypass Notifications.
1. If a User knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit
prior notice to the Director of Public Works, at least ten (10) days
before the date of the bypass, if possible.
2. A User shall submit oral notice to the Director of Public Works of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable Pretreatment
Standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes
aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided
within five (5) days of the time the User becomes aware of the
bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the
bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact
dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the
anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or
planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the
bypass. The Director of Public Works may waive the written report
on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within
twenty-four (24) hours.
D. Bypass.
1. Bypass is prohibited, and the Director of Public Works may take an
enforcement action against a User for a bypass, unless:
a. Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury,
or severe property damage;
Section
710.600
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
710.610
100:1766
Section 710.620. through Section 710.650. (Reserved)
b. There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated
wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment
downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up
equipment should have been installed in the exercise of
reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which
occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventive maintenance; and
c. The User submitted notices as required under Subsection (C)
of this Section.
2. The Director of Public Works may approve an anticipated bypass,
after considering its adverse effects, if the Director of Public Works
determines that it will meet the three (3) conditions listed in
Subsection (D)(1) of this Section.
Section
710.610
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.620
100:1767

ARTICLE XIV
Fats, Oil And Grease
Section 710.660. Scope And Purpose. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1,
9-20-2017]
To aid in the prevention of sanitary sewer blockages and obstructions
from contributions and accumulation of fats, oils and greases into the
Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) from industrial or commercial
establishments, particularly food preparation and serving facilities.
Section 710.670. Definitions. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
For purposes of this Article, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
FATS, OILS AND GREASES (FOG) — Organic polar compounds derived from
animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride
molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using
analytical test procedures established in the United States Code of Federal
Regulations 40 CFR 136, as may be amended from time to time. All are
sometimes referred to herein as grease or greases.
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS (FSE) — Those establishments
primarily engaged in activities of preparing, serving or otherwise making
available for consumption by the public such as restaurant, commercial
kitchen, caterer, hotel, school, hospital, prison, correctional facility and
care institution. These establishments use one (1) or more of the following
preparation activities: cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all methods),
grilling, sauteing, rotisserie cooking, broiling (all methods), boiling,
blanching, roasting, toasting or poaching. Non-cooking establishments that
are primarily engaged in the preparation of precooked foodstuffs that do
not require any form of cooking are considered food service establishments.
These include cold dairy and frozen foodstuffs preparation and serving
establishments. Also included are infrared heating, searing, barbecuing and
any other food preparation activity that produces a hot, non-drinkable food
product in or on a receptacle that requires washing.
GREASE INTERCEPTOR (INTERCEPTOR) — A structure or device designed
for the purpose of removing and preventing fats, oils and grease from
entering the POTW. These devices are often below-ground units in outside
areas and are built as two (2) or three (3) chamber baffled tanks.
GREASE TRAP (TRAP) — A device for separating and retaining waterborne
greases and grease complexes prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and
entering the POTW. Such traps are typically compact under-the-sink units
that are near food preparation areas.
MINIMUM DESIGN CAPABILITY — The design features of a grease
interceptor and its ability or volume required to effectively intercept and
retain greases from grease-laden wastewaters discharged to the POTW.
Section
710.660
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.670
100:1769
POTW (PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS) — A treatment works as
defined by Section 212 of the EPA Clean Water Act. This definition includes
any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling
and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any
conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment facility.
SEPARATOR — A device designed and installed to separate and retain for
removal, by automatic or manual means, deleterious or undesirable matter
from normal wastes while permitting normal sewage or waste to discharge
to the POTW by gravity. (Vessel may also be referred to as a settling tank or
grit trap.)
USER — Any person, including those located outside the jurisdictional limits
of the City, who contributes, causes or permits the contribution or discharge
of wastewater into the POTW.
Section 710.680. Wastewater Discharge Limitations. [Ord. No.
17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
No User shall allow wastewater discharge concentration from subject
grease interceptor, oil and water separator, grease trap or alternative
pretreatment technology to exceed one hundred (100) milligrams per liter,
as determined using protocols specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate
EPA guidance.
Section 710.690. Pretreatment. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
A. Pretreatment Facilities. Users shall provide wastewater treatment as
necessary to comply with this Chapter and wastewater permits issued
under Section 710.700 and shall achieve compliance with all applicable
national categorical Pretreatment Standards, Local Limits and the
Prohibitions set out in Section 710.050 within the time limitations
specified by the Director of Public Works, the EPA or the State of
Missouri, whichever is more stringent. All facilities necessary for
compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the User's
expense. Detailed plans describing such proposed pretreatment
facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the City for
review and shall be submitted to and approved by the Department of
Community Development before such facilities are constructed. Any
subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of
operation shall be reported to the City and, if required, to the Director
of Public Works for approval prior to the User's initiation of the
changes. Neither the review nor the approval of such plans and
operating procedures shall relieve the User from the responsibility of
modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to
the City under the provisions of this Chapter.
B. Facilities For Flow Equalization. To equalize flows and to avoid
temporary overloads, the Director of Public Works may require any
person who discharges into the POTW to construct and maintain on
their property and at their expense, in accordance with applicable local,
Section
710.670
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
710.690
100:1770
State and Federal rules and regulations, suitable storage tanks or
equivalent flow control facilities. The control of the volume of
discharges of waste shall be by a waterworks type rate controller or
equivalent device, the setting and operations of which shall be subject
to the direction of the Director of Public Works. A wastewater discharge
permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
C. Facilities For Equalization Of Pollutant Concentration. Whenever the
total volume of wastes to be discharged by any User in any one (1) day
has considerable variation in pollutional value, such User may be
required to construct, at its sole expense, holding or storage tanks in
order to control the discharge of wastes over a twenty-four-hour period.
The Director of Public Works may require such tanks to be equipped to
mix the waste thoroughly so that its quality will be uniform when
discharged into the POTW.
D. Interceptors, Separators And Traps For Grease, Oil And Sand.
Interceptors, separators and traps for grease, oil and sand shall be
constructed at User's sole expense and to City specifications when, in
the opinion of the Director of Public Works, they are necessary for
proper handling and control of grease, oil, sand, grit, petroleum
products or other substance. By way of example but not of limitation,
such devices may be required for industrial or commercial
establishments, public eating places, hotels, hospitals, automobile
service centers, vehicle wash facilities or other institutions. Such
devices shall be located so as to be readily accessible for cleaning and
inspection and shall be maintained by the User at its sole expense in
continuously efficient operation at all times.
1. The size, type and location of interceptors, separators and traps
shall be selected in accordance with the current Edition of the
International Plumbing Code and shall be approved in writing prior
to installation by the Department of Community Development.
2. The Director of Public Works may direct the User to install a unit or
to correct any unit that is not installed appropriately or functioning
properly.
3. These vessels must have each chamber directly accessible from the
surface to provide a means for servicing, sampling and maintaining
the interceptor in working and operating condition. These
chambers shall not be visually obscured with parked vehicles,
building structures, recycle containers, refuse containers, pallets,
trees, growing plants/shrubbery, landscape tarps, plastic sheets,
foreign objects, soil, mulch, floorings or pavement of any
substance.
4. The Director of Public Works may order the repair, modification or
replacement of a unit or may order the addition of a grease
recovery device in combination with a grease interceptor. All food
service establishments and other grease-handling facilities shall be
Section
710.690
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.690
100:1771
subject to review, evaluation and inspection by the aforementioned
representatives during normal working hours.
5. Interceptors, separators and traps shall be serviced and emptied of
accumulated waste content at a frequency appropriate to maintain
the efficiency of the device. Accumulated solids, grease caps
(floating FOG) and sludge pockets (settled solids) must be removed
at a frequency to maintain an effective volume of the device.
Servicing of interceptors, separators or traps may be more
frequent than, but not less frequent than, as required by permit or
this Chapter. For the purpose of enforcement, a grease interceptor,
oil and water separator or grease trap shall be considered to be at
its maximum level and shall be considered inoperative if fifty
percent (50%) or more of the trap is filled with floating FOG and
settled solids. It shall be immediately cleaned and cleaning
frequencies shall be increased. The owner, lease-holder or operator
shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal of grease
by appropriate means.
6. Interceptors, separators and traps shall be kept free of grit, rocks,
gravel, sand, eating utensils, cigarettes, shells, towels, rags,
excessive food solids, etc., which can reduce the effective volume of
the unit.
7. If any wastewater is removed from a grease interceptor, treated
and then reintroduced back into the interceptor, the User shall
remain responsible for not exceeding the established oil and grease
numerical limit and responsible for maintaining an effective volume
of the interceptor. Reintroduction of screenings, sludges or
residues is prohibited.
8. Any User utilizing biological or chemical additives remains
responsible for not exceeding the established oil and grease
numerical limit and remains responsible for maintaining an
effective volume of the interceptor, separator or trap. Any User
utilizing biological additives or enzymes must notify the Director of
Public Works and provide the Safety Data Sheets (SDS) for such
additives. The exclusive use of biological and chemical additives is
not considered acceptable grease vessel maintenance practice.
Their use cannot be employed as the sole method of treating or
maintaining the vessel's effluent.
9. Emulsifiers are prohibited from use in oil and water separators.
The use of emulsifiers in grease interceptors or grease traps for the
purpose of meeting the established oil and grease numerical limit
or to decrease the service frequency is prohibited.
10. Any User utilizing an automatic grease removal system remains
responsible for not exceeding the established oil and grease
numerical limit and remains responsible for maintaining an
effective volume of the interceptor, separator or trap.
Section
710.690
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
710.690
100:1772
Section 710.700. Permit Application. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1,
9-20-2017]
11. Grease interceptors shall receive grease-laden waste from the
major point sources. Wastes that are not expected to contain
grease or oil and that otherwise do not require separation shall not
discharge into the interceptor. Hot water flushing of a grease
interceptor, oil and water separator or grease trap is prohibited.
12. Any removal and hauling of grease or oils from in-ground units
shall be performed by a licensed waste disposal or rendering firm.
Indoor, above ground, under sink grease vessels may be cleaned by
the User unless required otherwise. The User is responsible for
appropriate disposal of the removed substances.
13. The User shall keep all records of interceptor, separator or trap
maintenance for three (3) years. The User must keep records of
each cleanout including the date of service, name of cleanout
company and receipt. The User shall provide to the Director of
Public Works documentation of maintenance as required. The local
User shall make appropriate arrangements with its corporate
office, if any, in this regard as needed.
14. Each facility will be issued a grease vessel maintenance log upon
initial inspection. The log shall be available at all times and kept upto-
date.
E. Authority To Direct And Restrict Discharge. Whenever deemed
necessary, the Director of Public Works may require Users to restrict
their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or
consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams, and
such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and
determine the User's compliance with the requirements of this Chapter.
A. Users who do not meet the criteria for Significant Industrial User may
be required by the Director of Public Works to obtain a wastewater
discharge permit when it is determined by the Director of Public Works
that such permit meets the intent of this Chapter. For purpose of
classification only, they shall be called minor non-domestic contributors
(MNDC). All Users with an interceptor, separator or trap shall submit
an industrial waste questionnaire or permit application to determine
the need for a local wastewater discharge permit. A fee of one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00) per year must accompany the permit application.
Not-for-profit charitable and religious organizations, as well as
educational institutions, are exempt from fees associated with the
permit application. The Director of Public Works may issue such local
permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this Chapter.
B. User permits shall comply with the requirements of this Chapter.
Section
710.690
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.700
100:1773
Section 710.710. Food Service Establishment Permit Requirement.
[Ord. No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
C. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5)
years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be
stated to expire on a specific date.
D. Wastewater permits are issued to a specific User for a specific
operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or
transferred or sold to a new owner, new User, different premises or a
new or changed operation without the approval of the Director of Public
Works.
E. A permitted User shall apply for a permit reissuance by submitting a
complete permit application a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to the
expiration of the existing permit or as specified in the discharge permit.
F. A permitted User must keep a copy of their wastewater permit on site at
the local facility. For permitted Users with an interceptor, separator or
trap, the User's permit shall establish a minimum frequency of service.
More frequent service may be necessary to comply with the established
numerical limit.
G. For permitted Users with an interceptor, separator or trap, failure to
service the unit in the time period required by permit and/or failure to
provide documentation required by permit shall each constitute
violation of this Chapter.
A. All permitted food service establishments discharging wastewater to
the City's POTW are subject to the following requirements:
1. Grease Interceptor Requirements. All permitted food service
establishments are required to install, operate and maintain an
approved type and adequately sized grease interceptor necessary
to maintain compliance with the objectives of this Chapter. All
grease interceptors must meet the requirements of the current
Edition of the International Plumbing Code.
2. Implementation.
a. All new food service establishment facilities are subject to
grease interceptor requirements. All such facilities must obtain
approval from the Department of Community Development for
grease interceptor sizing after submission of plans for a
building permit. All grease interceptors shall be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Existing facilities
with planned modification in plumbing improvements will be
required to include plans to comply with the grease interceptor
requirements. These facilities must obtain approval from the
Department of Community Development for grease interceptor
sizing after submission of plans for a building permit.
Section
710.700
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
710.710
100:1774
Section 710.720. Grease Interceptor Requirements. [Ord. No.
17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
b. All existing food service establishments, determined by the
Director of Public Works, to have a reasonable potential to
adversely impact the POTW will be notified of their obligation
to install a grease interceptor within the specified period set
forth in the notification letter.
3. Variance From Grease Interceptor Requirements. Grease
interceptors required under this Chapter shall be installed unless
the Department of Community Development authorizes the
installation of an indoor grease trap or other alternative
pretreatment technology and determines that the installation of a
grease interceptor would not be feasible. The food service
establishment bears the burden of demonstrating that the
installation of a grease interceptor is not feasible. The Department
of Community Development may authorize the installation of an
indoor grease trap where the installation of a grease interceptor is
not feasible due to space constraints or other considerations. If an
establishment believes the installation of a grease interceptor is
infeasible because of documented space constraints, the request
for an alternate grease removal device shall contain the following
information:
a. Location of sewer main and easement in relation to available
exterior space outside building.
b. Existing plumbing at or in a site that uses common plumbing
for all services at that site.
B. Alternative pretreatment technology, includes, but is not limited to,
devices that are used to trap, separate and hold grease from
wastewater and prevent it from being discharged into the POTW. All
alternative pretreatment technology must be appropriately sized and
approved by the Department of Community Development.
A. Grease interceptor sizing and installation shall conform to the current
Edition of the International Plumbing Code.
B. Grease interceptors shall be constructed in accordance with design
approved by the Department of Community Development and shall have
a minimum of two (2) compartments with fittings designed for grease
retention.
C. Grease interceptors shall be installed at a location where it shall be
easily accessible for inspection, cleaning and removal of intercepted
grease. The grease interceptor may not be installed in any part of the
building where food is handled. Location of the grease interceptor must
meet the approval of the Department of Community Development.
Section
710.710
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.720
100:1775
Section 710.730. Grease Trap Requirements. [Ord. No. 17-184 § 1,
9-20-2017]
D. All such grease interceptors shall be serviced and emptied of
accumulated waste content as required in order to maintain minimum
design capability or effective volume. These devices should be
inspected at least monthly. Users who are required to maintain a grease
interceptor shall:
1. Provide for a minimum hydraulic retention time in accordance with
the current Edition of the International Plumbing Code.
E. The User shall maintain a written record of inspection and maintenance
for three (3) years. All such records will be made available for on-site
inspection by representatives of the City during all operating hours.
F. Sanitary wastes are not allowed to be connected to sewer lines
intended for grease interceptor service.
G. Except as provided herein, for a period of one (1) year following
adoption of this Chapter, although installation of grease interceptors
will be required to be installed, no enforcement actions will be taken
under this Chapter for failure to achieve limits on grease discharges
from grease interceptors. If during this one (1) year period an
obstruction of a sewer main(s) occurs that causes a sanitary sewer
overflow to the extent that an impact on the environment is realized and
that said overflow or failure of the POTW to convey sewage can be
attributed in part or in whole to an accumulation of grease in the sewer
main(s), the City will take appropriate enforcement actions, as
stipulated in the City of St. Charles' Pretreatment Program
Enforcement Response Plan (ERP) and this Chapter, against the
generator or contributor of such grease.
H. Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of twenty-four (24) inches,
shall be provided over each grease interceptor chamber and sanitary
tee. The access manholes shall extend at least to finished grade and be
designed and maintained to prevent water inflow or infiltration. The
manholes shall also have readily removable covers to facilitate
inspection, grease removal and wastewater sampling activities.
A. Upon approval by the Department of Community Development, a
grease trap complying with the provisions of this Section must be
installed in the waste line leading from sinks, drains and other fixtures
or equipment in food service establishments where grease may be
introduced into the drainage or sewage system in quantities that can
effect line stoppage or hinder sewage treatment or private sewage
disposal.
B. Grease traps sizing and installation shall conform to the current Edition
of the International Plumbing Code.
Section
710.720
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
710.730
100:1776
Section 710.740. Interference, Recovery Of Costs Incurred. [Ord.
No. 17-184 § 1, 9-20-2017]
If a failure to maintain settling tanks, grit traps, interceptors, separators or
traps results in partial or complete blockage of the building sewer, private
sewer system discharging to the POTW or other parts of the POTW or
causes interference or excessive maintenance to the POTW or presents a
possible health hazard, the discharger shall be subject to the remedies
herein including cost recovery, enforcement and penalties.
C. No grease trap shall be installed which has a stated rate flow of more
than fifty-five (55) gallons per minute, nor less than twenty (20) gallons
per minute, except when specially approved by the Department of
Community Development.
D. Grease traps shall be maintained in efficient operating conditions by
periodic removal of the accumulated grease. No such collected grease
shall be introduced into any drainage piping or public or private sewer.
E. No food waste disposal unit or dishwasher shall be connected to or
discharge into any grease trap.
F. Wastewater in excess of one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140° F.)
(sixty degrees Celsius (60° C.)) shall not be discharged into a grease
trap.
G. Except as provided herein, for a period of one (1) year following
adoption of this Chapter, although installation of grease traps will be
required to be installed, no enforcement actions will be taken under this
Chapter for failure to achieve limits on grease discharges from the
facility. If during this one (1) year period, an obstruction of a sewer
main(s) occurs that causes a sewer overflow to the extent that an
impact on the environment is realized and that said overflow or failure
of the POTW to convey sewage can be attributed in part or in whole to
an accumulation of grease in the sewer main(s), the City will take
appropriate enforcement actions, as stipulated in the City of St.
Charles' Pretreatment Program Enforcement Response Plan (ERP) and
this Chapter, against the generator or contributor of such grease.
Section
710.730
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.740
100:1777

ARTICLE XV
Miscellaneous Provisions
Section 710.750. Pretreatment Charges And Fees. [Ord. No. 17-184
§ 1, 9-20-2017]
A. The City may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of
setting up and operating the City's pretreatment program which may
include:
1. Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the
cost of processing such applications;
2. Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures
including the cost of collection and analyzing a User's discharge,
and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by Users;
3. Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge
procedures and construction;
4. Fees for filing appeals;
5. Fees to recover administrative and legal costs (not included in
Section 710.065(B)) associated with enforcement activity taken by
the Director of Public Works to address IU non-compliance;
6. Other fees as the City may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the
matters covered by this Chapter and are separate from all other
fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the City; and
7. Surcharge for excess biochemical oxygen demand and total
suspended solids discharge.
a. In order for treatment rates to recapture the cost of providing
sanitary sewer treatment and disposal service to Industrial
Users, treatment rates shall be based on the volume of effluent
treated and the chemical composition of the effluent. Industrial
Users shall determine the chemical composition of effluent
discharged, directly or indirectly, into the sanitary sewer
system by using the sampling procedures stated in Section
710.250 and collected sample handling, preservation and
laboratory analyses shall be performed in accordance with 40
CFR, Part 136 and amendments thereto.
b. Normal domestic sewage strength and character (chemical
composition) is categorized as not exceeding a biochemical
oxygen demand (BOD5) of three hundred (300) parts per
million by weight and a total suspended solids (TSS) of three
hundred (300) parts per million by weight. Additional charges
for treatment and disposal of effluent in excess of the normal
domestic sewage strength and character shall be as follows:
Section
710.750
GENERAL PROVISIONS Section
710.750
100:1779
(1) Rate Surcharge Based Upon BOD5. There shall be an
additional charge of forty and three-tenths cents ($0.403)
per pound of BOD5 received in excess of three hundred
(300) parts per million by weight.
(2) Rate Surcharge Based Upon TSS. There shall be an
additional charge of thirty-four and three-tenths cents
($0.343) per pound of TSS received in excess of three
hundred (300) parts per million by weight.
c. An Industrial User may request reconsideration of the
additional charges in Subsection (6)(b) by submitting to the
City composite samples and analysis of the effluent to
substantiate BOD5 and TSS below three hundred (300) parts
per million by weight.
d. All costs of sampling and analysis, including the costs of
installation of hydraulic flow measuring devices, personnel
costs and laboratory costs, shall be the sole responsibility of
the Industrial User.
Section
710.750
ST. CHARLES CITY CODE Section
710.750
100:1780