CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF CLANTON, ALABAMA 
____________ 
Published in 1991 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: October 14, 1991 
Effective: October 30, 1991 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
CLANTON, ALABAMA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Billy Joe Driver 
Mayor 
____________ 
Ann Baker 
Donald Nelson 
Robert K. Easterling 
Elem Hill
Richard Davis 
City Council 
____________ 
Morgan Reynolds
Reynolds & Reynolds 
City Attorneys 
____________ 
Betty Wilson 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Clanton, Alabama. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1979 Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1979 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-2 and the first section of Chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Milton E. Lefkoff, Supervising Editor, and Connie Timmons, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Morgan Reynolds, City Attorney, and Ms. Betty Wilson, City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION
Tallahassee, Florida 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 15-91 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Clanton, Alabama; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be it Ordained by the City Council of Clanton, Alabama, as follows: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Clanton, Alabama," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 20, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before December 20, 1989, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance of the city shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment or hard labor not exceeding six (6) months, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after December 20, 1989, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective October 30, 1991. 
    Passed and Adopted by the City Council this 14th day of October, 1991. 
/s/                                        
     Billy Joe Driver
     Mayor   /s/                                        
     Betty M. Wilson
     Clerk   Certificate of Adoption 
    I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the City Council of the City of Clanton, Alabama, held on the 14th day of October, 1991. 
/s/                                        
     Betty M. Wilson
     Clerk   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No.Date AdoptedInclude/OmitSupp. No. 18 7-10 7-26-2010Include8-10 8- 9-2010Include9-1010-11-2010Include1-11 5-23-2011Include4-1110-10-2011Include5-1110-24-2011Include6-1111-28-2011Include1-12 1-23-2012Include4-12 3-12-2012IncludeSupp. No. 19 6-1210-22-2012Include1-13 3-11-2013Include2-13 3-25-2013Include3-13 6-24-2013Include6-13 9- 9-2013Omit2-14 7-14-2014Include 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Citation of Code. 
    The ordinances and resolutions embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated and cited as the Code of Ordinances, City of Clanton, Alabama. Such Code may also be cited as the Code of Clanton or the Clanton Code. 
(Code 1979, § 1-1) 
State law reference- Codification of ordinances, adoption of Code by ordinance, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-7. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions. 
    In the construction of this Code and all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the city council, the following definitions shall be observed, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Ala. Code or Code of Ala. 1975 shall refer to the Code of Alabama 1975, as amended. 
    Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
    City. The words "the city," "this city" or "city" shall mean the City of Clanton, in the County of Chilton, in the State of Alabama. 
    City council; council. The words "city council" or "the council" shall mean the city council of Clanton, Alabama. 
    Code. The words "this Code" or "the Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Clanton, Alabama. 
    Corporate limits. The term "corporate limits" shall mean the corporate limits of the City of Clanton, Alabama, not including its police jurisdiction. 
    County. The words "this county" or "the county" shall mean the County of Chilton, Alabama. 
    Court. The word "court" shall mean the Municipal Court of the City of Clanton, Alabama. 
    Gender. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter. 
    May. The word "may" is permissive. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Number. The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular number. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Officers, etc. Any reference to the title of an officer, department, board or commission shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Clanton, Alabama." 
    Person. The word "person" shall include a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidence of debt, deeds and conveyances. 
    Police jurisdiction. The term "police jurisdiction" shall mean the territorial jurisdiction of the City of Clanton outside its corporate limits. 
State law reference- Police jurisdiction, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-40-10, 11-47-22. 
    Preceding; following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean before and after, respectively. 
    Property. The term "property" shall include real and personal property. 
    Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Shall. The word "shall" is mandatory. 
    Signature or subscription. The words "signature" and "subscription" shall include a mark intended as such when the person cannot write. 
State law reference- Signature on conveyance, Code of Ala. 1975, § 35-4-20. 
    State. The words "state," "this state" or "the state" shall mean the State of Alabama. 
    Tense. Words used in the present or past tense shall include the future as well as the present and past. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1979, § 1-2) 
State law reference- Meaning of certain words and terms in state laws, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 1-1-1, 11-52-1. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of such sections nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1979, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Severability. 
    The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, unenforceable or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, unenforceability or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1979, § 1-4) 
State law reference- Severability of provisions of statutes, Code of Ala. 1975, § 1-1-16. 
Sec. 1-5. - Alteration of Code. 
    It shall be unlawful to change or amend by addition or deletion any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented. 
(Code 1979, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
    The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any repealed ordinance. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1979, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Amendment of Code. 
(a)	All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code shall be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the event of repealed chapters, articles, divisions or sections, or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the council to make the addition or amendment a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated herein, so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(b)	Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ;#rule; of the Code of Ordinances, City of Clanton, Alabama, is hereby amended to read as follows: ...." The new provisions may be set out in full as desired. 
(c)	If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Code of Ordinances, City of Clanton, Alabama, is hereby amended by adding a section (article or chapter) to be numbered ;#rule;, which section (article or chapter) shall read as follows: ...." The new provisions shall be set out in full as desired. 
(d)	All sections, chapters, articles or provisions sought to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, chapter, article or provision number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1979, § 1-7) 
State law reference- Amendment of ordinances, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-6. 
Sec. 1-8. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)	By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city 
council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)	In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been replaced shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)	Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2)	Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)	Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," and the like, as the case may be, or to "sections ;#rule; to ;#rule;," inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code; and 
(5)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
    Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment or hard labor not exceeding six (6) months, or both. Each day's violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall constitute a separate offense. However, no penalty shall consist of a fine or sentence of imprisonment exceeding the maximum fine or sentence of imprisonment established under state law for the commission of substantially similar offenses. 
(Code 1979, §§ 1-8, 9-2) 
State law reference- Power of municipal corporations to enforce obedience to ordinances, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-1; penalties which may be imposed for violations of ordinances, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-9; driving while under influence of alcohol, controlled substances, etc., Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-191. 
Sec. 1-10. - Certain ordinances, offenses, etc., not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)	Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)	Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issue of any bonds, including revenue certificates, of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(3)	License tax ordinances that are consistent with this Code.
(4)	Library board ordinances.
(5)	Park and recreation board ordinances.
(6)	Other ordinances and resolutions establishing boards, commissions or similar agencies.
(7)	Ordinances and resolutions granting permits or franchises.
(8)	Ordinances and resolutions adopted for purposes which have been consummated.
(9)	Ordinances and resolutions which are temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect. 
(10)	Ordinances and resolutions relating to salaries or expense allowances for city officials or employees. 
(11)	Ordinances and resolutions relating to annexation of territory to the city.
(12)	Ordinances and resolutions naming, renaming, opening, accepting or vacating streets or alleys in the city. 
(13)	The following codes of the city: the building code, the electrical code, the fire prevention code, the gas code, the license code and the plumbing code. 
(14)	Ordinances and resolutions making appropriations.
(15)	Ordinances and resolutions relating to the budget.
(16)	Ordinances and resolutions consistent with this Code ordering or dealing with elections.
(17)	Ordinances and resolutions making appointments to positions, offices or boards.
(18)	Ordinances and resolutions providing for local improvements or levying assessments for improvements. 
(19)	Ordinances and resolutions routing buses in a manner not inconsistent with anything contained in this Code. 
(20)	Ordinances and resolutions authorizing contracts or bonds for the payment of money.
(21)	Ordinances and resolutions authorizing deeds, leases, contracts or other instruments to or with named persons or corporations. 
(22)	Ordinances and resolutions under which vested rights may be accrued as to persons in whom such rights may have vested. 
(23)	Zoning ordinances and industrial development board ordinances and resolutions.
(24)	Ordinances and resolutions relating to social security coverage of officers or employees of the city. 
(25)	Ordinances consistent with this Code levying any tax, fee or charge, by whatever name known. 
(26)	Amendments to the zoning district map.
(27)	Ordinances and resolutions not of a general and permanent nature.
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this section. 
Editor's note- 
The above section is based on Ord. No. 4-79, § 3.
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Elections, Ch. 6; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; municipal court, Ch. 12; personnel, Ch. 15; police, Ch. 16; solid waste, Ch. 17; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 18; taxation, Ch. 19; utilities, Ch. 20; dog control officer, § 4-27; electrical official, § 5-54 et seq.; fire department, § 7-2 et seq.; fire chief, § 7-3; administration of flood damage prevention ordinance, § 8-61 et seq.; personnel clerk, § 15-5; personnel board, § 15-46 et seq.; administration of zoning ordinance, App. A, § 7; administration of subdivision regulations, App. B, art. II, § 4. (Back)
State Law reference- Counties and municipal corporations, Code of Ala. 1975, Title 11; provisions applicable to municipal corporations only, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-40-1 et seq.; industrial development boards, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-54-80 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipal corporations, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-80-1 et seq.; municipal housing authorities, Code of Ala. 1975, § 24-1-20 et seq.; classification of municipalities, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-40-12. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Public library reestablished. 
    The city council hereby officially reestablishes the city public library as set out in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-90-1 et seq. 
(Code 1979, § 2-38) 
Sec. 2-2. - Hospital association established. 
    Under authority of an act of the state legislature approved July 7, 1945, the city, in conjunction with the county and in cooperation with the state board of health as provided in the act, does hereby establish a hospital association within the zone including the city in the county, as determined by the state board of health. 
(Code 1979, § 2-11) 
State law reference- Public hospital associations, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-21-50 et seq.; exercise of police jurisdiction over hospitals, etc., Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-22. 
Sec. 2-3. - Planning commission. 
    There is hereby created a planning commission for the city, to consist of nine (9) members, to be appointed for the terms and in the manner set forth by state law. 
(Code 1979, § 2-13) 
Cross reference- Zoning, App. A; subdivisions, App. B. 
State law reference- Municipal planning commission, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-2 et seq.; appointment and terms of office of municipal planning commission, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-3. 
Sec. 2-4. - Adoption of county-wide emergency medical services master plan. 
    The city council does hereby adopt the county-wide emergency medical services master plan 1978, and further agrees to lend its assistance by participating therein for the advancement of this cause. 
(Code 1979, § 2-12) 
State law reference- State health planning and development, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-4-1 et seq.; ambulances, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-18-1 et seq.; municipal ambulance service, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-87-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-5. - Fire and police services in police jurisdiction. 
    The city will not furnish fire protection or police protection within the police jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3-86, § 1, 1-27-86) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; police, Ch. 16. 
State law reference- General territorial extent of police jurisdiction, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-40-10. 
Sec. 2-6. - Fees established for copying documents, researching records, etc. 
    Each department of the City of Clanton, Alabama shall have the authority to charge fees for copying documents, researching records and related matters, as follows: 
(1)	Furnishing copies of traffic accident reports: Three dollars ($3.00) per report.
(2)	Preparation of employment fingerprint cards: Fifteen dollars ($15.00) per card.
(3)	Document research fee: Eighteen dollars ($18.00) per hour for all non-court-ordered document researches. 
(4)	Sending of faxes: One dollar ($1.00) per fax transmission.
(5)	Expense of photocopies: Twenty-five cents ($0.25) per page.
    The charges established in this section shall not be charged to any department or agency of the City of Clanton. 
(Ord. No. 2-10, §§ 1, 2, 4-12-2010) 
Editor's note- 
Ord. No. 2-10, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 12, 2010, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as § 2-6 was at the discretion of the editor. Section 6 of said ordinance provides that § 2-6 shall be in effect 30 days from and after its adoption. 
Secs. 2-7-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-31. - Powers and duties. 
    The mayor and the city council shall be the governing body of the city with duties and powers to elect city officers and with authority to approve, adopt and repeal ordinances, regulations and policies which pertain and apply to city administration, business and functions subject to state law. 
(Code 1979, § 2-1) 
State law reference- Council, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-40 et seq.; mayor, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-80 et seq. 
Sec. 2-32. - Mayor-Generally. 
    The mayor shall be a qualified elector of the city and a resident thereof for a period of not less than one (1) year preceding his qualification for office. The mayor shall preside at all council meetings and serve a four-year term commencing on the first Monday in October following the election or until such time as a successor is duly elected and installed in office. 
(Code 1979, § 2-2) 
State law reference- Assumption of duties by officers elected, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-46-21. 
Sec. 2-33. - Same-Compensation. 
    The salary of the mayor of the City of Clanton, Alabama shall be and the same is hereby fixed at forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) annually to be paid in twelve (12) equal installments on the last pay period of each month. In addition to the salary provided for herein, the mayor shall also be entitled to Blue Cross Insurance as entitled to all full-time employees of the city. 
(Code 1979, § 2-3; Ord. No. 1-88, § I, 1-11-88; Ord. No. 2-92, § I, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 2-96, § I, 1-22-96; Ord. No. 3-2000, § 1, 2-14-00; Ord. No. 4-04, § 1, 2-9-04) 
Note-Section 3 of Ord. No. 4-04 provided for an effective date of the first Monday in October, 2004, and shall be continued in force and effect until repealed by action of the council. 
State law reference- Compensation of municipal officers, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-43-6, 11-43-8, 11-46-1. 
Sec. 2-34. - Compensation of councilmembers. 
    Each councilmember shall be compensated at the sum of twelve thousand dollars ($12,000.00) annually to be paid in twelve (12) equal installments on the last pay period of each month. 
(Code 1979, § 2-4; Ord. No. 1-88, § II, 1-11-88; Ord. No. 3-92, § I, 2-10-92; Ord. No. 2-96, § II, 1-22-96; Ord. No. 3-2000, § 2, 2-14-00; Ord. No. 4-04, § 2, 2-9-04) 
Note-Section 3 of Ord. No. 4-04 provided for an effective date of the first Monday in October, 2004, and shall be continued in force and effect until repealed by action of the council. 
Sec. 2-35. - Council meetings. 
    The stated and designated time for the holding of the meetings of the city council shall be on the second and fourth Mondays of each calendar month at 5:00 p.m. in the council room of the city hall building. 
(Code 1979, § 2-6) 
State law reference- Proceedings of council, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-48 et seq. 
Sec. 2-36. - [Council rules of procedure.] 
(a)	That the rules or order of procedure herein contained shall govern deliberations and meetings of the Council of Clanton, Alabama. 
(b)	Regular meetings of the council shall be held on the following dates: The second and fourth Mondays of each month. 
(c)	Special meetings may be held at the call of the presiding officer by serving notice on each member of the council not less than twenty-four (24) hours before the time set for such special meetings; or special meetings may be held as provided by § 11-43-50, Code of Alabama, 1975, whenever two (2) councilmembers (or the mayor) making the request shall have the right to call such meeting. Notice of all special meetings shall be posted on a bullentin board accessible to the public at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to such meeting. 
(d)	A quorum shall be determined as provided by § 11-43-48, Code of Alabama.
(e)	All regular meetings shall convene at five o'clock p.m. at the City Hall and all meetings, regular and special, shall be open to the public. 
(f)	The order of business shall be as follows:
(1)	A call to order.
(2)	Roll call.
(3)	Reading and approval of the minutes of the previous meeting.
(4)	Reports of standing committees.
(5)	Reports of special committees.
(6)	Reports of officers.
(7)	Reading of petitions, applications, complaints, appeals, communications, etc.
(8)	Auditing accounts.
(9)	Resolutions, ordinances, orders and other business.
(10)	Public comments.
(g)	No member shall speak more than twice on the same subject without permission of the presiding officer. 
(h)	No person, not a member of the council, shall be allowed to address the same while in session without permission of the presiding officer. 
(i)	Every officer, whose duty it is to report at the regular meetings of the council, who shall be in default thereof, may be fined at the discretion of the council. 
(j)	Motions shall be reduced to writing when required by the presiding officer of the council or any member of the council. All resolutions and ordinances and any amendments thereto shall be in writing at the time of introduction. 
(k)	Motions to reconsider must be made by a member who voted with the prevailing side and at the same or next succeeding meeting of the council. 
(l)	Whenever it shall be required by one or more members, the "yeas" and "nays" shall be recorded and any member may call for a division on any question. 
(m)	All questions of order shall be decided by the presiding officer of the council with the right of appeal to the council by any member. 
(n)	The presiding officer of the council may, at his or her discretion, call any member to take the chair, to allow him or her to address the council, make a motion or discuss any other matter at issue. 
(o)	Motions to lay any matter on the table shall be first in order. On all questions, the last amendment, the most distant day and the largest sum shall be first put. 
(p)	All meetings of the council shall be open to the public except when the council meets in executive session as authorized by state law. 
(q)	The council may meet in executive session only for those purposes authorized by state law. When a councilmember makes a motion to go into executive session for an enumerated purpose, the presiding officer shall put the motion to a vote. If the majority of the council shall vote in favor of the motion to go into executive session, the body shall then move into executive session to discuss the matter for which the executive session was called. No action may be taken in an executive session. When the discussion has been completed, the council shall resume its deliberations in public. 
(r)	A motion for adjournment shall always be in order.
(s)	The rules of the council may be amended in the same manner as any other ordinance of general and permanent operation. 
(t)	The rules of the council may be temporarily suspended by a two-thirds vote of the members present. 
(u)	The chairman of each respective committee, or the councilmember acting for him or her, shall submit or make all reports to the council when so requested by the presiding officer or any member of the council. 
(v)	All ordinances, resolutions or propositions submitted to the council which require the expenditure of money shall lie over until the next meeting; provided, that such ordinances, resolutions or propositions may be considered earlier by unanimous consent of the council; and provided further, that this rule shall not apply to the current expenses of, or contracts previously made with regular salaries of officers or wages of employees of the city. 
(w)	The clerk, engineer, attorney and chief of police, and such other officers or employees of the City of Clanton, shall, when requested, attend all meetings of the council and shall remain in the council room for such length of time as the council may direct. 
(x)	No ordinance or resolution of a permanent nature shall be adopted at the meeting at which it is introduced unless unanimous consent be obtained for the immediate consideration of such ordinance or resolution, such consent shall be by roll call and the vote thereon spread on the minutes. 
(y)	Robert's Rules of Order is hereby adopted as the rules of procedure for this council in those situations which cannot be resolved by the rules set out in this section. 
(z)	This section shall go into effect upon the passage and publication as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, §§ 1-26, 10-10-05) 
Editor's note- 
Ord. No. 10-05, §§ 1-26, adopted October 10, 2005, did not specifically amend the Code, hence, inclusion as § 2-36 has been included at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 2-37-2-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PURCHASING 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Manner of awarding contracts on bids, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-2; execution of contracts, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-5; contracts to be awarded to lowest responsible bidder, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-6; state division of purchasing, Code of Ala. 1975, § 41-4-110 et seq.; public contracts, Code of Ala. 1975, § 41-16-1 et seq.; competitive bidding on contracts, Code of Ala. 1975, § 41-16-50 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 2-56. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agent means the purchasing agent of the city. 
    Supplies means and includes all supplies, materials, equipment, labor, services and work. 
(Code 1979, § 2-18) 
Sec. 2-57. - Purchasing agent-Generally. 
    The city purchasing agent shall be the chief executive officer of the city or the mayor and shall have general supervision of the purchases of the city. 
(Code 1979, § 2-19) 
Sec. 2-58. - Same-Powers and duties. 
(a)	The agent shall have the power and it shall be his duty to:
(1)	Establish and enforce specifications with respect to supplies, materials and equipment required by the city government or by any of the using agencies thereof. 
(2)	Have charge of the general storerooms and supplies of the city as the statutes or council may direct. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of the purchasing agent that all expenditures of funds of whatever nature for labor, services or work, or for the purchase of materials, equipment, supplies or other personal property involving five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more, and also the lease of materials, equipment, supplies or other personal property where the lessee is or becomes legally and contractually bound under the terms of the lease to pay a total amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more, made by or on behalf of the council, except as otherwise provided in this section, shall be made under contractual agreement entered into by free and open competitive bidding, on sealed bids, to the lowest responsible bidder. If a bid is received for an item of personal property to be purchased or contracted for from a person deemed to be a responsible bidder, having a place of business within the city, which bid is no more than three (3) percent greater than the bid of the lowest responsible bidder, the agent may award the contract to such resident responsible bidder. If only one (1) bidder responds to the invitation to bid, the awarding authority may reject the bid and negotiate the purchase or contract, provided the negotiated price is lower than the bid price. 
(Code 1979, § 2-20) 
Sec. 2-59. - Exemptions from competitive bidding. 
    Competitive bids shall not be required under the provisions of this article where competitive bidding is exempt specifically by the provisions and terms of Code of Ala. 1975, § 41-16-51. 
(Code 1979, § 2-21) 
Sec. 2-60. - Rejection of bids. 
    The agent shall have the authority to reject any bid if the price is determined excessive or the quality of the product inferior. 
(Code 1979, § 2-26) 
Secs. 2-61-2-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RECYCLING COORDINATOR/ENVIRONMENTAL ENFORCEMENT OFFICER 

Sec. 2-81. - Office created. 
    There is hereby created the office of recycling coordinator/environmental enforcement officer for the city. 
(Ord. No. 11-96, § I, 8-12-96) 
Sec. 2-82. - Summary of duties. 
    The recycling coordinator/environmental enforcement officer shall be responsible for the general management of the authority recycling program, household hazardous waste program, and for the coordination of public relations. Work involves planning, organizing, and executing activities related to ensuring the overall success of the solid waste disposal authority recycling programs. Additionally, the work includes public relations, media relations, and community relations management. 
(Ord. No. 11-96, § II, 8-12-96) 
Sec. 2-83. - Essential duties and responsibilities. 
    The recycling coordinator/environmental enforcement officer manages the recycling program through the development and implementation of plans and procedures for the initiation and continued operation of the recycling program. 
(1)	Includes the preparation and/or revision of the request for proposal, analysis of bids, contract award, contract supervision, negotiations, and daily supervision. 
(2)	Insures that appropriate records are kept and that analysis of this data is accomplished in order that periodic reports on operational activities may be prepared and published. 
(3)	Prepares specifications for bids on recyclable material sales, equipment purchase and other contract activities related to the recycling program and public relations/information activities as required. Monitors the marketing activities of the curbside recycling contractor to ensure contract compliance. 
(4)	Prepares plans, programs, and budget for recycling operations. Makes periodic reports on these activities. 
(5)	Maintains contact with the general recycling community in order to stay abreast of current trends and technology. 
(6)	Provides coordination and liaison with local city, state and federal agencies, industry, environmental regulatory and educational institutions to promote the establishment and maintenance of recycling programs. 
(7)	Prepares proposals for recycling and waste reduction grants from state and federal agencies. Assists with grant programs including report preparation, supervision and coordination of subcontracting activities, and monitors compliance. 
(8)	Provides technical assistance to the local business community interested in reducing or recycling their waste. 
(9)	Manages the household hazardous waste collection program. Supervises the program, planning operations, public education and media relations activities. 
(10)	Could perform laborer skills or drive truck in the absence of employees or other related duties and special assignments as required. 
(11)	Performs other duties as required.
(12)	In environmental specialist field, this will require routine inspections of public refuse, solid wastes, drainage problems, solid waste collection and unauthorized dumping; investigating nuisance complaints, and having full law enforcement and arrest powers. Individual shall work under the authority of the mayor. 
(13)	Maintains a positive work atmosphere. Behaves and communicates in a manner that gets along with co-workers, supervisors, clients and customers. 
(Ord. No. 11-96, § III, 8-12-96) 
Sec. 2-84. - Supervisory responsibilities. 
    Directly supervises employees in the recycling department. Carries out supervisory responsibilities in accordance with the organization's policies and applicable laws. Responsibilities include interviewing, hiring, and training employees; planning, assigning, and directing work; appraising performance; rewarding and disciplining employees; addressing complaints and resolving problems. 
(Ord. No. 11-96, § IV, 8-12-96) 
Sec. 2-85. - Qualification requirements. 
    To perform this job successfully, an individual must be able to perform each essential duty satisfactorily. The requirements listed below are representative of the knowledge, skill, and/or ability required. Reasonable accommodations may be made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions. 
(Ord. No. 11-96, § V, 8-12-96) 
Sec. 2-86. - Education and/or experience. 
    Must have the Alabama Police Officers Minimum Standards and be a sworn law enforcement officer. Training and a minimum of eighteen (18) months experience in litter and solid waste management with basic knowledge of health and safety laws dealing with solid waste and recycling issues. 
(Ord. No. 11-96, § VI, 8-12-96) 
Sec. 2-87. - Physical demands. 
    The physical demands described here are representative of those that must be met by an employee to successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations may be made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions. 
    While performing the duties of this job, the employee is occasionally required to stand; walk; reach with hands and arms; and stoop, kneel, crouch, or crawl. 
(Ord. No. 11-96, § VII, 8-12-96) 
Secs. 2-88-2-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DISCRIMINATION AND SEXUAL HARASSMENT 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 20-98, adopted Dec. 14, 1998, not specifically amendatory of this Code, has been codified as Art. V, §§ 2-101-2-114 of this chapter at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference- Personnel, ch. 15. (Back)
Sec. 2-101. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)	State the city's policy prohibiting discrimination and prohibiting sexual harassment.
(2)	Specifically address sexual harassment by defining what it is, by assisting employees in identifying sexual harassment, by listing types of sexual harassment and some concrete examples, by describing who can be involved in sexual harassment, and by providing employees a procedure by which they can complain of sexual harassment and have their complaints investigated and resolved. 
(3)	Encourage any employee who believes that he or she is a victim of sexual harassment to come forward and voice their complaint to their superiors, so that the city can act to end any sexual harassment. 
(Ord. No. 20-98, § I, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 2-102. - City policy governing discrimination. 
    It is the policy of the city and all departments thereof to provide equal employment opportunity and equal treatment to all employees in all aspects of employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex (including pregnancy), age (forty (40) or over), national origin, or physical or mental disability (of an otherwise qualified individual). 
(Ord. No. 20-98, § I, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 2-103. - City policy governing sexual harassment. 
    It is the policy of the city and all departments thereof to prevent sexual harassment and to guard against any occurrence which remotely resembles this illegal act. Sexual harassment lowers morale and is damaging to the work environment. Therefore, the city will treat sexual harassment like any other form of employee misconduct: It will not be tolerated. 
(Ord. No. 20-98, § I, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 2-104. - Sexual harassment defined. 
    Sexual harassment is defined as unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal, visual, written or physical conduct of a sexual nature when: 
(1)	Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an individual's employment; or 
(2)	Submission to or rejection of such conduct by any individual is used as the basis for employment decisions affecting an individual; or 
(3)	The purpose or effect of such conduct is to substantially interfere with the individual's work performance or to create a hostile or abusive work environment. 
(Ord. No. 20-98, § I, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 2-105. - Identification of sexual harassment. 
(a)	Sexual harassment may occur in a variety of forms. Four (4) categories of sexual harassment and some concrete examples of conduct which may constitute sexual harassment, if unwelcome, are: 
(1)	Verbal: Unwelcome words of a sexual nature directed at another, including: making sexual demands or sexual propositions; sexual innuendos; demeaning sexual jokes; references to a person's anatomy; catcalls; whistles; demeaning name-calling; remarks on the intimate details of one's life or sexual likes or preferences; and, if unwelcome, invitations for lunch, dinner, drinks, or dates. 
(2)	Visual: Unwelcome exposure to visual objects such as: pictures, photos, drawings, cartoons, magazines, objects, or posters (including poster calendars); sexually obscene gestures or obvious staring; and nudity. 
(3)	Written: Notes or letters of sexual content or propositions; sexually explicit literature, poems, or magazine articles; and obscene words, phrases or graphics on walls, bulletin boards, or posters. 
(4)	Physical: Unwelcome physical contact with another, including: touching, hugging, kissing, patting, fondling, grabbing, rubbing, pinching, and in some instances close physical positioning. 
(b)	This list does not include all the possible behavior which could be viewed as sexually harassing by the city and which could result in job discipline. It is merely a list of offensive behaviors. Other behaviors might be viewed as being sexually harassing depending on the circumstances and frequency in which they occur. Plus, some of the behaviors on the list might not in all circumstances be sexually harassing, such as when they are not unwelcome. 
(c)	Employees are reminded, however, that certain behaviors may be inappropriate for other reasons, even if the behavior is not sexually harassing. For example, intimate behavior at work, such as kissing and hand-holding with a willing partner, is always unprofessional. The city wishes its employees to err on the safe side. 
(Ord. No. 20-98, § I, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 2-106. - Involvement in sexual harassment. 
    Sexual harassment can occur in a wide variety of circumstances and may encompass many variables. It is important to realize that: 
(1)	Victims can be of either gender (male or female).
(2)	Harassers can be of either gender (male or female).
(3)	Harassers may be supervisors of victims, but harassers may also be coworkers or even nonemployees. 
(4)	Harassers and victims need not be of the opposite gender, if the conduct is still based upon sex. 
(5)	Victims may be third-party observers, affected by the behavior of others and exposed to a hostile or abusive atmosphere based upon sex. 
(6)	Victims need not suffer any financial loss.
(7)	The sexual harassment need not seriously affect a victim's psychological well-being or lead the victim to suffer injury; instead, conduct or an environment based upon sex that a reasonable person would and does believe to be hostile or abusive constitutes sexual harassment. 
(Ord. No. 20-98, § I, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 2-107. - Registration of complaints with superiors. 
(a)	Any employee of the city who feels they have been subject to sexual harassment should register a complaint with their immediate superior. However, if it is their immediate superior who is the alleged harasser, the employee should register their complaint with the superior next in charge. If all supervisors over the employee are believed to be involved in the sexual harassment, the employee should register their complaint with the mayor. Likewise, if an employee believes that the mayor is involved in the sexual harassment, the complaint should be made to any department-level supervisor. 
(b)	The sexual harassment complaint may initially be made verbally, by talking to the appropriate supervisor. The complaint will then have to be put in writing and signed and dated by the person complaining. An employee may write their own complaint, or, if the employee wishes, the supervisor will assist the employee in drafting a complaint of sexual harassment. 
(c)	To the extent practicable, a complaint of sexual harassment will be kept confidential, with due regard to the sensitive nature of such complaints. 
(Ord. No. 20-98, § I, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 2-108. - Prompt investigation of complaint. 
    The city shall fully, impartially and promptly investigate any sexual harassment complaint filed by one of its employees. 
(Ord. No. 20-98, § I, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 2-109. - Confidential report of investigation. 
    A confidential written report of the result of the investigation will be submitted to either an impartial supervisor of the complainant or to the mayor, depending on the situation at hand. Also, the complainant will be promptly informed of the results of the investigation. If the investigation reveals that the accused harasser acted in a manner to sexually harass the complainant, the accused employee will also receive a copy of the special investigator's report. 
(Ord. No. 20-98, § I, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 2-110. - Prompt remedial action. 
    The city will take prompt action to end any sexual harassment. Following a report finding that sexual harassment in fact occurred, the city shall take immediate steps to discipline the offending employee or employees, including, if appropriate, immediate discharge. 
    Any city employee who acts in a manner to sexually harass any other city employee is acting outside the line and scope of their employment with the city. 
(Ord. No. 20-98, § I, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 2-111. - Right of rebuttal. 
    Both the complaining employee and the employee who has been accused of sexual harassment have the right to submit facts, documents or other evidence contesting the report to a higher supervisor, or the mayor, if the circumstances so dictate. 
(Ord. No. 20-98, § I, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 2-112. - Retaliation prohibited. 
    No employee of the city shall discharge or otherwise discriminate or harass any other city employee who has filed a complaint of sexual harassment under this policy or who has sought redress for sexual harassment with the equal employment opportunity commission or by instituting an action in court. 
(Ord. No. 20-98, § I, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 2-113. - False claims. 
    An employee of the city who knowingly files a false complaint shall be subject to disciplinary action up to and including, if deemed appropriate, termination of employment. 
(Ord. No. 20-98, § I, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 2-114. - Notice. 
    The city shall take all appropriate steps to inform all employees of the city of the contents of this policy. 
    The city encourages employees to come forward if they have a complaint of sexual harassment. The city assures each employee that no retaliatory action will be taken or allowed against any employee who asserts a sexual harassment complaint. If employees do not make their complaint known to supervisors, there will not be any opportunity for the city to assist employees in ending the sexual harassment. 
(Ord. No. 20-98, § I, 12-14-98) 
Secs. 2-115-2-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 08-01, § 1, adopted Aug. 27, 2001, was not specifically amendatory of the Code, hence; inclusion as Art. VI, § 2-131 was at the editor's discretion. Additionally, the provisions of nonspecific Ord. No. 09-01, § 3, adopted Aug. 27, 2001, have been included in Art. VI as § 2-132. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 2-131. - Chilton County Health Department rules-Enforcement. 
(a)	The Chilton County Health Department Rules as defined by the Alabama Department of Public Health pursuant to Title 22, Health and Environmental, Code of Alabama (1975), as last amended, are the health regulations of the City of Clanton. 
(b)	The Chilton County Health Officer is the health officer of the City of Clanton, pursuant to Title 22, Health and Environmental, Code of Alabama, (1975), as last amended. 
(c)	Any person found guilty of violating any provision of the rules of the Chilton County Health Department, as adopted pursuant to state law, within the city limits, or its police jurisdiction of the City, shall be prosecuted in accordance with the jurisdiction of the Municipal Court of the City of Clanton and shall be fined or punished as set out in the Code of Ordinances of the City of Clanton, Alabama. 
(Ord. No. 08-01, § 1, 8-27-01) 
Sec. 2-132. - Penalty. 
    Any person receiving a second municipal offense ticket for a violation of a municipal law or laws, and anyone failing to appear in municipal court, or otherwise settle the matter prior to the date stated on the municipal offense ticket, pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment in the jail or community service for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment and/or community service at the discretion of the judge, unless otherwise prohibited by state law. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, § 3, 8-27-01) 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, Ch. 10; taxation, Ch. 19; zoning, App. A; intoxicating liquors in billiard rooms, § 10-261. (Back)
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of alcoholic beverages, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-112; power of cities to abate nuisances, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-117 et seq.; intoxicating liquor, malt beverages and wine, Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-1-1 et seq.; local license taxes, Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-21; approval of retail license applications by council, Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-23. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 3-1-3-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WHOLESALE AND RETAIL SALES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 3-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverage means any alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented or other alcoholic beverage, or combination of liquors and mixed liquor, a part of which is spirituous, vinous, fermented or otherwise alcoholic, and all drinks or drinkable liquids, preparations or mixtures intended for beverage purposes, which contain one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume, and shall include liquor, beer and wine, both fortified and table wine. 
    Association means a partnership, limited partnership, or any form of unincorporated enterprise owned by two (2) or more persons. 
    Class I lounge means any place or premises operated by a responsible person of good reputation in which alcoholic beverages of all types may be offered for sale for on-premises consumption only, but which does not meet the requirement for a restaurant-lounge, restaurant-pub or private club lounge, and which meets the requirements of the zoning ordinance of the city (Ordinance No. 6-70, as amended), and the following additional requirements: 
(1)	The premises must have a lounge area of at least one thousand (1,000) square feet on one (1) floor in one (1) room, the area to be equipped with tables and chairs and capable of seating at least fifty (50) persons. 
(2)	A minimum of five (5) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each one hundred (100) square feet of lounge area, provided that this requirement shall be in addition to the parking requirements for any other uses in the same building. 
    Class II lounge-package store means a class II lounge retail liquor licensee who operates the licensed premises for the sale of all classes of alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption only. In addition to meeting all other legal requirements, such licensee must also comply with the following additional conditions or requirements: 
(1)	The licensee must have a minimum of five hundred (500) square feet of floor space for the display and sales of alcoholic beverages. The square footage required in this subsection shall not include areas of the licensed premises which are not open to the patrons or general membership of the licensee and which are used for office space, storage or restroom facilities. 
(2)	The licensee is authorized to sell only alcoholic beverages, ice, mixers, snack items and tobacco products. The licensee shall not sell general grocery items, novelties, clothing or any other item of general merchandise. 
(3)	Reserved. 
(4)	Reserved. 
(5)	The licensee shall at all times when open for business have in its possession a minimum inventory of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) wholesale value of liquor or wine. The liquor must have been produced by at least two (2) distilleries, and the wine produced by at least two (2) wineries. 
(6)	The licensee shall not advertise or identify its premises, prices or location by the use of a flashing or blinking sign, whether operated by electricity, gas or otherwise. 
(7)	No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall be issued such license nor shall any corporation be issued such license unless the president thereof is over the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
(8)	No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall be admitted on the premises of any class II lounge-package store as a patron or employee and it shall be unlawful for any class II lounge-package store licensee to admit any minor to the premises as a patron or employee. 
    Corporation means a corporation or joint stock association organized under the laws of this state, the United States, or any other state, territory or foreign country or dependency. 
    Licensee means any person licensed by the city council to sell liquor, wines, or malt and brewed beverages under the terms of this article. 
    Liquor means any alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented or other alcoholic beverage, or combination of liquors and mixed liquor, a part of which is spirituous, fermented, vinous or otherwise alcoholic, and all drinks or drinkable liquids, preparations or mixtures intended for beverage purposes, which contain one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume, except beer and table wine. 
    Malt or brewed beverages means any beer, lager beer, ale, porter or similar fermented malt liquor containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and not in excess of four (4) percent alcohol by weight and five (5) percent by volume, by whatever name the beverage may be called. 
    Meal means a diversified selection of food, some of which is not susceptible of being consumed in the absence of at least some articles of tableware, and which cannot be conveniently consumed while one is standing or walking about. 
    Person means a natural person, association or corporation. Whenever used in a clause prescribing or imposing a fine or imprisonment, or both, such terms as applied to an association shall mean the partners or members thereof and as applied to a corporation shall mean the officers thereof, except as to private clubs the term "person" shall mean such individual who, under the bylaws of such club, has jurisdiction over the possession and sale of liquor therein. 
    Private club. 
(1)	Class I private club means a corporation or association organized or formed in good faith by authority of law and which must have at least one hundred fifty (150) paid-up members. It must be the owner, lessee or occupant of an establishment operated solely for objects of a national, social, patriotic, political or athletic nature or the like, but not for pecuniary gain, as evidenced by Internal Revenue Service Qualified Exemption Status, and the property as well as the advantages of which belong to all the members and which maintains an establishment provided with special space and accommodations where, in consideration of payment, food, with or without lodging, is habitually served. The club shall hold regular meetings, continue its business through officers regularly elected, admit members by written application only and with a five-day waiting period, investigation and ballot, and charge and collect dues from elected members. The licensee may offer for sale all classes of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption. 
(2)	Class II private club means a corporation or association organized or formed in good faith by authority of law and which must have at least one hundred (100) paid-up members. It must be the owner, lessee or occupant of an establishment operated solely for objects of a national, social, patriotic, political or athletic nature or the like. The club shall hold regular meetings, continue its business through officers regularly elected, admit members by written application only and with a five-day waiting period, investigation and ballot, and charge and collect dues from elected members. The licensee may offer for sale all classes of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption. 
    Restaurant-lounge means any place or premises in which food, refreshments and liquor are offered for consumption within the building in which the establishment is located, which is operated by a responsible person of good reputation and which meets the requirements of the zoning ordinance (Ordinance No. 6-70, as amended), and the following additional requirements: 
(1)	The combined dining and kitchen areas shall total at least one thousand (1,000) square feet on one (1) floor. The dining area shall be equipped with tables and chairs accommodating at least fifty (50) persons at one (1) time. Storage areas shall not be considered in meeting square footage requirements. 
(2)	The premises shall have a kitchen separate and apart from the dining area, but adjoining the dining area, in which food is prepared for consumption by the public and in which the food or meals served in the dining area are prepared. 
(3)	At least one (1) meal per day shall be served at least six (6) days a week, with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating. 
(4)	Such place shall be duly licensed by the state alcoholic beverage control board for the sale of liquor for on-premises consumption. 
(5)	The serving of such food or meals shall constitute the principal business of such establishment, with the serving of liquor, malt or brewed beverages, wines or other alcoholic beverages being only an incidental part of the business. During any ninety-day period, the gross receipts from the serving of meals and food shall constitute more than sixty (60) percent of the gross receipts of the business. 
    Restaurant-pub means any place or premises in which foods, refreshments, and malt or brewed beverages or table wines, but not liquor, are offered for sale or consumption within the building in which the establishment is located, which is operated by a person of good reputation, and which meets the requirements of the zoning ordinance, (Ordinance No. 6-70, as amended), and the following additional requirements: 
(1)	The combined dining and kitchen areas shall total at least six hundred (600) square feet on one (1) floor. The dining area shall be equipped with tables and chairs accommodating at least thirty-five (35) persons at one (1) time. Storage areas shall not be considered in meeting square footage requirements. 
(2)	The premises shall have a kitchen separate and apart from the dining area, but adjoining the dining area, in which food is prepared for consumption by the public and in which the food or meals served in the dining area are prepared. 
(3)	At least one (1) meal per day shall be served at least six (6) days a week, with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating. 
(4)	Such place shall be duly licensed by the state alcoholic beverage control board for the sale of malt or brewed beverages or table wines for on-premises consumption. 
(5)	The serving of such food or meals shall constitute the principal business of such establishment, with the serving of malt or brewed beverages or table wines being only an incidental part of the business. During any ninety-day period, the gross receipts from the serving of meals and food shall constitute more than sixty (60) percent of the gross receipts of the business. 
    Wine means all beverages made from the fermentation of fruits, berries or grapes, with or without added spirits, and produced in accordance with the laws and regulations of the United States, containing not more than twenty-four (24) percent alcohol by volume, and shall include all sparkling wines, carbonated wines, special natural wines, rectified wines, vermouths, vinous beverages, vinous liquors, and like products, including restored or unrestored pure condensed juice. 
(1)	Fortified wine means any wine containing more than fourteen (14) percent alcohol by volume but not more than twenty-four (24) percent. 
(2)	Table wine means any wine containing not more than fourteen (14) percent alcohol by volume. Table wine is not liquor, spirituous or vinous. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-71, 9-28-87; Ord. No. 01-02, 2-25-02) 
State law reference- Club liquor license, approval of municipality, Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-12. 
Sec. 3-27. - Purpose of article; territorial applicability. 
    In addition to its revenue purposes within the corporate limits, this article shall be deemed the exercise of the police power of the city for the protection of the public welfare, health, peace and morals of the people of the city, and all the provisions of this article shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of this purpose. This article shall have application to that area within the corporate limits of the city, and none other. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-66, 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-28. - Sales to which article applies. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-69, 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-29. - Exceptions to article-Beverages stored for purpose of resale or reshipment. 
    This article shall not be construed to apply to any alcoholic beverages stored for the purpose of resale or reshipment outside the city and which are actually so resold or reshipped. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-93, 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-30. - Same-Interstate commerce; federal agencies. 
    This article shall not be construed to tax interstate commerce or any business of the United States government or any branch or agency thereof. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-94, 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-31. - Article cumulative. 
    This article shall not be construed to repeal any of the provisions of any other ordinance of the general license code of the city, but shall be held to be cumulative. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-95, 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-32. - Adoption of state control board regulations. 
    The rules and regulations adopted and promulgated by the state alcoholic beverage control board, in effect as of May 15, 1972, and as may be adopted or amended thereafter by the beverage control board, the violation of which constitutes a misdemeanor, are hereby adopted as laws of the city. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-67, 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-33. - Reporting of delinquencies. 
    It shall be the duty and responsibility of the city clerk's office to inform the chief of police of delinquent privilege taxes and licenses under this article. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-77, 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-34. - Sale for off-premises consumption. 
    Except for beer and wine, no alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption shall be sold, furnished or given away in the city by any city alcoholic beverage retail licensee or under any city alcoholic beverage retail liquor license except by a class II lounge or package store licensee under a license as provided for in this article. Nothing in this section is intended to conflict with the provisions of Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-13. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-71, 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-35. - Hours of sale in lounges, restaurants, etc. 
    All lounges, clubs, private clubs, restaurants or other places serving alcoholic beverages shall abate the sale of all whiskey, wine, beer or liquor at 2:00 a.m. These businesses may commence the sale of such beverages at 6:00 a.m., except Sunday. No sales shall be made between 2:00 a.m. Sunday and 6:00 a.m. Monday. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-79, 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-36. - Bringing opened container onto licensed premises; seating of patrons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person other than the licensee to bring on the premises of a licensee any bottle, can or container of alcoholic liquor or alcoholic beverage if the seal is broken. No person shall be served for on-premises consumption unless seated, and no patron shall move drinks from one table to the other. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-80, 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-37. - Consumption outside licensed premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume alcoholic liquor or alcoholic beverages outside of the licensee's establishment, or to have in his possession any opened bottle, can or container of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-81, 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-38. - Duty to maintain order on premises; reports of assaults, affrays, etc. 
    It shall be the duty of each owner and of each manager or supervisor at any time charged with the management and supervision of any retail liquor, retail table wine or retail malt or brewed beverage licensed premises, while the premises are open to the public, to maintain order upon the premises and to exclude from the premises any person who is drunk and disorderly or who commits any breach of the peace, or who uses offensive, disorderly, threatening, abusive or insulting language, conduct or behavior with the intent to provoke a breach of the peace, or whereby a breach of the peace might be occasioned. It shall be the duty of each officer, owner, manager or person in charge of any retail liquor, retail table wine or retail malt or brewed beverage licensed premises within the city immediately to make an appropriate report to the police department of the city of each assault, assault and battery or affray occurring on the licensed premises while the premises are open for business. It shall further be the duty of the person to make a written report of each of the incidents to the police department of the city and to the local field office of the state alcoholic beverage control board within thirty-six (36) hours thereof. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-87, 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-39. - Identification of delivery vehicles. 
    Each person, firm or corporation making distribution sales or deliveries of alcoholic beverages in the city shall clearly display the company markings for license identification on the side panels of each vehicle making such delivery. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-97, 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-40. - Consumption by employees on licensed premises prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator or employee of any licensee who is engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages to consume or allow any employee to consume any alcoholic beverage while performing work or duty on the premises of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-98, 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-41. - Purchase by, sale to minors; possession by minors; misrepresentation of age. 
(a)	As used in this section, the word "minor" means a person less than twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful:
(1)	For any minor person, directly or indirectly, to purchase any malt or brewed beverages, any wine, or liquor, or any alcoholic or intoxicating beverage, or to attempt to purchase any of such beverages. 
(2)	For any minor person to possess or to consume any alcoholic or intoxicating beverages in any public place, or in any business establishment or club. 
(3)	For any person to sell, furnish, give to or purchase for any minor person any of such beverages. 
(4)	For any person, directly or indirectly, to falsely represent or attempt to falsely represent that a minor person is not a minor or is not under twenty-one (21) years of age, and, by means of such false representation, to aid or abet or attempt to aid or abet such minor person to buy, receive or otherwise obtain, or otherwise to aid or abet such minor person to buy, receive or otherwise obtain, any malt or brewed beverage, any wine or liquor, or any alcoholic or intoxicating beverages. 
(c)	For the purposes of this section the definitions of malt or brewed beverages, wine or liquor, or alcoholic or intoxicating beverages, shall be the same as they are defined in the Code of Ala. 1975, Tit. 28, as amended. 
(d)	It shall be considered a false representation that a person is not a minor, or is not under twenty-one (21) years of age, that the purchaser fails to disclose that the person making the purchase of, obtaining or securing such malt or brewed beverages, such wines or liquors, or such alcoholic or intoxicating beverages, is a minor person or has not reached the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-82, 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-42. - Possession of open container or consumption in public place. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to possess open containers of alcoholic beverages or consume alcoholic or intoxicating beverages while upon or along any public street, road or highway in the city or while in or on any automobile or other motor vehicle on or along any public street, road or highway in the city, or in any public place. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-86, 9-28-87; Ord. No. 16-87, 11-9-87) 
Sec. 3-43. - Sale or consumption on public grounds. 
    Any person who gives away, sells, serves or drinks any alcoholic or malt or brewed beverages in or on any city school building and grounds, recreation building, excluding any private recreation areas leased or rented to individuals or clubs for special events, city or city school playgrounds, city parks, and athletic fields is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-88, 9-28-87) 
Secs. 3-44-3-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE GENERALLY 

Sec. 3-56. - Required; issuance; transfer. 
    No person shall engage in business as wholesaler, distributor, jobber or retailer of malt or brewed beverages or alcoholic beverages in the corporate limits of the city without first having obtained from the city a license to do such business. Such license shall be issued by the city clerk, and shall first be approved by the city council at a regular meeting thereof, before the same shall be valid. Such license shall be renewed on the first day of January of each year thereafter. No reduction or proration of the fee for the license shall be allowed on account of not commencing its business on the first day of January, nor shall any rebate be allowed upon revocation, suspension, or surrender of such license before the expiration thereof. License issued under this article may not be assigned. In the event the fifty-one (51) percent of the ownership of a corporate licensee or partnership is sold or transferred to a person not previously an owner of the business and licensee during the license year, such sale or transfer shall be deemed to terminate the license issued under this article, and shall require a new license to be purchased and issued for the continuation of such business. Applications for the transfer of the location of any license issued under this article shall be administered as a new license, and the written application for such transfer shall be submitted with a transfer fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), which shall be refunded if the transfer is denied. 
(Ord. No. 9-07, 11-12-07) 
Editor's note- 
Ord. No. 9-07, adopted November 12, 2007, repealed the former § 3-56 in its entirety, and enacted a new § 3-56 as set out herein. The former § 3-56 pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 3-57. - Eligibility; application; approval. 
(a)	Sale for on-premises consumption. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the on-premises retail sale of alcoholic beverages within the city without first obtaining a license as provided in this article. No person shall be granted a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages within the city unless such person operates a restaurant, hotel, restaurant-lounge, restaurant-pub, private club-lounge or lounge or is granted another retail license as provided in this article, unless such person is duly licensed by the state alcoholic beverage control board, unless such person is licensed to do so by the city and conforms to all the regulations provided in this article and to all regulations promulgated by the state alcoholic beverage control board, and unless such person pays all the license fees levied under this article. In addition, such person shall file written application on the form provided by the state with the city clerk prior to consideration of the application by the city council. Licenses shall be granted and issued by the city only to reputable individuals or to reputable corporations organized under the laws of the state or duly qualified thereunder to do business in the state, and then only when it appears that all officers and directors of the corporation are reputable individuals. In addition, no license shall be granted under this article if the establishment seeking such license is within the prohibited distance from any church building, public or private school building, YMCA building or public playground. Such distance shall be set out and measured in a straight line as defined in section 3-58 
(b)	Sale of beer and wine for off-premises consumption. No license shall be approved by the city council for the retail sale of malt and brewed beverages or wine for off-premises consumption unless the business of the licensed establishment is at least sixty (60) percent the sale of groceries, foodstuffs, gasoline and general merchandise. The retail sales of groceries, foodstuffs, gasoline and general merchandise shall constitute the principal business of the licensed establishment with the sale of malt or brewed beverages or wine being only an incidental part of the business. During any ninety-day period, the gross receipts from the sale of groceries, foodstuffs, gasoline and general merchandise shall constitute more than sixty (60) percent of the gross receipts. This subsection shall not be applicable to a class II lounge-package store or private club. In addition, no license shall be granted under this article until after the required alcoholic beverage control license shall have been duly issued by the state alcoholic beverage control board. 
(c)	Application; approval by council. 
(1)	All initial applications for a license shall be presented in writing at a regular meeting of the city council. The application shall be upon the appropriate form supplied by the city clerk and shall be signed and verified by oath or affirmation by the owner; in the case of a partnership, association or unincorporated enterprise, by a partner or member thereof; or in the case of a corporation by an executive officer thereof. The applicant shall deposit with the city clerk a filing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). In addition, the applicant shall pay any and all charges levied by governmental agencies in connection with the city's investigation of the application for a license as submitted by said applicant. Said charges shall be paid in full prior to consideration of the applicant's application for a license by the city council. 
(2)	An application for which the consent and the approval of the city council is sought shall contain all the information required, by the appropriate form, for the classification of alcoholic beverage license being applied for. Failure to submit information as prescribed therein shall render the application to the city void. 
(3)	A license shall not be finally approved or denied until the next regular meeting of the city council; however, any application may be held under advisement for a longer period. No initial license shall be issued except on approval of the city council in a regular meeting, and the city council may in such regular meeting direct that any renewal license, specifying the particular license, be withheld. 
(d)	Criteria for approval. In rendering a decision on each application, the city council shall consider, among others, the following factors: 
(1)	The wishes and desires of the residents, real property owners and businesses within five hundred (500) feet of the property for which a license is sought. 
(2)	The character and reputation of the applicant and each partner, member, officer, member of board of directors, landlord and club manager. 
(3)	The criminal court records of the applicant and each partner, member, officer, member of the board of directors, landlord and club manager. 
(4)	The location of premises for which a liquor license is sought and the number of establishments presently holding liquor licenses for lounges, clubs, hotels and restaurants whose place of business is within five hundred (500) feet of the property for which a liquor license is sought. 
(5)	The compliance by the applicant and each partner, member, officer, member of the board of directors, landlord and club manager with the laws of the state and ordinances of the city. 
The city council may refuse to approve a liquor license for a club when it appears that the operation would inure to the benefit of individual members, officers, agents or employees of the club rather than to the benefit of the entire membership of the club, or the licensee shows intent to sell alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption on Sunday. 
(e)	Bond. 
(1)	If the city council decides to approve a lounge retail liquor license, a club retail liquor license, a restaurant retail liquor license for a hotel, or a restaurant retail liquor license for a restaurant, the city council shall approve the license only upon the condition that the lounge, club, hotel or restaurant licensee shall deliver to and maintain with the city a bond executed by the licensee and by some surety company authorized to do business in the city, payable to the city, in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) as liquidated damages and conditioned that the licensee will comply with the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city, including but not limited to this article, relating to a lounge retail liquor licensee, a club retail liquor licensee, a restaurant retail liquor licensee for a hotel, or a restaurant retail liquor licensee for a restaurant, as the case may be. 
(2)	The bond shall be a forfeiture or liquidated damages bond and not an indemnity bond. Such bond shall include an endorsement to the effect that it shall not be canceled without the consent of the city council. The city may declare the bond forfeited as liquidated damages in its full amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) upon the breach of any one (1) or more of the conditions. In lieu of the bond, such lounge, club, hotel or restaurant licensee may deposit with the director of finance of the city cash in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) upon the same conditions and subject to forfeiture as set forth in this section. Failure by the city to declare the bond or deposit forfeited in the case of a breach of any one (1) or more of the conditions shall not operate as a waiver to do so in the event of any subsequent breach of any one (1) or more of the conditions. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-70, 9-28-87; Ord. No. 16-87, 11-9-87; Ord. No. 4-08, 4-28-08) 
Sec. 3-58. - Proximity of establishment to church, school or playground. 
(a)	No privilege license shall be issued for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages where the entrance of the establishment for which such license is applied for is less than five hundred (500) feet from the main entrance of any church building, public or private school building, YMCA building or public playground. Such distance shall be set out and measured in a straight line. 
(b)	Where the church, public or private school or YMCA building was established after the licensed premises began operation under the license provided herein, and such operation has not been abandoned or discontinued for a period of six (6) months, the above distance restrictions do not apply. 
(c)	When measuring from a church, public or private school, or YMCA, the closest property line or lot line shall constitute the beginning point for measurement of property owned by either a church, YMCA or a public or private school. When measuring from the licensed premises, the closest point of the closest exterior of the building shall be used for measurement purposes. 
(Ord. No. 16-96, 11-6-96) 
Secs. 3-59-3-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LEVY OF LICENSE FEE 

Sec. 3-71. - Generally. 
    In addition to all other taxes imposed by law, any person, prior to the sale of any liquor, including wines and malt beverages, within the city, and prior to receiving a license from the city for such purpose, shall pay to the city an annual license fee. The license fee is fixed in this division and shall be in the amounts indicated in this division. Failure to continuously meet the requirements of a license specified shall be sufficient reason for revoking the license. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-72, 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-72. - Beer wholesaler license. 
    Each person licensed as a beer wholesaler under Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-1 et seq., shall pay to the city an annual license fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). In addition, each licensee will remit to the city clerk, on forms provided by the clerk, each month, the privilege or excise tax levied on the sales of beer by the Uniform Beer Tax Act (Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3-190 et seq.). Wholesale beer dealers and distributors will not sell to any retail outlet that does not have a current city beer license. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-72(a), 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-73. - Wine wholesaler license. 
    Each person licensed by the state alcoholic beverage control board as a wine wholesaler under Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-1 et seq., shall pay to the city an annual license fee of two hundred seventy-five dollars ($275.00). In addition, each licensee will remit to the city clerk, on forms provided by the clerk, each month, the privilege or excise tax levied on the sales of table wine by the Alabama Table Wine Act (Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-7-1 et seq.). Wholesale wine dealers will not sell to any retail outlet that is not properly licensed by the city to sell wine. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-72(b), 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-74. - Beer and wine wholesaler license. 
    Each person licensed as a beer and wine wholesaler under Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-1 et seq., shall pay to the city an annual license fee of three hundred seventy-five dollars ($375.00). In addition, each licensee will remit to the city clerk, on forms provided by the clerk, each month, the privilege or excise tax levied on the sales of beer by the Uniform Beer Tax Act (Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3-190 et seq.). In addition, each licensee will remit to the city clerk, on forms provided by the clerk, each month, the privilege or excise tax levied on the sales of table wine by the Alabama Table Wine Act (Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-7-1 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-72(c), 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-75. - Warehouse license. 
    Each person licensed by the state alcoholic beverage control board to receive, store or warehouse alcoholic beverages within the state for transshipment inside and outside the state shall pay to the city an annual license fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-72(d), 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-76. - Club retail liquor license. 
    Each person licensed by the state alcoholic beverage control board to operate a club, class I or class II, under Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-1 et seq., shall pay to the city an annual license fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) if a class I club, and one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) if a class II club. In addition to the stated license fee, each person shall pay to the city, on or before the fifteenth day of the calendar month next succeeding each separate calendar month, for the privilege of having engaged in such business, an additional license tax of ten (10) percent of the gross receipts of such business derived from the sale of all alcoholic beverages, except beer and table wines, received during such immediate next preceding calendar month. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-72(e), 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-77. - Lounge retail liquor license. 
    Each person licensed by the state alcoholic beverage control board to operate a retail liquor lounge under Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-1 et seq., shall pay to the city an annual license fee of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). In addition to the stated license fee, each such retail liquor lounge licensee shall pay, on or before the fifteenth day of the calendar month next succeeding each separate calendar month, for the privilege of so engaging in such business in the calendar month, an additional license tax of ten (10) percent of the gross receipts of all such business derived from the sale of alcoholic beverages, except beer and table wines, received during such immediate next preceding month. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-72(f), 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-78. - Retail license for off-premises consumption. 
    Each person licensed by the state alcoholic beverage control board to sell liquor, wine, table wine and beer at retail for off-premises consumption under Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-1 et seq., shall pay to the city an annual license fee of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-72(g), 9-28-87; Ord. No. 16-87, 11-9-87; Ord. No. 4-92, 2-24-92) 
Sec. 3-79. - Restaurant retail liquor license. 
    Each person licensed by the state alcoholic beverage control board to sell alcoholic beverages in connection with the operation of a restaurant under Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-1 et seq., shall pay to the city an annual license fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). In addition to the stated license fee, each such person shall pay to the city, on or before the fifteenth day of the calendar month next succeeding each separate calendar month, for the privilege of having engaged in such business, an additional license tax of ten (10) percent of the gross receipts of all such business derived from the sale of all alcoholic beverages, except beer and table wine, received during such immediate next preceding calendar month. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-72(h), 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-80. - Retail table wine license for off-premises consumption. 
    Each person licensed by the state alcoholic beverage control board to sell table wine at retail for off-premises consumption under Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-1 et seq., shall pay to the city an annual license fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-72(i), 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-81. - Retail table wine license for on-premises and off-premises consumption. 
    Each person licensed by the state alcoholic beverage control board to sell table wine at retail for on-premises and off-premises consumption under Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-1 et seq., shall pay to the city an annual license fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00), unless such person shall have paid for an on-premises liquor license. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-72(j), 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-82. - Retail beer license for on-premises or off-premises consumption. 
    Each person licensed by the state alcoholic beverage control board to sell beer for on-premises and off-premises consumption under Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-1 et seq., shall pay the city an annual license fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-72(k), 9-28-87; Ord. No. 16-87, 11-9-87) 
Sec. 3-83. - Retail beer license for off-premises consumption. 
    Each person licensed by the state alcoholic beverage control board to sell beer for off-premises consumption under Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-1 et seq., shall pay to the city an annual license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-72(l), 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-84. - Special retail liquor license. 
    Each person who has obtained a special retail liquor license from the state alcoholic beverage control board under Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-1 et seq., shall pay to the city a license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) when the period of use is thirty (30) days or less. Such person shall pay a license fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) when the period of use is more than thirty (30) days. In addition to the stated license fee, each such person shall pay to the city, on or before the fifteenth day of the calendar month next succeeding each separate calendar month, for the privilege of having engaged in such business, an additional license tax of ten (10) percent of the gross receipts of all such business derived from the sale of all alcoholic beverages, except beer and table wine, received during such immediate next preceding calendar month. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-72(m), 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-85. - Special events retail liquor license. 
    Each person who has obtained a special events retail liquor license from the state alcoholic beverage control board under Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-1 et seq., shall pay to the city a license fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). No such license shall be issued for a period in excess of seven (7) days. Such alcoholic beverages as are authorized by the board may be sold. All applications for special events licenses shall be filed with the director of revenue at least one hundred twenty (120) days in advance of the event for which a license is sought. In addition to the stated license fee, each such person shall pay to the city, on or before the fifteenth day of the calendar month next succeeding each separate calendar month, for the privilege of having engaged in such business, an additional license tax of ten (10) percent of the gross receipts of all such business derived from the sale of all alcoholic beverages, except beer and table wine, received during such immediate next preceding calendar month. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-72(n), 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-86. - Manufacturer license. 
    Each person who has obtained a manufacturer license from the state alcoholic beverage control board under 1975 Code of Alabama § 28-3A-1 et. seq., as last amended, shall pay to the city an annual license fee of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00). 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-72(o), 9-28-87; Ord. No. 7-05, 7-25-05) 
Sec. 3-87. - Importer license. 
    Each person who has obtained an importer license from the state alcoholic beverage control board under Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-1 et seq., shall pay to the city an annual license fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-72(p), 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-88. - Liquor wholesale license. 
    Each person who has obtained a liquor wholesale license from the state alcoholic beverage control board under Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-3A-1 et seq., shall pay to the city an annual license fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-72(q), 9-28-87) 
Secs. 3-89-3-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TAXES 

Sec. 3-101. - Levied. 
    There is hereby levied, in addition to all other taxes of every kind imposed by law, and shall be collected as provided in this division, a privilege or license tax against the person on account of the business activities as follows: 
(1)	Upon every person, firm and corporation engaged in the business of selling whiskey, wine or liquor at retail there is hereby levied an additional privilege or license tax of ten (10) percent of the gross receipts of all such business derived from the sale of all alcoholic beverages, except beer and table wine. 
(2)	Taxes on the sale of beer and malt beverages shall be made in accordance with Tit. 28, Ch. 3, Art. 5B (§ 28-3-190 et seq.), Excise Tax on Beer, of the Code of Alabama 1975, as amended. 
(3)	Taxes on the sale of table wine are taxed under the Alabama Table Wine Act (Code of Ala. 1975, § 28-7-1 et seq.) and shall be deducted from the amount considered gross receipts considered under this section. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-73, 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-102. - Reports and payments; delinquency penalty. 
(a)	The tax levied under provisions of this division shall be due and payable in monthly installments on or before the fifteenth day of the month next succeeding the month in which sales are made. On or before the fifteenth day of each month after the tax provided in this division shall take effect, every person, firm or corporation upon whom the tax is levied shall render to the city, on a form prescribed by the city, a true and correct statement showing the gross receipts of whiskey, wine or liquors, and the like sold during the preceding month, which report shall accompany payments of the tax levied in this division. 
(b)	The city shall receive a purchasing statement from the state alcoholic beverage control store the first of each month. Each licensee shall have until the fifteenth of the month to pay these taxes. 
(c)	The tax imposed by this division shall be paid by each retail beer dealer to the wholesale dealer from whom the retail dealer purchases or otherwise acquires his retail stock, at the rates fixed, on or before the fifteenth day of the month next succeeding the date of purchase by the retailer. 
(d)	Any person who fails to pay the tax levied in this division within the time prescribed shall pay, in addition to the tax, a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of tax, together with the interest thereon, at the rate of one and one-half (11/2) percent per month or fraction thereof, from the date on which the tax levied in this division became payable, such penalty and interest to be assessed and collected as part of the tax. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-74, 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-103. - Collection from purchasers. 
    All persons subject to the provisions of the tax levied under this division shall add the tax to the sales price of the whiskey, wine or liquor sold, and collect the tax from the purchasers. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-75, 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-104. - Records. 
    All persons subject to provisions of the tax levied under this division shall keep and preserve for a period of three (3) years all invoices, sales slips or evidences received from or issued by the state alcoholic beverage control store or agency from which purchases are made, which will be subject to examination at all reasonable times by authorized representatives of the city. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-76, 9-28-87) 
Secs. 3-105-3-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SEXUAL CONDUCT; NUDITY 

Sec. 3-116. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages means any business establishment operating within the corporate limits of the city which sells, dispenses or allows the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
    Person means any individual, firm, association, joint venture, partnership, estate, trust, business trust, syndicate, fiduciary, corporation, or any combination thereof, or other entity. 
    Vulgar, distasteful or immoral act means any act performed for the purpose of arousing the sexual desires or attitudes of patrons, employees, owners or operators. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, §§ 8-90, 8-91, 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-117. - Purpose of division. 
    The purpose of this division is to prohibit sexual conduct and nudity in establishments dealing in alcoholic beverages and prohibit persons owning, maintaining or operating such establishments from permitting any such prohibited activity. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-89, 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-118. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)	No person shall expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage or any simulation thereof in an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages. 
(b)	No person shall expose to public view any portion of their breasts below the top of the areola or any simulation thereof in an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages. 
(c)	No person maintaining, owning or operating an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages shall suffer or permit any person to expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage or simulation thereof in an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages. 
(d)	No person maintaining, owning or operating an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages shall suffer, or permit any person to expose to public view any portion of their breasts below the top of the areola or any simulation thereof in an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages. 
(e)	No person shall engage in and no person maintaining, owning or operating an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages shall suffer or permit any person to engage in any sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, any sexual act which is prohibited by law, touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals or the simulation thereof within an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages. 
(f)	No person maintaining, owning or operating an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages shall allow any sexual demonstration, entertainment, exposition or contest, to include wet shirt, or any other vulgar, distasteful or immoral act on the premises. 
(g)	No licensee shall permit the showing of films, still pictures, electronic reproductions or other visual reproductions depicting any of the acts prohibited by this section, or any such acts which are prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-91, 9-28-87) 
Secs. 3-119-3-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 3-131. - Failure to pay license tax. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who is required to pay the license or privilege tax provided for in this division to fail to pay the tax at the time specified in this division, and such offense shall be a continuing offense against the city and each day during which the person shall sell or store such beverages in the city during such default shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-83, 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-132. - Sale of unstamped beer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any retail beer dealer to have, hold, possess, sell or offer for sale within the corporate limits of the city any beer, the container of which does not have securely affixed thereto decal stamps of the nature and in the amount as provided and required by law. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-84, 9-28-87) 
Sec. 3-133. - Delivery of unstamped beer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any wholesale beer dealer to ship or deliver, directly or otherwise, any beer to or within the corporate limits of the city which does not have securely affixed to each container thereof as provided and required by law the decal stamps issued therefor. 
(Ord. No. 15-87, § 8-85, 9-28-87) 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, Ch. 10; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 13; parades and demonstrations, Ch. 14; taxation, Ch. 19; zoning, App. A; injuring or trapping animals protected by law, § 13-1; public nuisances enumerated, § 13-63. (Back)
State Law reference- Animals, Code of Ala. 1975, § 3-1-1 et seq.; municipal regulation of animals, Code of Ala. 1975, § 3-7-13; animals at large, impoundment, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-110; municipal powers as to health, cleanliness, sanitation, quarantine, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-130 et seq.; cruelty to animals, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-11-14. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Keeping of hogs, pigs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep one (1) or more hogs or pigs in the city, except if they are kept in a pen or lot with not less than nine hundred (900) square feet to each pig or hog. The pen or lot must not be within three hundred (300) feet of any residence other than that of the owner or keeper. 
(Code 1979, § 3-12) 
Sec. 4-2. - Reasonable dog and cat owners; public nuisance. 
(a)	All owners of cats or dogs in the corporate limits of the city are expected and required to exercise control over the animal in such a manner and to such an extent as to prevent damage, inconvenience, annoyance or alarm to others. It shall, therefore, be unlawful and constitute a public nuisance for any person, including those that own, control or maintain any cat or dog in such a manner that the same is allowed or permitted to commit or engage in any of the following acts or conduct: 
(1)	Damage the property of another, including, but not limited to, damages to shrubs, flowers or other vegetation, entering into or searching through garbage and other waste receptacles, defecating upon the property of another, entering into, over or upon automobiles or motor vehicles of others in such a manner as to scratch, dent, mark or otherwise damage the same. 
(2)	Habitually or repeatedly chases, attacks, barks, snaps, or engages in overtly hostile or aggressive behavior towards others, including, but not limited to, children, pedestrians, joggers, bicyclers or other vehicles or other animals lawfully at large in the presence of their owner or upon property of the owner. 
(3)	Hunting, stalking or attacking animals or fowl, whether wild or domesticated, on the property of another. 
(b)	It shall also be unlawful and shall constitute a public nuisance for any person that owns, controls or maintains any cat or dog within the corporate limits of the city in such a manner that the area in which the animal is kept is habitually in an unsanitary condition or results in offensive odors, damage to the animals, damage to the public health, safety or welfare, or is maintained in such a manner as to create the potential for the breeding and transmission of diseases or obnoxious odors. 
(c)	Any person who shall be convicted of violation of any of the provisions of this section or any order issued hereunder shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more that five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months or by both fine and imprisonment. Each day that any violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as a separate offense and shall be punishable as a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 8-08, 10-13-08) 
Editor's note- 
Ord. No. 8-08, adopted October 13, 2008, set out provisions intended for use as § 4-59. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 4-2 
Sec. 4-3. - Limitations on number of cats. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or board on such person's premise within the corporate limits of the city more than four (4) cats. Provided, however, this section shall not apply to kittens under the age of three (3) months. 
(b)	A violation of this section exiting at the adoption of this section may continue; however, additional cats shall be prohibited. 
(c)	Any person who shall be convicted of violation of any of the provisions of this section or any order issued hereunder shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months or by both fine and imprisonment. Each day that any violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 8-08, 10-13-08) 
Editor's note- 
Ord. No. 8-08, adopted October 13, 2008, set out provisions intended for use as § 4-60. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 4-3 
Secs. 4-4-4-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Liability of owners of dogs biting or injuring persons, Code of Ala. 1975, § 3-6-1 et seq.; rabies, Code of Ala. 1975, § 3-7-1 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 4-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dog includes both male and female dogs and shall mean and include pet foxes, wolves and members of the canine family; provided that no such animal shall be deemed to be a dog within the terms of this article unless it is three (3) months old or over. 
    Keeping includes harboring or confining. 
    Owner means any person owning, harboring or keeping a dog within the city or who has right of property in a dog or who has a dog in his care or acts as its custodian or who permits a dog to remain on or about the premises occupied by him. 
    Vicious dog means a dog which has bitten or which, without provocation, bites or fiercely attacks any person or any other animal. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1; Ord. No. 10-92, § 1, 9-28-92) 
Sec. 4-27. - Dog control officer. 
    The city council may appoint a dog control officer who shall be an employee of the city and shall be paid such salary as the city council shall prescribe. It shall be the duty of the dog control officer to enforce the provisions of this article and to attempt to rid the city of stray, homeless, unclaimed and diseased dogs. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2; Ord. No. 10-92, § 2, 9-28-92) 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
Sec. 4-28. - Right of entry; interference with officer. 
    The dog control officer or any police officer of the city shall have the right, for the public health, welfare and safety, to enter upon any property within the city or its police jurisdiction for the purpose of capturing any dog running at large or capturing any dog upon written complaint that such dog has bitten a human being, capturing any vicious dog, or capturing any rabid dog. No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with any such officer who is authorized or empowered to perform any duty under this article. 
(Code 1979, § 3-9; Ord. No. 10-92, § 9, 9-28-92) 
Sec. 4-29. - Rabies inoculation required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, keep or harbor a dog within the city without having such dog inoculated annually for rabies, as required by Code of Ala. 1975, § 3-7A-4, as last amended. 
(Ord. No. 1-08, 1-14-08) 
Editor's note- 
Ord. No. 1-08, adopted January 14, 2008, repealed the former § 4-29 in its entirety, and enacted a new § 4-29 as set out herein. The former § 4-29 pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 4-30. - Inoculation tag-Required on dogs at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit to run or be upon a street, alley, sidewalk, thoroughfare or public place within the city, unless secured by a suitable leash, any dog which does not have attached to it a dog inoculation tag, as required by Code of Ala. 1975, § 3-7A-4, as last amended. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as permitting any such dog, whether tagged or untagged, to become a nuisance or to run at large upon the premises or any person other than the owner thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1-08, 1-14-08) 
Editor's note- 
Ord. No. 1-08, adopted January 14, 2008, repealed the former § 4-30 in its entirety, and enacted a new § 4-30 as set out herein. The former § 4-30 pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 4-31. - Same-Tag to be worn only by dog for which issued. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow any dog in his charge or control to wear a dog inoculation tag issued for a different dog. 
(Code 1979, § 3-5; Ord. No. 10-92, § 5, 9-28-92) 
Sec. 4-32. - Same-Attachment; unlawful removal. 
    Every dog over the age of three (3) months shall wear a substantial, durable collar or harness to which the inoculation tag provided for in this article shall be attached. It shall be unlawful to attach such tag by wire, rope or other inhumane means. No person shall remove the collar or harness or inoculation tag from any dog without the consent of its owner. 
(Code 1979, § 3-7; Ord. No. 10-92, § 7, 9-28-92) 
Sec. 4-33. - Impoundment of dogs not wearing inoculation tag. 
    Any dog which is found at large on any street, alley, sidewalk or public place in the city which does not have attached to it an inoculation tag duly issued for it for the then-current year is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and it shall be the duty of the dog control officer to take up and impound in the city pound every such dog. Any such dog so impounded may be redeemed from the pound by the owner thereof within five (5) days from impoundment thereof, or at any time thereafter before sale or destruction thereof, by paying to the city a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00), plus cost of keeping such dog in the pound, at the rate of five dollars ($5.00) per day. Every such dog which has remained in the pound for five (5) days or longer which has not been redeemed or retaken by the owner may be disposed of in such manner as the dog control officer might direct in a humane manner. Diseased or injured dogs impounded under this section shall be destroyed by the dog control officer in a humane manner without delay. 
(Code 1979, § 3-6; Ord. No. 10-92, § 6, 9-28-92) 
State law reference- Impounding of animals running at large, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 3-7-7, 11-47-110. 
Sec. 4-34. - Impoundment of dogs on premises other than owner's. 
    Any dog, whether wearing a tag or not, which is found upon the premises of a person other than the owner or keeper thereof shall, at the request of the owner of such premises, be impounded by the dog control officer, and the owner of the dog, if known, shall be notified of such impoundment. Such dog may be redeemed upon the payment of an impounding fee of five dollars ($5.00), plus the cost of keeping. If not redeemed by the owner within five (5) days, the dog shall be subject to disposition as provided in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 3-8; Ord. No. 10-92, § 8, 9-28-92) 
Secs. 4-35-4-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS, DANGEROUS ANIMALS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 05-01, §§ 1-15, adopted July 23, 2001, being not specifically amendatory of the Code has been treated as superceding former art. III, §§ 4-40-4-58, which pertained to similar subject matter as adopted by Ord. No. 9-99, § 1, adopted April, 7, 1999. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 4-40. - Purpose. 
    This article is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City of Clanton, Alabama. 
(Ord. No. 05-01, § 1, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 4-41. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article: 
    "Animal control officer" shall mean the chief of police, the person so designated by the city council of the City of Clanton, Alabama, or his or her authorized representative or designee. 
    "City" shall mean the City of Clanton, Alabama. 
    "Dangerous animal" shall mean an animal of any type or description which has: 
(1)	Caused bodily injury or disfigurement to any person.
(2)	Engaged in any attack on any person under circumstances which would indicate danger to personal safety. 
(3)	Inflicted or attempted to inflict bodily injury to any person or other animal.
(4)	Exhibited unusually aggressive behavior, such as an attack on another animal.
(5)	Bitten one or more person(s).
    "Domestic animals" shall mean those animals commonly accepted as domesticated household pets. Unless otherwise defined, such animals shall include dogs; cats; caged birds; gerbils; hamsters; guinea pigs; domesticated rabbits; fish; non-poisonous, non-venomous and non-constricting reptiles or amphibians; and other similar animals. 
    "Education exhibit" shall mean an exhibition for education purposes to a school or similar group not open to the general public and authorized and sanctioned by the appropriate school board. 
    "Exhibit" shall mean the exhibition of non-domestic animals to the public and includes zoos, circuses and education exhibits, whether or not for compensation. 
    "Exhibitor" shall mean a person whose business involves the showing or displaying of animals to the public and who is a Class C USDA licensee as defined by 9 C.F.R. § 1.1. as amended. 
    "Non-domestic animals" shall mean those animals commonly considered to be naturally wild and not naturally trained or domesticated, or which are commonly considered to be inherently dangerous to the health, safety, an welfare of people. Unless otherwise defined, such animals shall include: 
(1)	Any member of the large cat family (family felidae) including lions, tigers, cougars, bobcats, leopards, panthers, cheetahs, and jaguars, but excluding commonly accepted domesticated house cats. 
(2)	Any naturally wild member of the canine family (family canidae) including wolves, foxes, coyotes, and jackals, but excluding commonly accepted domesticated dogs. 
(3)	Any crossbreeds such as the crossbreed between a wolf and a dog, unless the crossbreed is commonly accepted as a domesticated house pet. 
(4)	Any member or relative of the rodent family including any skunk, raccoon, squirrel, or ferret, but excluding those members otherwise defined or commonly accepted as domesticated pets. 
(5)	Any poisonous, venomous, constricting, or inherently dangerous member of the reptile or amphibian families including but not limited to rattlesnakes, boa constrictors, cobras, pit vipers, crocodiles and alligators. 
(6)	Any member of family ursidae (bears).
(7)	Any monkey or nonhuman primate, bat, poisonous insect or arachnid, and poisonous spiders.
(8)	Any poisonous, venomous or inherently dangerous or vicious member of any family or species including any animal with wild, dangerous or vicious propensities. 
(9)	Any other animal which is not explicitly listed above but which can be reasonably defined by the terms of this article. 
    "Person" shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation, firm, association, company, entity or combination of individuals, of whatever form or character. 
    "Secondary perimeter" shall mean a fence, rope, elevation separation such a state, or some other physical arrangement as may be approved by the animal control officer by which the public is kept at such a distance from an animal as to avoid accidental or intentional contact with animals. 
    "USDA license" shall mean a person licensed as a breeder (Class A), dealer (Class B) or exhibitor (Class C) in accordance with 9 C.F.R. § 1.1, et seq., as amended. 
    "Veterinary clinic" shall mean a facility for the care and treatment of animals operated by a doctor of veterinary medicine licensed by the State of Alabama. 
(Ord. No. 05-01, § 2, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 4-42. - Non-domestic animals prohibited. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to bring into, receive into, buy, own, possess, exhibit, control, harbor, sell or offer for sale, any non-domestic animal within the corporate limits of the city without first applying for and obtaining a license from the city in accordance with the provisions of this article. Any person who owns or possesses such an animal at the time of the adoption of this article shall have fourteen (14) days in which to remove the animal from the city or to apply for and obtain a license as provided for herein, after which time the city ma [may] impound the animal as provided for herein. 
(Ord. No. 05-01, § 3, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 4-43. - Exceptions; license required. 
(a)	The city may issue a license to own, possess, buy, sell or bring a non-domestic animal into the city for non-domestic animals brought into the city only under the following circumstances: 
(1)	During exhibitions when under the direct supervision and presence of a person with the appropriate USDA license and in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(2)	While being transported directly to or from a USDA licensed facility when under the direct supervision and presence of a person with the appropriate USDA license and in accordance with the requirement of this article. 
(3)	While being transported directly to or from a veterinary clinic when under the direct supervision and presence of a person with the appropriate USDA license and in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(4)	While being held at a veterinary clinic.
(b)	An application for a license shall contain the following:
(1)	Name and address of the applicant.
(2)	A description of the method, materials and manner for confirming the non-domestic animal. 
(3)	Proof of the applicant's ability to respond in damages for bodily injury to or death of any person or persons or for damage to property owned by any other person which may result from the ownership, keeping or maintenance of such non-domestic animal. Proof of ability to respond in damages may be given by filing with the animal control officer a certificate of insurance from an insurance company authorized to do business in the state and acceptable to the city stating that the applicant is, at the time of the application, insured by a policy of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) combined single limit liability for bodily injury and property damage or by posting with the animal control officer a surety bond conditioned upon payment of such damages. Such certificate of insurance shall provide that no cancellation of the insurance or bond will be made unless fourteen (14) days written notice is first given to the animal control officer. 
(4)	If a corporation or other entity, the location of its principal office, and the names and addresses of its officers, directors, trustees, or managing officials or partners. 
(5)	A description of the animal or animals including species and the place of origin of the animal or animals. 
(6)	The address of the premises where the animal or animals will be kept and exhibited.
(7)	The license application shall be accompanied by a registration form and registration fee as set forth in section 4-46 of this article. 
(c)	It shall be the duty of any licensee, owner or person in possession of a non-domestic animal to promptly report to the City of Clanton Police Department and the animal control officer when any non-domestic animal is found missing. 
(Ord. No. 05-01, § 4, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 4-44. - Exhibition requirements. 
(a)	Only Class C licensees who have registered as exhibitors as required by this article shall be allowed to exhibit non-domestic animals within the city. 
(b)	At least one Class C licensee must be present at all times at each exhibition and in direct physical control of the non-domestic animals being exhibited. 
(c)	Except for educational exhibits, public contact with non-domestic animals shall be prevented by a secure enclosure with a secondary perimeter to avoid public contact with the animals. 
(d)	During educational exhibits where a secure enclosure is not used, public contact with animals shall be prevented by double leashes and a secondary perimeter. The animals shall be under the control of two (2) handlers, at least one being a Class C licensee. 
(e)	Exhibitors must notify the city five (5) working days prior to any exhibition within the city. The notice shall be in such a manner as determined by the animal control officer and shall include the date, time and location of each exhibition. 
(f)	Prior to the conduct of any exhibition in the city, exhibitors shall file with the police department and the animal control officer copies of USDA permits applicable to these regulations. Upon the request of the animal control officer, prior to, during or following an exhibition, exhibitors shall have available and present to the city or state health officials copies of health records, vaccination records and ownership records for the animals exhibited. 
(g)	Exhibitors shall have a written protocol for first aid and medical attention in the event of an injury caused during exhibitions. Exhibitors shall maintain appropriate first aid equipment and supplies at an exhibition. 
(h)	Exhibitors shall maintain liability insurance coverage covering any exhibition in the city in the amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) and naming the city as an additional insured. A copy of the insurance shall be provided to the city prior to the exhibition. 
(Ord. No. 05-01, § 5, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 4-45. - Transportation. 
(a)	Exhibition. Non-domestic animals transported to or from an exhibition in the city shall be under the direct physical control of a Class C licensee and contained in a secure cage inside an enclosed vehicle so as to prevent accidental or intentional contact with the public. 
(b)	Veterinary clinic. Animals transported to or from a veterinary clinic in the city shall be under the direct physical control of a person with a USDA license and contained in a secure cage inside an enclosed vehicle so as to prevent accidental or intentional contact with the public. 
(Ord. No. 05-01, § 6, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 4-46. - Registration. 
(a)	Any exhibitor proposing to conduct an exhibition in the city shall register with the police department and animal control officer with such information as reasonably determined by the animal control officer. 
(b)	An annual registration fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall accompany registration.
(Ord. No. 05-01, § 7, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 4-47. - Seizure-Disposition of non-domestic animals. 
    In addition to other penalties or remedies provided for herein, the animal control officer may notify the owner or person in possession thereof in writing that the non-domestic animal is being kept or possessed in violation of this article and may order the animal seized or make such orders as deemed proper. The notice shall state that the owner or person in possession of the non-domestic animal shall have seven (7) days in which to request a hearing before the city council as provided in section 4-48 of this article; provided, however, that the non-domestic animal shall not be released from impoundment prior to such hearing before the city council. 
(Ord. No. 05-01, § 8, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 4-48. - Hearing. 
(a)	Any person affected by any interpretation or requirement of the animal control officer or any administrative penalty ordered under this article may, within seven (7) days of such, request in writing a hearing before the animal control officer to show cause why such should be modified or made to not apply to such person. The animal control officer or his or her designee shall hold the requested hearing as soon as practical after receiving the request, at which time the person affected shall have an opportunity to be heard. At the conclusion of the hearing, the animal control officer shall issue a written response to the person. 
(b)	The owner or person in possession of the dangerous animal shall have seven (7) days in which to appeal any order issued by the animal control office and request a hearing before the city council. If the owner or person in possession of the dangerous animal requests a hearing in writing, the hearing shall be held before the city council, which shall set a date for hearing not more than three (3) weeks after demand for such hearing. After considering the evidence, the city council shall make an order as it deems proper in accordance with the provisions of this article. A decision by the city council shall constitute a final administrative decision. 
(Ord. No. 05-01, § 9, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 4-49. - Dangerous animals. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person's dangerous animal to inflict bodily injury to any person or other animal. This section shall not apply to an attack by a dog under the control of a law enforcement officer or to an attack upon an uninvited intruder who has entered the owner's home with criminal intent. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to allow a dangerous animal to run at large in the city. 
(c)	As provided for herein, upon finding that an animal is dangerous, the owner or person in possession of a dangerous animal may be ordered to comply with any one or more of the following in addition to any penalty as provided for herein: 
(1)	That the owner or person in possession of the dangerous animal provide and maintain a proper enclosure for the dangerous animal provided such enclosure is suitable to prevent the animal from escaping. 
(2)	That the owner or person in possession of the dangerous animal post the front and rear of the premises with clearly visible warning signs, including a warning symbol to inform children, that there is a dangerous animal on the property. 
(3)	Provide and show proof annually of liability insurance in the minimum amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
(4)	If the dangerous animal is a dog and is outside the proper enclosure, the dog must be muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash (not to exceed six (6) feet in length) and under the physical restraint of a person sixteen (16) years of age or older. The muzzle must be of such design as to prevent the dog from biting any person or animal. 
(5)	If the animal is a dog, it must have an easily identifiable tag identifying the dog as dangerous affixed to its collar at all times. 
(6)	The animal must be up to date on rabies vaccinations.
(d)	The animal control officer, after having determined that an animal is dangerous, may proceed in the following manner: 
(1)	The owner or person in possession thereof shall be notified in writing that the animal is dangerous and may order the animal seized or make such orders as deemed proper. The notice shall state that the owner or person in possession of the dangerous animal shall have seven (7) days in which appeal any order issued by the animal control officer and request a hearing before the city council. 
(2)	If the owner or person in possession of the dangerous animal requests a hearing in writing, the hearing shall be held before the city council, which shall set a date for hearing not more than three (3) weeks after demand for such hearing. After considering the evidence, the city council shall make an order as it deems property including the destruction of the animal, any or all of the provisions of subparagraph (c) of this section, or any combination thereof. 
(e)	The animal control officer may immediately seize or cause to be seized any dangerous animal if the owner or person who has possession thereof fails to meet or comply with any requirement or regulation imposed herein or by the municipal judge of the city. 
(f)	The dangerous animal may be destroyed if:
(1)	The animal is dangerous as demonstrated by a vicious attack, an unprovoked attack, an attack without warning or multiple attacks; or 
(2)	The owner or person in possession of the dangerous animal has demonstrated an inability or unwillingness to control the dangerous animal in order to prevent injury to persons or other animals. 
(g)	A dangerous animal seized under the provisions of this article may, upon approval of the animal control officer, or the city council if a hearing is requested, be reclaimed by the owner upon payment of impounding and boarding fees and such other fees as are incurred by the city in seizing and keeping such animal provided that such owner must comply with the provisions of subsection (c) of this section. An animal not reclaimed within seven (7) days, and if no hearing is requested as provided for herein, may be disposed of as provided herein or by applicable law and the owner of the animal shall be liable for all costs incurred in seizing, confining, boarding and disposing of such animal. 
(Ord. No. 05-01, § 10, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 4-50. - Authorization. 
(a)	The animal control officer shall make such rules and regulations as shall be reasonable and necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. This shall include the necessary forms, first aid and medical protocols, and informational material necessary for the registration of exhibitors, conduct of exhibitions and enforcement. 
(b)	The animal control officer shall require the filing of bite reports pertaining to non-domestic animals. 
(c)	The animal control officer shall be responsible for the enforcement of this article and is authorized to make such investigation, to issue notices, orders, and directions as are necessary for such enforcement, and shall register exhibiters as herein required. 
(Ord. No. 05-01, § 11, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 4-51. - Violation; misdemeanor. 
    Any person who shall be convicted of violation of any of the provisions of this article or any order issued hereunder shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months or by both fine and imprisonment. Each day that any violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as a separate offense and shall be punishable as a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 05-01, § 12, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 4-52. - Nuisance. 
    Possession of any animal within the corporate limits of the city in violation of the provisions of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and, in addition to any other penalties or remedies for herein, such public nuisance may be abated as provided by applicable law including by issuance of an injunction by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 05-01, § 13, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 4-53. - Administrative penalty. 
(a)	Notwithstanding any other remedy or procedure set forth in this article, any person who is found to have violated any provision of this article, or any order issued thereunder, may be assessed an administrative penalty. Such penalty may include the suspension or revocation of the right to conduct future exhibitions by the exhibitor and the suspension or revocation of any license issued hereunder. 
(b)	Any person who willfully, negligently or in violation of the provisions of this article keeps, possesses or maintains a non-domestic animal or dangerous animal shall be liable for any expenses incurred in searching for, containing, returning or disposing of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 05-01, § 14, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 4-54. - Stopping an attack. 
    If any police officer or the animal control officer is witness to an attack by an animal upon a person or another animal, the officer may take whatever means the officer deems appropriate to bring the attack to an end and prevent injury or further injury to the victim. 
(Ord. No. 05-01, § 15, 7-23-01) 
Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; flood damage prevention, Ch. 8; housing, Ch. 9; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 10; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 18; taxation, Ch. 19; utilities, Ch. 20; zoning, App. A; location of businesses, § 10-36; compliance with sanitary regulations prerequisite to issuance of building permit, § 20-52; administration of zoning ordinance, App. A, § 7. (Back)
State Law reference- Municipal building regulations generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-59; adoption of certain technical codes by reference, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-8; power of cities to regulate sanitary conditions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-131; refusal to permit a legally authorized inspection of one's property, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-10-3; state code of minimum building standards, Code of Ala. 1975, § 41-9-160 et seq.; minimum housing standards and regulation of unsafe buildings, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-53-1 et seq.; plumbers and gasfitters, Code of Ala. 1975, § 34-37-1 et seq. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Fire limits-Designated. 
    The fire limits in the city shall embrace and include the following territory in the city: 
(1)	Blocks numbered 30, 31, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11, all as shown by the map or plat of the city, as the plat is of record in the office of judge of probate of the county; also block 6 of the Gowan Addition to the city as the map or plat of the Gowan Addition is recorded in the office of the judge of probate in the county; also that area in the city which is bounded on the north by First Avenue South, on the east by Sixth Street, on the south by Second Avenue South if Second Avenue South was extended to the right-of-way of the Louisville and Nashville Railroad, and on the west by the Louisville and Nashville Railroad; also all of that area in the city which is bounded on the south by Fourth Avenue North, on the east by Seventh Street, and on the north by Chilton Avenue, as such avenue is shown by the W.M. Adams lots as the lots appear of record on page 6 of the map book 1 in the office of judge of probate of the county, and on the west by the Louisville and Nashville Railroad; also the south half of block A and block 29 which is an area bounded on the north by Oakdale Avenue as shown on the map or plat of the W.M. Adams lots in the probate office of the county, and bounded on the east by Sixth Street, on the south by Fourth Avenue, and on the west by Seventh Street, all of the area described in this subsection being east of the Louisville and Nashville Railroad as the railroad is now located through the city. 
(2)	All of the following area in the city, which is located west of the Louisville and Nashville Railroad as the railroad is now located in the city: lots numbered 1 and 4 in block 1; all of block 2 except lots numbered 1 and 4; also all that area in the city which is bounded on the north by Second Avenue, on the east by the Louisville and Nashville Railroad and on the south by First Avenue South, if First Avenue South was extended in a westerly direction across the Louisville and Nashville Railroad so as to intersect Ninth Street, if Ninth Street was extended in a southerly direction, and on the west by Ninth Street if Ninth Street was extended in a southerly direction so as to intersect First Avenue, if First Avenue South was extended in a westerly direction. 
(Code 1979, § 6-1) 
Sec. 5-2. - Same-Building regulations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or construct any building or structure within the fire limits designated in section 5-1 unless the building or structure is erected or constructed of brick, stone or concrete, or to cover any such building or structure, or to recover any building or structure, with any material other than slate or metal; provided that the city council may permit a structure of wood to be erected within the fire limits, such permission to be shown in the minutes of proceedings, provided that the structure of wood does not exceed six (6) feet in height from the ground and is covered with metal. 
(Code 1979, § 6-2) 
Secs. 5-3-5-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODES 

Sec. 5-26. - Adoption; amendments. 
(a)	Adoption. The following codes are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied fully in this section: 
2009 International Building Code (IBC). 
2009 International Residential Code (IRC). 
2009 International Mechanical Code (IMC). 
2008 National Electrical Code (NEC). 
2009 International Plumbing Code (IPC). 
2009 International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC). 
2009 International Fire Code (IFC). 
2009 International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC). 
2009 International Existing Building Code (IEBC). 
(b)	Amendments. The codes adopted in subsection 5-26(a) are amended as follows: 
AMENDMENT 1. General inserts and modifications. 
The following sections are hereby revised and/or modified: 
Section 101.1 in the following: 2009 International Fire Code, 2009 International Building Code (IBC), 2009 International Residential Code (IRC) (with respect to Section R101.1), 2009 International Mechanical Code (IMC), 2009 International Plumbing Code (IPC), 2009 International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC), 2009 International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC), and 2009 The International Existing Building Code (IEBC). 
Insert: CITY OF CLANTON. 
Section 103.1 in the following: 2009 International Building Code (IBC), 2009 International Residential Code (IRC) (with respect to Section 103.1), 2009 International Mechanical Code (IMC), 2009 International Plumbing Code (IPC), 2009 International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC), 2009 International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC), 2009 The International Existing Building Code (IEBC), will be changed from: the department of building safety, the department of plumbing inspection, the department of property maintenance inspection, the department of inspection, and the department of mechanical inspection, to: "The Building Department." 
Article 100 of the 2008 National Electrical Code (NEC) refers to an "Authority Having Jurisdiction." The Building Official or any of his/her designees, shall be included within the definition of an "Authority Having Jurisdiction." 
AMENDMENT 2. 
The 2009 International Building Code (including Section 113); the 2009 International Property Maintenance Code (including Section 111); the 2009 International Fire Code (including Section 108); the 2009 International Existing Building Code (including Section 112); the 2009 International Mechanical Code (including Section 109); the 2009 International Fuel Gas Code (including Section 109); the 2009 International Residential Code (including Section R112); and the 2009 International Plumbing Code (including Section 109) refer to a "board of appeals." All such references shall relate to the City of Clanton Code Enforcement Board of Appeals. The provisions in this Amendment 2 shall supersede any contradictory and irreconcilable provisions in the above-referenced codes, as the same relate to a board of appeals and the operation or decisions thereof. 
(a)	Establishment. There is hereby established the "City of Clanton Code Enforcement Board of Appeals" (referred to herein as the "Board"). The Board shall exercise the powers as set forth herein and in the respective codes adopted by the City and referenced in this Amendment 2. 
(b)	Membership of Board. The Board shall consist of five persons appointed by the City Council to serve for a term of three years, except that the City Council shall upon first appointing members to the Board modify the length of the initial terms so as to ensure the members serve staggered terms. Each new member shall serve for three years or until a successor has been appointed. No member of the Board may be an employee of the City. The Building Official, or his designee, shall be an ex officio member of said board but shall have no vote on any matter before the Board. The City Council shall appoint two alternate members who shall be called by the Board chairperson to hear appeals during the absence or disqualification of a member. Alternate members shall be appointed for three years, or until a successor has been appointed. The City Council may remove any member of the Board at any time in its sole discretion, and appoint another person to serve during his/her remaining term. Members of the Board shall not be compensated for their services as members of the Board. 
(c)	Rules and Procedures. The Board is authorized to establish policies and procedures necessary to carry out its purpose as set forth in the respective codes adopted by the City and referenced in this Amendment 2. The Board may adopt and make available to the public through the secretary procedures under which a hearing shall be conducted. The procedures will not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only relevant information be received. 
(d)	Chairperson. The Board shall annually select one of its members to serve as chairperson.
(e)	Disqualification. A member of the Board shall not hear an appeal in which that member has a personal, professional, or financial interest. 
(f)	Secretary. The chairperson shall designate a qualified clerk to serve as secretary to the Board. The secretary shall file a detailed record of all proceedings in the office of the Building Official. 
(g)	Meetings. The Board shall meet upon notice from the chairperson, within thirty (30) days of the filing of an appeal or at regular, periodic meetings as may be established by the Board. 
(h)	Postponement. Five members must be present to hear an appeal. When five members are not present to hear an appeal, the hearing shall be postponed. 
(i)	Appeal. An application for appeal of a notice of violation shall be filed on a form obtained from the building inspector within twenty (20) days after the notice of violation was served. 
(j)	Board decision. The Board shall modify or reverse the decision of the Building Official by a concurring vote of a majority of its members. The Building Official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the Board. 
AMENDMENT 3. 
The International Residential Building Code, 2009 edition, Code Section R313, concerning Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems, shall be deleted in its entirety. The deletion of this Section R313 shall supersede any contradictory and irreconcilable provisions in any code adopted as stated in Section 5-26 of the Code of Ordinances. 
AMENDMENT 4. 
Permit Fees. All references to fees shall mean the "City of Clanton - Schedule of Permit Fees". On new buildings, structures, alterations, additions, or modifications to existing buildings or structures, a permit fee shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule established in Section 5-26 of the Code of Clanton, Alabama. 
TOTAL VALUATION 
1.	Determining the Valuation of a Detached Single-Family Dwelling.
a.	The actual contract price or sum of contracts shall be used in determining the valuation of the detached single-family dwelling. 
b.	Exceptions. Provided that the minimum price of $65.00 per square foot of heated area plus $30.00 for all unheated areas, porches, balcony, garages, etc be used in determining the valuation of a single-family detached building. 
c.	All Buildings Excluding Single-Family Dwelling. All buildings, other than single-family detached, shall have their values taken from the actual contract price, Or the sum of contracts. 
d.	All valuations of $2000.00 (two thousand dollars) or less shall have a minimum fee of $20.00 (twenty dollars). 
2.	Penalties. Where work for which a permit is required by the 2009 International Building Code is started or proceeded prior to obtaining said permit, the fees herein specified shall be doubled, but the payment of such doubled fee shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of the code in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed herein. 
(Code 1979, § 4-1; Ord. No. 1-83, § 1, 3-28-83; Ord. No. 12-91, § 1, 5-13-91; Ord. No. 14-97, § 1, 8-27-97; Ord. No. 2-02, 3-25-02; Ord. No. 5-03, § 1, 9-22-03; Ord. No. 6-03, § 1, 9-22-03; Ord. No. 8-10, § 1, 8-9-2010) 
Editor's note- 
Ord. No. 8-10, § 4, adopted Aug. 9, 2010, provides that nothing in this ordinance or in the residential code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in section 2 of this ordinance; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character to be lost, impaired or affected by this ordinance. 
Sec. 5-27. - Compliance. 
    No person shall construct, alter, change or amend any structure or building or any plumbing, gas or electrical lines, fixtures or appliances contrary to the codes enumerated and adopted in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 4-2) 
Sec. 5-28. - Enforcement. 
    Within the codes adopted in this article, when reference is made to the duties of certain officials named therein, that designated official in the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in the code shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of the code is concerned. 
(Ord. No. 1-83, § 3, 3-28-83; Ord. No. 12-91, § 3, 5-13-91) 
Secs. 5-29-5-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-51. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Electrician means any person having a regular place of business in his name who performs the work of installing, maintaining, altering or repairing, for hire, wires, electric signs, devices, conduits, apparatus, fixtures or other appliances for carrying or using electricity for light, heat or power purposes. 
    Person means any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, company, trustee, agency or association, and any agent, servant, employee or officer thereof, singular or plural. 
    Within the city refers to both the corporate limits and the police jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1979, § 4-6) 
Sec. 5-52. - Interpretation of article. 
    The provisions of this article shall not be construed to relieve any person from or to lessen the responsibility of any person owning, operating, controlling, installing or repairing any electrical wiring, apparatus, devices or equipment for damage or an injury to any person or property, nor shall it be construed to impose on the city any liability whatever by reason of the examinations provided for in this article or by reason of any certificate issued under this article. 
(Code 1979, § 4-7) 
Sec. 5-53. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article or doing or failing to do any act or thing prohibited by this article or declared by this article to be unlawful shall be guilty of an offense against the city and shall, upon conviction in any case, be punished as provided in section 1-9, and revocation of license may be imposed. 
(Code 1979, § 4-18) 
Sec. 5-54. - Electrical official-Authority generally. 
    The electrical official is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to regulate and determine the placing of electrical wires or other appliances for electric light, heat, or power in the city, and to cause such wires or appliances to be placed, constructed, guarded and maintained so as not to cause fires or accidents endangering life or property. 
(Code 1979, § 4-4) 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
Sec. 5-55. - Same-Powers and duties. 
(a)	The electrical official shall enforce the provisions of this article and he or his duly authorized representative may enter any structure or premises to perform any duty imposed upon him by this Code. 
(b)	The electrical official shall have the right, in the discharge of his duties, to enter, during reasonable hours, any building, manhole or subway, or to climb any pole, for the purpose of examining and testing the electrical appliances therein or thereon contained. For that purpose, he shall be given prompt access to all buildings, public and private, and to all manholes, subways or poles. Whenever an electric wire or appliance shall be defective through improper or insufficient insulation, or for any other reason, he shall at once cause the removal of such defect at the expense of the owner of such wires or appliances. 
(Code 1979, §§ 4-5, 4-9) 
Sec. 5-56. - Permit. 
(a)	Application for a permit to install, add to or repair electrical systems shall be made to the electrical official. The applicant shall furnish such information as may be required to complete the application form furnished by the electrical official. Any permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have been commenced within six (6) months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of one (1) year after the work is commenced. 
(b)	No permit shall be valid until the fees prescribed shall have been paid. If any person commences any work on electrical installation before obtaining the necessary permit from the city, he shall be subject to the penalty prescribed in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 4-14) 
Sec. 5-57. - Fees. 
    The following are the fees to be charged in connection with electrical permits and inspections: 
For issuing permit$ 1.00For inspecting:Fixtures (lights, switches and outlets): 1 to 10  1.0011 to 20  2.0021 to 30   3.0031 to 40  4.0041 to 59  5.00All over 50 to be figured in proportionMotors:Up to 3 hp  2.00 4 hp to 10 hp  3.0011 hp to 20 hp  4.0020 hp and over   6.00Power box, each  1.00Loop, each  1.00Panel box, each  1.00Circuits, each  1.00Heat pump and unit1-story building  5.0011/2-story building  7.502-story building 10.00 
(Code 1979, § 4-15) 
Sec. 5-58. - Inspection. 
    Work regulated under this article must be inspected when roughed in. When this inspection has been completed, notification will be issued by the inspector to the supplier of current. If, for any reason, an installation does not pass these inspections, an additional inspection shall be made after the installation has been changed so as to conform to specifications. An inspection fee of two dollars ($2.00) will be charged for each additional inspection made, and a certificate of inspection will be issued for each approved installation. 
(Code 1979, § 4-16) 
Secs. 5-59-5-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Electrical contractors, Code of Ala. 1975, § 34-36-1 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 5-71. - Required. 
    No person shall, within the city or the police jurisdiction, work at or engage in the business of installing, maintaining, altering or repairing electric wires, conduits, apparatus, fixtures, electric or neon signs, or other appliances for carrying or using electricity for light, heat or power purposes unless such person has a license as provided by this division. 
(Code 1979, § 4-8) 
Sec. 5-72. - Exemption. 
    The provisions of this division requiring a license for working at or engaging in the business of installing, maintaining, altering or repairing electric wires, conduits, apparatus, fixtures or other appliances shall not apply to homeowners. Any individual may do such work upon his own premises, provided the work is done by himself and is used exclusively by him or his family, and when he demonstrates to the electrical inspector that he is qualified and receives from the electrical inspector a special permit to do such work and pays the fees provided for in section 5-57. 
(Code 1979, § 4-12) 
Sec. 5-73. - Application. 
    All applications for licenses under this division shall be made in writing to the electrical inspector. The applicant shall state in this application the name and age of the applicant and the experience of the applicant in performing electrical work. 
(Code 1979, § 4-10) 
Sec. 5-74. - Fee. 
    Each application for a license under this division shall be accompanied by a fee of five dollars ($5.00). An applicant who fails in his examination shall not have his fee returned to him, but shall be entitled to one (1) reexamination without payment of any additional fee. For each subsequent examination, he shall pay the regular fee of five dollars ($5.00). The five-dollar fee shall also accompany each application for a renewal certificate. All fees required to be paid under the provisions of this section shall be paid to the city clerk. 
(Code 1979, § 4-11) 
Sec. 5-75. - Bond. 
    No business license shall be issued to any person to engage in the business or trade of electrical construction and installation, or electrical contractor, unless such person shall have filed with the city clerk a bond approved by the city clerk, in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), payable to the city. The bond shall be made by some suitable surety company duly authorized to do business in the state and the city, and shall be conditioned that such person will faithfully perform all work and will comply with and observe all ordinances, rules and regulations of the city regulating electrical work, will pay all license, permit and inspection fees accruing thereto, will save the city harmless from all loss, damage or injury resulting from any work done or any neglect or omission incident thereto by such person or his agents, servants or employees, or from improper material used therein, and will restore to like condition to that found any street, alley, sidewalk or other property and keep the property in good repair for one (1) year. 
(Code 1979, § 4-13) 
Sec. 5-76. - Correction of work; revocation. 
(a)	Any person engaged in the electrical business whose work does not conform to the applicable rules and regulations set out in this chapter or whose workmanship or materials are of inferior quality, shall, on notice from the electrical inspector, make necessary changes or corrections at once so as to conform to this Code. If the work has not been so changed after ten (10) days' notice from the electrical inspector, the electrical inspector shall then refuse to issue any more permits until such work has fully complied with the rules and regulations of this Code. The electrical inspector may appear before the governing authority and request that all licenses be revoked because of continuous violations. When the revocation of any such license is to be considered at any meeting, the person to whom the license has been issued shall have at least three (3) days' notice in writing of the time and place of such meeting, together with a statement of the grounds upon which it is proposed to revoke such license. 
(b)	All work must meet specifications and requirements of the electrical code adopted by the city. 
(Code 1979, § 4-17) 
Chapter 6 - ELECTIONS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. (Back)
State Law reference- Municipal elections, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-46-1 et seq.; elections generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 17-1-1 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 6-1. - Conduct. 
    General municipal elections held in the city shall be conducted pursuant to the provisions of Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-46-2 and 11-46-20 et seq. 
(Code 1979, § 5-1) 
Sec. 6-2. - Election of mayor and council-Generally. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-2, the city council shall consist of a mayor and five (5) aldermen, who shall be elected from the city, by the qualified electors of the city, at general municipal elections to be held on the fourth Tuesday in August, and quadrennially thereafter. Such officers elected at such general municipal elections shall commence their term of office on the first Monday in October following their election and serve for four-year terms, or until their successors are lawfully chosen and installed in office. 
(Code 1979, § 5-2) 
Sec. 6-3. - Same-Establishment of wards. 
    The method of election of the members of the city council and the mayor shall be as follows: 
(1)	The city shall be divided into five (5) wards having as nearly as may be the same number of inhabitants. The wards shall be designated as ward number 1, ward number 2, ward number 3, ward number 4 and ward number 5. One (1) councilmember shall be elected from each ward and the mayor shall be elected from the city at large. 
(2)	The plan shall meet the constitutional requirement of one (1) man, one (1) vote.
(3)	The geographical boundaries of the wards shall be established so as to embrace one (1) minority ward which shall have a population of not less than sixty (60) percent of the minority race, and the minority community shall have an opportunity to be heard in the development of the plan. 
(Ord. No. 6-84, § I, 5-14-84) 
Sec. 6-4. - Same-Polling places. 
    The city establishes and adopts the following locations as the polling places for the election of the member of the city council for the ward or district where the polling place is located. The location of the polling places shall be by ward number and shall be as follows: 
(1)	Ward number 1: Clanton Airport, Clanton Avionics office, Airport Road.
(2)	Ward number 2: Clanton city park, facility building, Lay Dam Road.
(3)	Ward number 3: Old Clanton Elementary School, Fifth Avenue North.
(4)	Ward number 4: Veteran's club, Enterprise Road.
(5)	Ward number 5: Martin Funeral Home, back door, Fourth Avenue North at Thirteenth Street.
(Ord. No. 6-88, § I, 6-27-88) 
Sec. 6-5. - Qualification fees. 
(a)	A qualification fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) is hereby fixed and imposed upon all candidates seeking election as mayor of the city, except as hereinafter provided for. 
(b)	A qualification fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) is hereby fixed and imposed upon all candidates seeking election as councilmember of the city, except as hereinafter provided for. 
(c)	Such qualification fee shall be paid to the city clerk and deposited to the general fund of the city at or prior to the time of taking out qualification papers by any such candidates. 
(d)	Any person desiring to qualify who is not financially able to pay the required fee may qualify provided such prospective candidate furnishes the clerk with an affidavit stating that he is financially unable to pay the required fee fixed by this section. 
(e)	This section is adopted pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-46-2 and shall be effective in all elections, both general and special, for aforesaid offices from and after the date of adoption. 
(Ord. No. 9-96, §§ 1-5, 6-10-96) 
Chapter 7 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings, Ch. 5; flood damage prevention, Ch. 8; housing, Ch. 9; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 10; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 11; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 13; police, Ch. 16; solid waste, Ch. 17; utilities, Ch. 20; subdivisions, App. B; fire services in police jurisdiction, § 2-5; levy of tax for sale and storage of gasoline, § 10-110; fireworks, § 13-10 et seq.; public nuisances enumerated, § 13-63; abatement of fire and explosion hazards, App. A, § 9(12); general improvements in subdivisions, App. B, art. VI, § 1. (Back)
State Law reference- Firemen, rescue squad members, etc., rendering first aid or emergency care at scene of accident, etc., Code of Ala. 1975, § 6-5-332; volunteer firemen or rescue squad members entering burning buildings, etc., to preserve property, etc., Code of Ala. 1975, § 6-5-335; municipal fire regulations, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-59; fire department, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-140 et seq.; adoption of fire prevention code, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-8; water, sewer and fire protection authorities, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-88-1 et seq.; chief of fire department and chief of police as assistants to state fire marshal, Code of Ala. 1975, § 36-19-3; fire fighters' personnel standards and education commission, Code of Ala. 1975, § 36-32-1 et seq.; fireworks, Code of Ala. 1975, § 8-17-210 et seq.; license tax paid by dealers in fireworks, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-12-102. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any rule established by the chief of the fire department shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 1979, § 9-9) 
Sec. 7-2. - Fire department created; composition. 
    There is hereby created for the city a fire department to be composed of one (1) fire chief and as many firefighters as the mayor, chief of the fire department and members of the city council may deem necessary for the efficient handling of the department. 
(Code 1979, § 2-9) 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
Sec. 7-3. - Appointment and compensation of fire chief, firefighters. 
    The chief of the fire department and the members of the fire department shall be appointed by the mayor and members of the waterworks committee, and shall hold their office at the will of the city council. The compensation to be paid the chief of the fire department and members of the fire department shall be fixed by the city council from time to time as the needs of the city may require. 
(Code 1979, § 2-10) 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
Sec. 7-4. - Authority to make arrests. 
    The chief of the fire department and each member of the fire department shall have authority to make arrests for a violation, within his presence, of any of the rules or regulations set out in this chapter or any rules or regulations which may be promulgated and adopted by the chief of the fire department, and it shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department and each member of the fire department to arrest any person who violates any of such rules and regulations within his presence. 
(Code 1979, § 9-8) 
Cross reference- Police, Ch. 16. 
Sec. 7-5. - Unauthorized use of fire equipment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person other than the chief of the fire department and the members of the fire department to use, remove or assist in using or removing any fire hose, ladder, reel or any part of the fire equipment of the city, unless directed to do so by the chief of the fire department or some member of the fire department. It shall be unlawful to use the fire equipment of the city for any purpose other than for fire drills and the extinguishing of fires. 
(Code 1979, § 9-3) 
Cross reference- Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 13. 
Sec. 7-6. - Injuring fireplug, standpipe or manhole. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle or other conveyance upon or against any fireplug, standpipe or manhole or to injure any fireplug, standpipe or manhole with any other instrument. 
(Code 1979, § 9-5) 
Sec. 7-7. - Interfering with fire-extinguishing activities. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, handle or use any fire hose, reel, ladder or other parts of the fire equipment while being used in extinguishing a fire, or for any person to interfere with or fail to obey reasonable instructions or orders given by the chief of the fire department or any member of the fire department toward the efficient extinguishing of the fire or for the preserving of property or the preventing of injury to persons or property. 
(Code 1979, § 9-6) 
Sec. 7-8. - Danger zones at fires. 
    The chief of the fire department or other member of the fire department who may be acting as such shall have authority to establish a danger zone at each fire and it shall be unlawful for any person to go within the zone as established until the fire is fully extinguished and all objects of danger are removed and the premises within the zone are approved as safe for persons to go upon by the chief of the fire department or member acting as such. 
(Code 1979, § 9-7) 
Secs. 7-9-7-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 7-36. - Fire prevention code adopted. 
    There is hereby adopted the Standard Fire Prevention Code, edition of 1991, recommended by the American Insurance Association, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, city hall building. 
(Code 1979, §§ 4-1, 6-7; Ord. No. 12-91, § 1, 5-13-91) 
Secs. 7-37-7-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BURNING OF GARBAGE 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Solid waste, Ch. 17. (Back)
Sec. 7-51. - Exemption from division. 
    Nothing in this division shall prohibit the fire department of the city from burning, within the corporate limits of the city or the police jurisdiction thereof, any trash, buildings or structures, rubbish, waste or any substance commonly known as garbage. 
(Ord. No. 15-86, § 3, 10-27-86) 
Sec. 7-52. - Permit-Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to voluntarily set fire to or burn, within the corporate limits of the city thereof, any trash, rubbish, waste, or any other substance commonly known as garbage without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Clanton Fire Department. 
(Ord. No. 15-86, § 1, 10-27-86; Ord. No. 9-05, 9-12-05) 
Sec. 7-53. - Same-Application; granting. 
    If any person desires to exercise controlled burning or voluntary burning of trash, rubbish, waste or any substance commonly known as garbage within the corporate limits of the city, an application for a permit to do so must first be obtained from the Clanton Fire Department, in compliance with all applicable policies and regulations of the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 15-86, § 2, 10-27-86; Ord. No. 9-05, 9-12-05) 
Sec. 7-54. - Description of charges and fines. 
    The description of charges and the applicable fines thereto are described as follows: 
(1)	Burning without permit .....$50.00 
(2)	Fire extinguisher .....$25.00 
(3)	Means of egress obstructed .....$75.00 
(4)	Emergency exit signs illuminated .....$25.00 
(5)	Obstructing a fire hydrant .....$75.00 
(6)	Commercial hood required .....$75.00 
(7)	Signage for fire department connection required .....$25.00 
(8)	Fire apparatus access roads .....$25.00 
(9)	Fire alarm required .....$50.00 
(10)	Sprinkler ceiling clearance .....$25.00 
(11)	Vacant premises .....$25.00 
(12)	Sprinklers required .....$50.00 
(13)	Storage of LP containers .....$25.00 
(14)	Parking in fire lane .....$50.00 
    In addition thereto, court costs, if any, shall be added to the above enumerated fines in the event the same are applicable and if so, in the applicable amount according to the 1975 Code of Alabama and the ordinances of the City of Clanton, Alabama, as the same apply to assessment of the same in the municipal court of the City of Clanton, Alabama. 
(Ord. No. 2-13, 3-25-2013) 
Chapter 8 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2-09, adopted Feb. 9, 2009, repealed the former Ch. 8, Art. I, §§ 8-1-8-9, Art. II, §§ 8-36-8-39, Art. III, §§ 8-61-8-64, Art. IV, §§ 8-86-8-91, and enacted a new Ch. 8 as set out herein. The former Ch. 8 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 4-87, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 5-98, 1-26-98. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference- Buildings, Ch. 5; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; housing, Ch. 9; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 10; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 13; zoning, App. A; subdivisions, App. B; street plan under subdivision regulations, App. B, art. V, § 2. (Back)
State Law reference- Assessments for protection against floods, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-48-16. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
    Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction." 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the building inspector's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one (1) to three (3) feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 8-3. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
    Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, and storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, pilings, posts, columns, piers, or shear walls. 
    Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before May 10, 1984. [i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that community's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)]. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before May 10, 1984. [i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)	The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
(2)	The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been designated as Zone A. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study/flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
    Floodplain means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
    Floodway (regulatory floodway) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Functionally dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facility that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding, and ship repair facilities. The term does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.	By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
b.	Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
    Levee means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
    Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one (1) or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this chapter, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum. 
    National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced after May 10, 1984 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. [i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for community participation in the (NFIP)] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after May 10, 1984. [i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
    Repetitive loss means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)	Built on a single chassis;
(2)	Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
(3)	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(4)	Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Remedy a violation means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
    Section 1316: No new flood insurance shall be provided for any property which the administrator finds has been declared by a duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public body, to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations or ordinances which are intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or occupancy in flood-prone areas. 
    Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: Accessory structures are not exempt from any chapter requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. Substantial damage also means flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "repetitive loss" or "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The market value of the building should be: (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
    For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include either: (1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or (2) Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
    Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
    Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) § 44, Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) and corresponding parts of this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2-09, 2-9-09) 
Sec. 8-2. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
    This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Clanton, Alabama. 
(Ord. No. 2-09, 2-9-09) 
Sec. 8-3. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated March 16, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS and data for Chilton County are hereby adopted by reference. Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
(Ord. No. 2-09, 2-9-09) 
Sec. 8-4. - Establishment of development permit. 
    A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. No. 2-09, 2-9-09) 
Sec. 8-5. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2-09, 2-9-09) 
Sec. 8-6. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2-09, 2-9-09) 
Sec. 8-7. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be: 
(1)	Considered as minimum requirements;
(2)	Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3)	Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(Ord. No. 2-09, 2-9-09) 
Sec. 8-8. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Clanton or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2-09, 2-9-09) 
Sec. 8-9. - Penalties for violation. 
    Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case: Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Clanton from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 2-09, 2-9-09) 
Secs. 8-10-8-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 

Sec. 8-36. - Statutory authorization. 
    The Legislature of the State of Alabama has in Title 11, Chapter 19, Sections 1-24, Chapter 45, Sections 1-11, Chapter 52, Sections 1-84, and Title 41, Chapter 9, Section 166 of the Code of Alabama, 1975, authorized local government units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(Ord. No. 2-09, 2-9-09) 
Sec. 8-37. - Findings of fact. 
(a)	The flood hazard areas of Clanton, Alabama are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)	These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. No. 2-09, 2-9-09) 
Sec. 8-38. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)	Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)	Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)	Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters. 
(Ord. No. 2-09, 2-9-09) 
Sec. 8-39. - Objectives. 
    The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)	To protect human life and health;
(2)	To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)	To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)	To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(5)	To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)	To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and
(7)	To insure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
(Ord. No. 2-09, 2-9-09) 
Secs. 8-40-8-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 8-61. - Designation of chapter administrator. 
    The building inspector is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2-09, 2-9-09) 
Sec. 8-62. - Permit procedures. 
    Application for a development permit shall be made to the building inspector on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
    Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)	Application stage. 
a.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the regulatory lowest floor level, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be flood-proofed; 
c.	Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed non-residential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria of subsections 8-87(2) and 8-90(2); 
d.	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)	Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the building inspector an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or flood-proofing level using appropriate FEMA elevation or flood-proofing certificate immediately after the lowest floor or flood-proofing is completed. When flood-proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The building inspector shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 2-09, 2-9-09) 
Sec. 8-63. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
    Duties of the building inspector shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)	Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied; and, assure that sites are reasonably safe from flooding. 
(2)	Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 8-3, then the building inspector shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of Article IV. 
(4)	Verify and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the regulatory floor level, including basement, of all new construction or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 8-62(2). 
(5)	Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with subsections 8-87(2) and 8-90(2). 
(6)	When flood-proofing is utilized for a structure, the building inspector shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsection 8-62(1)c. and subsection 8-87(2) or 8-90(2). 
(7)	Notify adjacent communities and the Alabama Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), and the Alabama Department of Economic and Community Affairs/Office of Water Resources/NFIP State Coordinator's Office. 
(8)	For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six (6) months to the FEMA and state to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(9)	Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the building inspector shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. 
(10)	All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the building inspector and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2-09, 2-9-09) 
Sec. 8-64. - Variance procedures. 
(a)	The planning commission as established by Clanton City Council shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)	The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the building inspector in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)	Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning commission may appeal such decision to the municipal court, as provided in Code of Alabama 1975. 
(d)	Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)	Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)	In reviewing such requests, the planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(h)	Conditions for variances:
(1)	A variance shall be issued only when there is:
a.	A finding of good and sufficient cause;
b.	A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.	A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)	The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction, therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)	The building inspector shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Alabama Department of Economic and Community Affairs/Office of Water Resources upon request. 
(i)	Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2-09, 2-9-09) 
Secs. 8-65-8-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 8-86. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)	New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)	Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of flood water. 
a.	Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.	Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade; and
3.	Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.	So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.	The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components, all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)	Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(7)	New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(8)	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(9)	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)	Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 2-09, 2-9-09) 
Sec. 8-87. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard designated as A1-30, AE, AH, A (with estimated BFE), the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 8-86(4), "Elevated buildings." 
(2)	Non-residential construction. New construction or the substantial improvement of any non-residential structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 8-63(6). 
(3)	Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.	All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on: (i) individual lots or parcels; (ii) in new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; (iii) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or (iv) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.	Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.	The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.	Where no base flood elevation exists, the manufactured home chassis and supporting equipment is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength and is elevated to a maximum of sixty (60) inches (five (5) feet). 
c.	All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Refer: Section 8-86.) 
d.	All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either:
1.	Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, fully licensed and ready for highway use if it is licensed, on it's wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions; or 
2.	The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction," including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections 8-87(3)a. and c., above. 
(4)	Standards for subdivisions. 
a.	All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
b.	All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
c.	All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
d.	Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser. 
(Ord. No. 2-09, 2-9-09) 
Sec. 8-88. - Floodways. 
    Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 8-3 are areas designated as floodways. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)	The community shall select and adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle that the area chosen for the regulatory floodway must be designed to carry the waters of the base flood, without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one (1) foot at any point. 
(2)	Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the adopted regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
(3)	A community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM and floodway revision, fulfills the requirements for such revisions as established under the provisions of § 65.12, and receives the approval of the administrator. 
(4)	Require, until a regulatory floodway is designated, that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. 
(5)	Only if subsection 8-88(2), (3) or (4) above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Article IV. 
(Ord. No. 2-09, 2-9-09) 
Sec. 8-89. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations (approximate A zones). 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 8-3, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (approximate A zones), the following provisions apply: 
(1)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 8-3, then the building inspector shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Article IV only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2) and (4) shall apply: 
(2)	No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or twenty-five (25) feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)	All development in Zone A must meet the requirements of section 8-86 and subsections 8-87(1)-(4). 
(4)	In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Also, in the absence of a base flood elevation, a manufactured home must also meet the elevation requirements of subsection 8-87(3)b.2. in that the structure must be elevated to a maximum of sixty (60) inches (five (5) feet). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 8-86(4), "Elevated buildings." 
The building inspector shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. No. 2-09, 2-9-09) 
Sec. 8-90. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
    Areas of special flood hazard established in section 8-3, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)	All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 8-64(4), "Elevated buildings." 
The building inspector shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)	New construction or the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level or two (2) feet (if no map elevation is listed), above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsection 8-62(1)c. and subsection 8-62(2). 
(3)	Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 2-09, 2-9-09) 
Chapter 9 - HOUSING 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings, Ch. 5; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; flood damage prevention, Ch. 8; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 10; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 13; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 18; utilities, Ch. 20; zoning, App. A; subdivisions, App. B; group housing projects, App. A, § 9(15); comprehensive group housing development, App. B, art. IX, § 3. (Back)
State Law reference- Municipal regulation as to housing of different classes of inhabitants in residential districts, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-75; municipal regulation as to housing of mentally retarded or mentally ill persons in multifamily zone, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-75.1; right of physically disabled persons to housing accommodations, Code of Ala. 1975, § 21-7-9; real estate brokers, Code of Ala. 1975, § 34-27-1 et seq.; minimum housing standards and regulation of unsafe buildings, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-53-1 et seq.; housing authorities, Code of Ala. 1975, § 24-1-1 et seq. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 9-1-9-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING 

Sec. 9-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Discrimination or discriminatory housing practice means any difference in treatment based upon race, color, religion, ancestry, sex, place of birth or national origin; or any act that is unlawful under this article. 
    Financial institution includes any person engaged in the business of lending money or guaranteeing losses. 
    Housing accommodation or dwelling means any building, mobile home or trailer, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence by one (1) or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, mobile home or trailer, structure or portion thereof or any real property used or intended to be used for any of the purposes set forth in this subsection. 
    Open market means the market which is informed of the availability for sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation, whether informed through a real estate broker or by advertising by publication, signs or by any other advertising methods directed to the public or any portion thereof, indicating that the property is available for sale, purchase, rental or lease. 
    Owner includes a lessee, sublessee, cotenant, assignee, managing agent or other person having the right of ownership or possession or the right to sell, rent or lease any housing accommodation. 
    Person includes individuals, children, firms, associations, joint adventures, partnerships, estates, trusts, business trusts, syndicates, fiduciaries, corporations and all other groups or combinations. 
    Real estate broker or real estate salesman includes any individual qualified by law who, for a fee, commission, salary or for other valuable consideration, or who with the intention or expectation of receiving or collecting valuable consideration, lists, sells, purchases, rents or leases any housing accommodations, including options thereupon, or who negotiates or attempts to negotiate such activities or who advertises or holds himself out as engaged in such activities; who negotiates or attempts to negotiate a loan, secured by a mortgage or other encumbrance, upon transfer of any housing accommodation; who is engaged in the business of charging an advance fee or contracting for collection of a fee in connection with a contract whereby he undertakes to promote the sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation through its listing in a publication issued primarily for such purpose; or an individual employed by or acting on behalf of any of these. 
    Real property includes buildings, structures, lands, tenements, leaseholds, cooperatives and condominiums. 
(Ord. No. 9-78, § 2, 12-11-78) 
Sec. 9-27. - Policy. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city in the exercise of its police power for the public safety, public health and general welfare to ensure equal opportunity to all persons to live in decent housing facilities regardless of race, color, religion, ancestry, sex, place of birth or national origin and, to that end, to prohibit discrimination in housing by any person. 
(Ord. No. 9-78, § 1, 12-11-78) 
Sec. 9-28. - Exemptions from article. 
    This article shall not apply to: 
(1)	A religious organization, association or society or any nonprofit institution or organization operating, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society, which limits the sale, rental or occupance of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or which gives preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, ancestry, sex, place of birth or national origin. 
(2)	A private club, not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, and which limits the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or gives preference to its members. 
(3)	Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner, provided that:
a.	Such private individual owner does not own more than three (3) such single-family houses at any one (1) time; 
b.	In the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one (1) such sale within any twenty-four-month period; 
c.	Such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three (3) such single-family houses at any one (1) time; and 
d.	The sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be excepted from the application of this article only if such house is sold or rented: 
1.	Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman or person; and 
2.	Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of the provisions of 42 United States Code § 3604(c) or of section 9-29 of this article; but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title. 
(4)	Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupied one (1) of such living quarters as his residence. 
(Ord. No. 9-78, § 4, 12-11-78) 
Sec. 9-29. - Unlawful practices. 
    In connection with any of the transactions set forth in this section which affect any housing accommodation on the open market, or in connection with any public sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation, it shall be unlawful within the city for a person, owner, financial institution, real estate broker or real estate salesman, or any representative of such persons: 
(1)	To refuse to sell, purchase, rent or lease, or deny to or withhold any housing accommodation from a person because of his race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, sex or place of birth; 
(2)	To discriminate against a person in the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation, or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith; 
(3)	To refuse to receive or transmit a bona fide offer to sell, purchase, rent or lease any housing accommodation from or to a person because of his race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, sex or place of birth; 
(4)	To refuse to negotiate for the sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation to a person because of his race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, sex or place of birth; 
(5)	To represent to a person that any housing accommodation is not available for inspection, sale, purchase, rental or lease when in fact it is so available, or to refuse to permit a person to inspect any housing accommodation, because of his race, color, religion, ancestry, or national origin, sex or place of birth; 
(6)	To make, publish, print, circulate, post or mail, or cause to be made, published, printed, circulated, posted or mailed, any notice, statement or advertisement, or to announce a policy or sign or use a form of application for the sale, purchase, rental, lease or financing of any housing accommodation or make a record of inquiry in connection with the prospective sale, purchase, rental, lease or financing of any housing accommodation which indicates any discrimination or any intent to make a discrimination; 
(7)	To offer, solicit, accept or use a listing of any housing accommodation for sale, purchase, rental or lease with the understanding that a person may be subjected to discrimination in connection with such sale, purchase, rental or lease, or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith; 
(8)	To induce directly or indirectly, or attempt to induce directly or indirectly, the sale, purchase, rental or lease, or the listing for any of such purposes, of any housing accommodation by representing that the presence or anticipated presence of persons of any particular race, color, religion, ancestry, sex or national origin or place of birth in the area to be affected by such sale, purchase, rental or lease will or may result in either: 
a.	The lowering of property values in the area;
b.	An increase in criminal or antisocial behavior in the area; or
c.	A decline in the quality of the schools serving the area;
(9)	To make any misrepresentations concerning the listing for sale, purchase, rental or lease, or the anticipated listing for any of such purposes, or the sale, purchase, rental or lease, of any housing accommodation in any area in the city, for the purpose of including or attempting to induce any such listing or any of the transactions specified; 
(10)	To engage in or hire to be done or to conspire with others to commit acts or activities of any nature, the purpose of which is to coerce, cause panic, incite unrest or create or play upon fear, with the purpose of either discouraging or inducing or attempting to induce the sale, purchase, rental or lease, or the listing for any of such purposes, of any housing accommodation; 
(11)	To retaliate or discriminate in any manner against a person because he has opposed a practice declared unlawful by this article, or because he has filed a complaint, testified, assisted or participated in any manner in any investigation, proceeding, hearing or conference under this article; 
(12)	To aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce any person to engage in any of the practices prohibited by this article; or to obstruct or prevent any person from complying with the provisions of this article or any order issued thereunder; 
(13)	By canvassing, to commit any unlawful practices prohibited by this article;
(14)	Otherwise to deny to or withhold any housing accommodation from a person because of his race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, sex or place of birth; 
(15)	For any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance, because of the race, color, religion, ancestry, sex, place of birth or national origin of such person or of any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance or the purposes of such loan or other financial assistance or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwelling in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given; or 
(16)	To deny any qualified person access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization, or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation on account of race, color, religion, ancestry, sex, place of birth or national origin. 
(Ord. No. 9-78, § 3, 12-11-78) 
Sec. 9-30. - Filing of complaints. 
    Any person aggrieved by an unlawful practice prohibited by this article may file a complaint with the city attorney within thirty (30) days after the aggrieved person becomes aware of the alleged unlawful practice, and in no event more than sixty (60) days after the alleged unlawful practice occurred. 
(Ord. No. 9-78, § 5, 12-11-78) 
Sec. 9-31. - Additional remedies. 
    Nothing in this article shall prevent any person from exercising any right or seeking any remedy to which he might otherwise be entitled or from filing his complaint with any appropriate governmental agency. 
(Ord. No. 9-78, § 6, 12-11-78) 
Chapter 10 - LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; animals, Ch. 4; buildings, Ch. 5; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; flood damage prevention, Ch. 8; housing, Ch. 9; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 11; parades and demonstrations, Ch. 14; taxation, Ch. 19; zoning, App. A; subdivisions, App. B; posting of advertisements, § 13-5; sidewalks in business district, § 18-41 et seq.; advertising signs and structures, App. A, § 9(14); off-site outdoor advertising signs, App. A, § 9(17). (Back)
State Law reference- Municipal license taxes, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-90 et seq.; collection of certain municipal license taxes by state department of revenue, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-180 et seq.; licenses generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-12-1 et seq.; municipal taxation generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-1 et seq. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Erection of permanent outdoor business or service signs. 
(a)	It shall be illegal for any person to erect a permanent outdoor sign for the purpose of advertising or for the purpose of advertising for the sale of any commodity or for the furnishing of any services, except that it is not a violation of this section to erect a temporary outdoor sign or a sign for the advertising for the sale of commodities or advertising for the sale of services by such a sign erected or constructed on the site where the sale of the commodity or where the services offered for sale are sold or furnished. The area of four hundred (400) feet on the east side and on the west side of the right-of-way of Interstate Highway 65 is hereby expressly excluded from the restrictions contained in this section. 
(b)	Any person in violation of this section and on conviction for such violation shall be punished as provided in section 1-9 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 9-90, §§ I, II, 12-10-90) 
Editor's note- 
Ord. No. 9-90, §§ I, II, adopted Dec. 10, 1990, not specifically amendatory of this Code, has been codified as § 10-1 at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 10-2. - False going-out-of-business sales. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a misdemeanor against the city for any person to advertise, conduct or carry on any "going-out-of-business sale," as such sale is hereinafter defined, except for the legitimate and bona fide purpose of selling and closing out the goods, wares and merchandise owned by such person and on hand at the commencement of such sale. 
(b)	Going-out-of-business sale, as used herein, shall mean the sale and closeout of the goods, wares and merchandise of such person on hand at the commencement of such sale and none other; the closeout and liquidation of an existing business and the sale and disposal of the goods, wares and merchandise actually on hand and located within the premises of such business at the commencement of such sale. 
(c)	It shall constitute prima facie evidence of an unlawful act, and a violation of this section, on the part of any person for such person to receive, admit, place, store, display, sell or offer for sale any goods, wares or merchandise except such goods, wares and merchandise as were actually on hand and located within the premises of such person at the commencement of such going-out-of-business sale. 
(d)	In order to conduct any such going-out-of-business sale, all persons desiring to conduct any such sale shall first secure, at no charge, a permit from the city clerk and shall declare on oath that such sale is for the purpose of closing out and liquidating an existing business and that no goods, wares or merchandise except those on hand at the commencement of such sale, as hereinabove provided, shall be sold or offered for sale during such going-out-of-business sale, upon penalty of perjury. Upon securing permit from the city clerk, such person desiring to have a going-out-of-business sale shall have a period of forty-five (45) days to complete such sale. 
(e)	Nothing contained in this section shall rescind, modify or amend the requirements of this chapter. 
(f)	Any person who shall violate this section shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and may be imprisoned or sentenced to hard labor for a period of not exceeding six (6) months, one (1) or both, at the discretion of the court. Each and every day this section is violated shall constitute a separate offense, punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 10-91, 5-13-91) 
Editor's note- 
Ord. No. 10-91, adopted May 13, 1991, not specifically amendatory of this Code, has been codified as § 10-2 at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 10-3-10-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS LICENSE 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 8-07, §§ 1-24, adopted October 8, 2007, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as superseding former Art. II, §§ 10-26-10-45, was at the discretion of the editor. Former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 10-26. - Levy of tax. 
    Pursuant to the Code of Alabama, the following is hereby declared to be and is adopted as the business license code and schedule of licenses for the municipality for the year beginning January 1, 2008, and for each subsequent year thereafter. There is hereby levied and assessed a business license fee for the privilege of doing any kind of business, trade, profession or other activity in the municipality, or the police jurisdiction, by whatever name called. 
(Ord. No. 8-07, § 1, 10-8-07) 
Sec. 10-27. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following terms shall have the following meaning as set forth below: 
    Business. Any commercial or industrial activity or any enterprise, trade, profession, occupation, or livelihood, including the lease or rental of residential or nonresidential real estate, whether or not carried on for gain or profit, and whether or not engaged in as a principal or as an independent contractor, which is engaged in, or caused to be engaged in, within a municipality. 
    Business license. An annual license issued by the municipality for the privilege of doing any kind of business, trade, profession, or any other activity in the municipality, by whatever name called, which document is required to be conspicuously posted or displayed except to the extent the taxpayer's business license tax or other financial information is listed thereon. 
    Business license remittance form. Any business license return, renewal reminder notice, or other writing on which the taxpayer calculates the business license tax liability for all or part of the license year and remits the amount so calculated with the form. 
    Department or Department of Revenue. The Alabama Department of Revenue, as created under Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-2-1 et seq. 
    Designee. An agent or employee of the municipality authorized to administer or collect, or both the municipality's business license taxes, which may include another taxing jurisdiction, the Department of Revenue, or a "private auditing or collecting firm" as defined in Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-2A-3. 
    Gross receipts. The measure of any and all receipts of a business from whatever source derived, to the maximum extent permitted by applicable laws and constitutional provisions, to be used in calculating the amount due for a business license. Provided, however, that: 
(1)	Gross receipts shall not include any of the following taxes collected by the business on behalf of any taxing jurisdiction or the federal government: All taxes which are imposed on the ultimate consumer, collected by the taxpayer and remitted by or on behalf of the taxpayer to the taxing authority, whether state, local or federal, including utility gross receipts levied pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, Title 40, Chapter 21, Article 3; license taxes levied pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, Title 40, Chapter 21, Article 2; or reimbursements to professional employer organizations of federal, state or local payroll taxes or unemployment insurance contributions; but no other deductions or exclusions from gross receipts shall be allowed except as provided in this article. 
(2)	A different basis for calculating the business license may be used by the municipality with respect to certain categories of taxpayers as prescribed in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-90B. 
(3)	For a utility or other entity described in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-129, gross receipts shall be limited to the gross receipts derived from the retail furnishing of utility services within the municipality during the preceding year that are taxed under Code of Ala. 1975, Title 40, Chapter 21, Article 3, except that nothing herein shall affect any existing contract or agreement between a municipality and a utility or other entity. The gross receipts derived from the furnishing of utility services shall not be subject to further business license taxation by the municipality. 
(4)	Gross receipts shall not include dividends or other distributions received by a corporation, or proceeds from borrowing, the sale of a capital asset, the repayment of the principal portion of a loan, the issuance of stock or other equity investments, or capital contributions, or the undistributed earnings of subsidiary entities. 
    License form. Any business license application form, renewal reminder notice, business license remittance form, or business license return by whatever name called. 
    License officer or municipal license officer. The municipal employee charged by the municipality with the primary responsibility of administering the municipality's business license tax ordinance and related matters thereto. 
    License year. The calendar year. 
    Municipality. Any town or city in this state that levies a business license tax from time to time. The term shall also include the town's or city's police jurisdiction, where the business license tax is levied in the police jurisdiction. 
    Person. Any individual, association, estate, trust, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other entity of any kind, except for any nonprofit corporation formed under the laws of Alabama which is operated to enable municipalities that become members of such nonprofit corporation to finance or refinance capital projects and related undertakings, on a cooperative basis, and whose board of directors or other governing body consists primarily of elected officials of the municipality. 
    Taxing jurisdiction. Any municipality that levies a business license tax, whether or not a business license tax is levied within its police jurisdiction, or the Department of Revenue acting as agent on behalf of a municipality pursuant to Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-180 et seq., as the context requires. 
    Taxpayer. Any person subject to or liable under this chapter for any business license tax; any person required to file a return with respect to, or pay or remit the business license tax levied under this chapter or to report any information or value to the taxing jurisdiction; or any person required to obtain, or who holds any interest in, any business license issued by the taxing jurisdiction; or any person that may be affected by any act or refusal to act by the taxing jurisdiction under this chapter, or to keep any required by this chapter. 
    U.S.C. The applicable title and section of the United States Code, as amended from time to time. 
    Other terms. Other capitalized or specialized terms used in this article, and not defined above, shall have the same meanings ascribed to them in Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-2A-3, unless the context therein otherwise specifies. 
(Ord. No. 8-07, § 2, 10-8-07) 
Sec. 10-28. - License term; minimums. 
    The license term and the minimum amount for a business license are as follows: 
(1)	Full year. Every person who commences business before the first day of July shall be subject to and shall pay the annual license for such business in full. Unless otherwise specified in the enclosed schedules, the minimum annual license shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(2)	Half year. Every person who commences business on or after July 1st, shall be subject to and shall pay one-half (1/2) the annual license for such business for that calendar year. 
(3)	Issue fee. For each license issued there shall be an issuance fee collected of ten dollars ($10.00) and said issuance fee shall be collected in the same manner as the license tax. 
(4)	Annual renewal. Except as provided in subsections a. or b., the business license shall be renewed annually on or before the 31st day of January each year. 
a.	If the due date for payment of any business license falls on a weekend or a holiday recognized by the municipality from time to time, the due date shall automatically be extended until the next business day. 
b.	Insurance company annual license renewals shall be renewed in accordance with Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-122, which states that each year, each insurance company shall furnish the municipality a statement in writing duly certified showing the full and true amount of gross premiums received during the preceding year and shall accompany such statement with the amount of license tax due according to the licensing schedule. Failure to furnish such statement or to pay such sum shall subject the company and its agents to those penalties as prescribed for doing business without a license as provided for in this Code. 
c.	On or before December 31 of each year, a renewal reminder shall be mailed to each licensee that purchased a business license during the current year. Said renewal notice shall be mailed via regular U.S. mail to the licensee's last known address of record with the municipality. Licensees are required to furnish the municipality any address changes for their business prior to December 1st in order for them to receive their notice. 
d.	Business license renewal payments received by the municipality shall be applied to the current renewal only when any and other debts the licensee owes to the municipality are first paid in full. No business license shall be issued if the current renewal payment does not meet said prior obligations and the current renewal. Failure to pay such sums shall subject the licensee and its agents to those penalties as prescribed for doing business without a license provided for in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 8-07, § 3, 10-8-07; Ord. No. 6-12, 10-22-2012) 
Sec. 10-29. - License shall be location specific. 
(a)	For each place at which any business is carried on, a separate license shall be paid, and any person desiring to engage in any business for which a license is required shall designate the place at which business is carried on, and the license to be issued shall designate such place, and such license shall authorize the carrying on of such business only at the place designated. 
(b)	Every person dealing in two (2) or more of the articles, or engaging in two (2) or more of the businesses, vocations, occupations or professions scheduled herein, shall take out and pay for a license for each line of business. 
(c)	A taxpayer subject to the license authorized by this article that is engaged in business in other municipalities, may account for its gross receipts so that the part of its gross receipts attributable to its branch offices will not be subject to the business license imposed by this article. To establish a bona fide branch office, the taxpayer must demonstrate proof of all following criteria: 
(1)	The taxpayer must demonstrate the continuing existence of an actual facility located outside the police jurisdiction in which its principal business office is located, such as a retail store, outlet, business office, showroom, or warehouse, to which employees and/or independent contractors are assigned or located during regular normal working hours. 
(2)	The taxpayer must maintain books and records, which reasonably indicate a segregation or allocation of the taxpayer's gross receipts to the particular facility of facilities. 
(3)	The taxpayer must provide proof that separate telephone listings, signs, and other indications of its separate activity are in existence. 
(4)	Billing and/or collection activities relating to the business conducted at the branch office or offices are performed by an employee or other representative, of the taxpayer who has such responsibility for the branch office. 
(5)	All business claimed by a branch office or offices must be conducted by and through said office or offices. 
(6)	The taxpayer must supply proof that all applicable business licenses with respect to the branch office or offices have been issued. 
(d)	Nothing herein shall be construed as exempting businesses from payment of a license on the basis of a lack of physical location. 
(Ord. No. 8-07, § 4, 10-8-07) 
Sec. 10-30. - Restriction on transfer of license. 
    No license shall be transferred except with the consent of the council or other governing body of the municipality or of the director of finance or other chief revenue officer or his or her designee, and no license shall be transferred to reflect a physical change of address of the taxpayer within the municipality more than once during a license year and never from one (1) taxpayer to another. Provided that a mere change in the name or ownership of a taxpayer that is a corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other form of legal entity now or hereafter recognized by the laws of Alabama shall not constitute a transfer for purposes of this chapter, unless (1) the change requires the taxpayer to obtain a new federal employer identification number or department of revenue taxpayer identification number or (2), in the discretion of the municipality, the subject license is one for the sale of alcoholic beverages. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a municipality from requiring a new business license application and approval for an alcoholic beverage license. 
(Ord. No. 8-07, § 5, 10-8-07) 
Sec. 10-31. - Unlawful to do business without a license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, taxpayer, or agent of a person or taxpayer to engage in businesses or vocations in the municipality for which a license is required without first having procured a license. A violation of this division of the article passed hereunder fixing a license shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and if a willful violation, by imprisonment, not to exceed six (6) months, or both, at the discretion of the court trying the same. Each day shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 8-07, § 6, 10-8-07) 
Sec. 10-32. - License must be posted. 
    Every license shall be posted in a conspicuous place, where said business, trade or occupation is carried on, and the holder of the license shall immediately show same to the designee of the municipality upon being requested so to do. 
(Ord. No. 8-07, § 7, 10-8-07) 
Sec. 10-33. - Duty to file report. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of every person subject to such license tax to render to the municipality on such forms as may be required, a sworn statement showing the total business done, amount of sales, gross receipts and gross sales, stock, value of furniture and other equipment, capital invested, number of helpers or employees, amount of space occupied, or other factor described in the schedule, one (1) or several, as the case may require, for the ascertainment of the classification of such person for license taxation purposes and the correct amount of license tax to which he is subject. 
(b)	If the municipality determines that the amount of business license tax reported on or remitted with any business license remittance form is incorrect, if no business license remittance form is filed within the time prescribed, or if the information provided on the form is insufficient to allow the taxing jurisdiction to determine the proper amount of business license tax due, the municipality shall calculate the correct amount of the tax based on the most accurate and complete information reasonably obtainable and enter a preliminary assessment for the correct amount of business license tax, including any applicable penalty and interest. 
(c)	The municipality shall promptly mail a copy of any preliminary assessment to the taxpayer's last known address by either first class U.S. mail or certified U.S. mail with return receipt requested, or, in the sole discretion of the municipality, deliver the preliminary assessment to the taxpayer by personal delivery. 
(d)	If the amount of business license tax remitted by the taxpayer is undisputed by the municipality, or if the taxpayer consents to the amount of any deficiency or preliminary assessment in writing, the municipality shall enter a final assessment for the amount of the tax due, plus any applicable penalty and interest. 
(1)	If a taxpayer disagrees with a preliminary assessment as entered by the taxing jurisdiction, the taxpayer shall file a petition for review with the municipal license officer within thirty (30) days from the date of entry of the preliminary assessment setting out the specific objections to the preliminary assessment. If a petition for review is timely filed, the license officer of the municipality shall schedule a conference with the taxpayer for the purpose of allowing the taxpayer or its representatives and the representatives of the municipality to present their respective positions, discuss any omissions or errors, and to attempt to agree upon any changes or modifications to their respective positions. 
(2)	If a petition for review is not timely filed, or is timely filed, and upon further review the license officer determines that the preliminary assessment is due to be upheld in whole or in part, the municipality may make the assessment final in the amount of business license tax due as computed by the license officer, with applicable interest and penalty computed to the date of entry of the final assessment. The license officer shall, whenever practicable, complete his or her review of the taxpayer's petition for review and applicable law within ninety (90) days following the later of the date of filing of the petition or the conference, if any. 
(3)	A copy of the final assessment shall promptly be mailed to the taxpayer's last known address (i) by either first class U.S. mail or certified U.S. mail with return receipt requested in the case of assessments of business license tax of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less, or (ii) by certified U.S. mail with return receipt requested in the case of assessments of business license tax of more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). In either case, at the option of the taxing jurisdiction a copy of the final assessment may be delivered to the taxpayer by personal delivery. The final assessment shall include a statement informing the taxpayer of his or her right to appeal the final assessment to circuit court within thirty (30) days from the date of the entry of the final assessment. 
(Ord. No. 8-07, § 8, 10-8-07) 
Sec. 10-34. - Duty to permit inspection and produce records. 
    Upon demand by the designee of the municipality, it shall be the duty of all licensees to: 
(1)	Permit the designee of the municipality to enter the business and to inspect all portions of his place or places of business for the purposes of enabling said municipal designee to gain such information as may be necessary or convenient for determining the proper license classification, and determining the correct amount of license tax; 
(2)	To furnish information during reasonable business hours, at the licensee's place of business, in the municipality or the police jurisdiction, all books of account, invoices, papers, reports and memoranda containing entries showing amount of purchases, sales receipts, inventory and other information from which the correct license tax classification of such person may be ascertained and the correct amount of license tax to which he is subject may be determined, including exhibition of bank deposit books, bank statements, copies of sales tax returns to the State of Alabama, copies of Alabama income tax returns and federal income tax returns. 
(Ord. No. 8-07, § 9, 10-8-07) 
Sec. 10-35. - Unlawful to obstruct. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, or for any agent, servant or employee of such person, to fail or refuse to perform any duty imposed by this article; nor shall any person, agent, servant or employee of such person obstruct or interfere with the designee of the municipality in carrying out the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 8-07, § 10, 10-8-07) 
Sec. 10-36. - Privacy. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person connected with the administration of this article to divulge any information obtained by him/her in the course of inspection and examination of the books, papers, reports and memoranda of the taxpayer made pursuant to the provisions of this article, except to the mayor, the municipal attorney or others authorized by law to receive such information described herein. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to print, publish, or divulge, without the written permission or approval of the taxpayer, the license form of any taxpayer or any part of the license form, or any information secured in arriving at the amount of tax or value reported, for any purpose other than the proper administration of any matter administered by the taxing jurisdiction, or upon order of any court, or as otherwise allowed in this article. 
(c)	Nothing herein shall prohibit the disclosure of the fact that a taxpayer has or has not purchased a business license. Statistical information pertaining to taxes may be disclosed to the municipality council upon their written request through the mayor's office. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 8-07, § 11, 10-8-07) 
Sec. 10-37. - Failure to file assessment. 
(a)	In any case where a person subject to paying a license tax as provided herein fails to do so, the municipal designee shall be authorized to assess and determine the amount of license taxes due using the best information available either by return filed or by other means. 
(b)	The taxpayer shall be notified by registered or certified mail, or by personal service, of the amount of any such assessment, and of his right to appear before the municipal governing body on a day named not less than twenty (20) days from the date of notice and to show cause why such assessment shall not be made final. Such appearance may be made by agent or attorney. 
(c)	If no showing is made on or before the date fixed in such notice, or if such showing is not sufficient in the judgment of the municipality, such assessment shall be made final in the amount originally fixed, or in such other amount as is determined by the municipality to be correct. If upon such hearing the municipal designee finds a different amount due than that originally assessed, he/she shall make the assessment final in the correct amount, and in all cases shall notify the taxpayer of the assessment as finally fixed. 
(d)	A notice by the U.S. mail, addressed to the taxpayer's last known place of business, shall be sufficient. Any assessment made by the designee of the municipality shall be prima facie correct upon any appeal. 
(Ord. No. 8-07, § 12, 10-8-07) 
Sec. 10-38. - Lien for non-payment of license tax. 
    On all property, both real and personal, used in the business, the municipality shall have a lien for such license, which lien shall attach as of the date when the license is due, as allowed by Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-44. 
(Ord. No. 8-07, § 13, 10-8-07) 
Sec. 10-39. - Criminal penalties. 
    Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be fined in an amount not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and may also be sentenced to imprisonment for a period of not exceeding six (6) months, in the discretion of the court trying the case, and violations on separate days shall each constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 8-07, § 14, 10-8-07) 
Sec. 10-40. - Civil penalties. 
    In addition to the remedies provided by Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-150 et seq., the continued or recurrent performance of any act or acts within the corporate limits or within its police jurisdiction for which a license may be revoked or suspended under this article is hereby declared to be detrimental to the health, safety, comfort and convenience of the public and is a nuisance. The municipality, as an additional or alternative remedy, may institute injunctive proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to abate the same. 
(Ord. No. 8-07, § 15, 10-8-07) 
Sec. 10-41. - Penalties and interest. 
(a)	All licenses not paid within thirty (30) days from the date they fall due shall be increased by fifteen (15) percent for the first thirty (30) days they shall be delinquent and shall be measured by an additional ten (10) percent for a delinquency of sixty (60) or more days, but this provision shall not be deemed to authorize the delay of thirty (30) days in the payment of the license due, which may be enforced at once. 
(b)	In the case of persons who began business on or after the first day of the calendar year, the license for such "new business" shall be increased by fifteen (15) percent for the first fifteen (15) days they shall be delinquent, and shall be measured by an additional ten (10) percent for a delinquency of forty-five (45) days or more. 
(c)	All delinquent accounts (both license taxes and penalties) shall also be charged simple interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month. 
(Ord. No. 8-07, § 16, 10-8-07) 
Sec. 10-42. - Prosecutions unaffected. 
    The adoption of this article shall not in any manner affect any prosecution of any act illegally done contrary to the provisions of any ordinance now or heretofore in existence, and every such prosecution, whether begun before or after the enactment of this article shall be governed by the law under which the offense was committed; nor shall a prosecution, or the right to prosecute, for the recovery of any penalty or the enforcement of any forfeiture be in any manner affected by the adoption of this article; nor shall any civil action or cause of action existing prior to or at the time of the adoption of this article be affected in any manner by its adoption. 
(Ord. No. 8-07, § 17, 10-8-07) 
Sec. 10-43. - Procedure for denial of new applications. 
(a)	The municipal designee shall have the authority to investigate all applications and may refer any application to the municipal governing body for a determination of whether such license should or should not be issued. 
(b)	If the municipal governing body denies the issuance of any license referred to it, the municipal clerk shall promptly notify the applicant of the municipal governing body's decision. 
(c)	If said applicant desires to appear before the municipal governing body to show cause why said license should be issued, he shall file a written notice with the municipal clerk, said notice to be filed within two (2) weeks from the date of mailing by the municipal clerk of the notice of the denial of such license by the municipal governing body. 
(d)	Upon receipt of said notice the municipal clerk shall promptly schedule a hearing, to be held within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of such notice, before the municipal governing body and shall give the notice of the date, time and place of said hearing to the applicant. 
(e)	The applicant shall be given the opportunity to appear personally, or through his counsel, or both, and the municipal governing body shall proceed to hear any evidence which may be presented both for and against the issuance of said license. 
(f)	If the municipal governing body determines from the evidence presented that in order to either provide for the safety, preserve the health, promote the prosperity, or improve the morals, order, comfort and convenience of the inhabitants of the municipality said license should not be granted, it shall enter an order to that effect; otherwise, said license shall be ordered issued upon payment of any required license fees. 
(Ord. No. 8-07, § 18, 10-8-07) 
Sec. 10-44. - Procedure for revocation or suspension of license. 
(a)	Any lawful license issued to any person to conduct any business shall be subject to revocation by the municipal governing body for the violation by the licensee, his agent, servant, or employee of any provision of this article or of any ordinance of the municipality, or any statute of the State of Alabama relating to the business for which such license is issued; and shall also be subject to revocation by the municipal governing body if the licensee, his agent, servant, or employee under color of such license violates or aids or abets in violating or knowingly permits or suffers to be violated any penal ordinance of the municipality or any criminal law of the State of Alabama; and shall also be subject to revocation by the municipal governing body if, in connection with the issuance or renewal of any license, the licensee or his agent filed or caused to be filed any application, affidavit, statement, certificate, book, or any other data containing any false, deceptive or other misleading information or omission of material fact. 
(b)	The conditions hereinabove set forth as grounds for the revocation of a license shall also constitute grounds for refusing to renew a license. 
(c)	The municipal governing body shall set a time for hearing on the matter of revoking or refusing to renew a license; and a notice of such hearing shall be given to the licensee, or the applicant for renewal, as the case may be, at least ten (10) days before the day set for said hearing. At the hearing the municipal governing body shall hear all evidence offered by any party and all evidence that may be presented bearing upon the question of revocation or the refusal of renewal, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 8-07, § 19, 10-8-07) 
Sec. 10-45. - Refunds on overpayments. 
(a)	Any taxpayer may file a petition for refund with the municipality for any overpayment of business license tax erroneously paid to the municipality. If a final assessment for the tax has been entered by the municipality, a petition for refund of all or a portion of the tax may be filed only if the final assessment has been paid in full prior to or simultaneously with the filing of the petition for refund. 
(b)	A petition for refund shall be filed with the municipality within two (2) years from the date of payment of the business license tax, which is the subject of the petition. 
(c)	The municipality shall either grant or deny a petition for refund within six (6) months from the date the petition is filed, unless the period is extended by written agreement of the taxpayer and the municipality. The taxpayer shall be notified of the municipality's decision concerning the petition for refund by first class U.S. mail or by certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested, sent to the taxpayer's last known address. It the municipality fails to grant a full refund within the time provided herein, the refund petition shall be deemed to be denied. 
(d)	If the petition is granted or the municipality or a court otherwise determines that a refund is due, the overpayment shall be promptly refunded to the taxpayer by the municipality, together with interest to the extent provided for in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-92. If the municipality determines that a refund is due, the amount of overpayment plus any interest due thereon may first be credited by the municipality against any outstanding tax liabilities due and owing by the taxpayer to the municipality, and the balance of any overpayment shall be promptly refunded to the taxpayer. If any refund or part thereof is credited to any other tax by the municipality, the taxpayer shall be provided with a written detailed statement showing the amount of overpayment, the amount credited for payment to other taxes, and the resulting amount of the refund. 
(e)	A taxpayer may appeal from the denial in whole or in part of a petition for refund by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the circuit court of the county in which the municipality denying the petition for refund is located. Said notice of appeal must be filed within two (2) years from the date the petition was denied. The circuit court shall hear the appeal according to its own rules and procedures and shall determine the correct amount of refund due, if any. If an appeal is not filed with the appropriate circuit court within two (2) years of the date the petition was denied, then the appeal shall be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 8-07, § 20, 10-8-07) 
Sec. 10-46. - Delivery license. 
(a)	In lieu of any other type of license, a taxpayer may at its option purchase a delivery license at the rate of where not more than one (1) delivery is made per week forty dollars ($40.00), where not more than two (2) deliveries is made per week fifty dollars ($50.00), where not more than three (3) deliveries are made per week sixty dollars ($60.00), where not more than four (4) deliveries are made per week seventy dollars ($70.00), where not more than five (5) deliveries per week eighty dollars ($80.00), where not more than six (6) deliveries are made per week ninety dollars ($90.00), and per day two dollars ($2.00) for the privilege of delivering its merchandise in the municipality if the taxpayer meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)	Other than deliveries, the taxpayer has no other physical presence within the municipality or its police jurisdiction; 
(2)	The taxpayer conducts no other business in the municipality other than delivering merchandise and performing the requisite set-up and installation of said merchandise; 
(3)	Such delivery and set-up and installation is performed by the taxpayer's employees or agents, concerns the taxpayer's own merchandise in that municipality, and is done by means of delivery vehicles owned, leased, or contracted by the taxpayer; 
(4)	The gross receipts derived from the sale and any requisite set-up or installation of all merchandise so delivered shall not exceed seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) during the license year; 
(5)	Any set-up or installation shall relate only to (i) that required by the contract between the taxpayer and the customer or as may be required by state or local law, and (ii) the merchandise so delivered; 
(6)	If at any time during the current license year the taxpayer fails to meet any of the above stated criteria, then within ten (10) days after any of said criteria have been violated or exceeded, the taxpayer shall purchase all appropriate business licenses from the municipality for the entire license year and without regard to this section. 
(b)	Mere delivery of the taxpayer's merchandise by common carrier shall not allow the municipality to assess a business license tax against the taxpayer, but the gross receipts derived from any sale and delivery accomplished by means of a common carrier shall be counted against the seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) limitation described in the preceding section if the taxpayer also during the same license year sells and delivers into the taxing jurisdiction using a delivery vehicle other than a common carrier. 
(c)	A common carrier, contract carrier, or similar delivery service making deliveries on behalf of others shall not be entitled to purchase a delivery license. 
(d)	The delivery license shall be calculated in arrears, based on the related gross receipts during the preceding license year. 
(e)	The purchase of a delivery license shall not, in and of itself, establish nexus between the taxpayer and the municipality for purposes of the taxes levied by or under the authority of Code of Ala. 1975, Title 40, or other provisions of law, nor does the purchase of a delivery license conclusively determine that nexus does not exist between the taxpayer and the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 8-07, § 21, 10-8-07) 
Sec. 10-47. - License classifications. 
1.	(541) Abstractor of title. Furnishing, making or preparing abstracts of title to land .....$ 20.00 
2.	(541) Accountant or auditor. Each person engaged in business as accountant or auditor, or any person preparing, advising or making income tax returns or other tax returns as agent for another for reward. Professional rates apply. 
3.	(511) Advertising agency. Contracting or advertising or conducting advertising agency bureau. Professional rates apply. 
4.	(711) Advertising billboards. Bill posting, sign tacking, distributing advertising matter or letting or supplying billboards for advertising purposes. Provided that no license for sign tacking shall be issued in violation of City of Clanton Ordinance dated May 28, 1962. Merchants general rates apply. 
5.	(524) Agents. Each person taking orders for any article of merchandise and or delivering same in person or by agent shall pay the same license as regular merchant in such business, profession, or calling. See classification for specific calling. 
6.	(a)	(443) Air conditioning. Sales. Merchants general rates apply. 
(b)	(238) Air conditioning. Contractors and subcontractors. Contractor rates apply. 
7.	(621) Ambulances and ambulance service. Permit for the operation of an ambulance must be granted by the governing body of the city. 
8.	(443) Alarm systems. Each person, firm or corporation engaged in selling, offering for sale or installing alarm systems. Merchants general rates apply. 
9.	(910) Amusement devices or coin-operated machines. Where machines are operated in connection with established business: 
First machine .....50.00 
Each additional machine .....25.00 
    Provided that no gambling machines or gambling devices prohibited by the state laws of the State of Alabama, shall be licensed. 
10.	(453) Antiques. Merchants general rates apply. 
11.	(811) Appliance repair. See Electrical repair. 
12.	(541) Architect. Professional rates apply. 
13.	(453) Artists. Each commercial artist: 
Per year .....30.00 
Per day .....5.00 
14.	(541) Attorney at law. Professional rates apply. 
15.	(441) Automobiles, trucks, tractors, or trailers. 
(a)	Automobile dealers, including repair garage, body shop, paint shop, handling attachments, accessories, replacement supplies and auto rentals and where the same are painted and repaired that a business license shall be due to be paid by each dealer to the city as follows: 
(1)	For each place of business where the annual receipts do not exceed $400,000.00 .....250.00 
(2)	For each place of business where the annual receipts are in excess of $400,000.00 and do not exceed $1,000,000.00 .....350.00 
(3)	For each place of business where the annual receipts are in excess of $1,000,000.00 and do not exceed $2,000,000.00 .....400.00 
(4)	For each place of business where the annual receipts are in excess of $2,000,000.00 but do not exceed $3,000,000.00 .....450.00 
(5)	For each place of business where the annual receipts are in excess of $3,000,000.00 .....500.00 
(b)	Each such dealer in used motor vehicles or tractors not paying a license as a dealer in new motor vehicles or tractors where the gross receipts do not exceed $400,000.00 shall pay an annual license of $175.00 and in addition thereto shall pay 1/20 of 1 percent on total gross receipts in excess of $400,000.00. 
The duty shall be on the dealers to furnish sufficient proof to the city of the gross sales. 
16.	(441) Automobile parts and/or accessories-Retail. Merchants general rates apply. 
17.	(421) Automobile parts and/or accessories-Wholesale. Wholesale general rates apply. 
18.	(811) Automobile repair, body shop or garage. See Garage or repair shop. 
19.	(811) Automobile tire retreading. Merchants general rates apply. 
20.	(454) Awnings. Selling, manufacturing or erecting. Merchants general rates apply. 
21.	(445) Bakeries and bakery procucts. Merchants general rates apply. 
22.	(522) Banks. Each banking establishment shall pay a license fee as follows: 
Where capital surplus and undivided profits are: 
$50,000.00 or less .....10.00 
$50,000.00 and less than $100,000.00 .....20.00 
$100,000.00 and less than $150,000.00 .....30.00 
$150,000.00 and less than $200,000.00 .....40.00 
$200,000.00 and less than $250,000.00 .....50.00 
$250,000.00 and less than $300,000.00 .....60.00 
$300,000.00 and less than $350,000.00 .....70.00 
$350,000.00 and less than $400,000.00 .....80.00 
$400,000.00 and less than $450,000.00 .....90.00 
$450,000.00 and less than $500,000.00 .....100.00 
$500,000.00 and less than $600,000.00 .....110.00 
$600,000.00 and over .....125.00 
The term undivided profits, as used in this article, shall be construed to mean the undivided profits as shown by the books of the bank and all payments shall be based on the report made by the bank to the Superintendent of Banks of Alabama next preceding January 1 or the current year. Also see Branch bank. 
23.	(522) Banks-Branch bank. 
Each branch bank .....10.00 
24.	(522) Banks-Savings and loan association. Each savings and loan association must pay a license in proportion to the amount paid in on nonwithdrawable shares, reserves and undivided profits of the association upon the same schedule as provided for banks herein. 
25.	(722) Barbecue stands or sandwich shops. See Restaurants. 
26.	(812) Barber shop. Each barber shop chair as follows, whether in use or not: 
For one chair .....15.00 
For each additional chair .....10.00 
In addition thereto for the sale of any merchandise, merchants general rates apply. 
27.	(812) Beauty parlor. Each person, firm or corporation engaged in the operation of a beauty shop or parlor: 
First operator .....15.00 
Each additional operator .....10.00 
In addition thereto, for the sale of any merchandise, merchants general rates apply. 
28.	(910) Billiard room or pool room. Each person, firm or corporation engaging in the business, calling or profession of the operation of a billiard room or pool room shall pay a privilege license therefore of $80.00 per year for the first table and $20.00 per year for each additional table or similar apparatus or device upon which billiards or pool are permitted or played. Prior to the issuance of this license, application must by made to mayor and approved by city council. Also see state code and city ordinance. 
29.	(541) Billing service. Professional rates apply. 
30.	(999) Blacksmith shop. Same as repair shop. 
31.	(721) Boarding house. Each person who operates transient boarding house .....45.00 
32.	(441) Boats. Sales or for hire. Merchants general rates apply. 
33.	(524) Bond agent. Any person, company or agent making or furnishing appeal or appearance bonds .....60.00 
34.	(452) Books, book store supplies. 
(a)	Established place of business. Merchants general rates apply.
(b)	Each transient dealer in either of same, per person:
Per year .....25.00 
Per week .....10.00 
35.	(910) Bottle drinks. Each retail dealer of soft drinks or bottle drinks who does not pay a soda fountain or vending machine license, $12.00 per year per box; provided said dealer is not subject to retail license. 
36.	(312) Bottlers. Each person distributing, delivering or handling soft drinks or bottled drinks by motor vehicle, whether retail or wholesale, each vehicle, $95.00; provided that person, firm or corporation is not subject to retail merchant license. 
37.	(312) Bottler, manufacturing. Each person, firm or corporation operating a plant where soda water or other carbonated water or bottled drinks are bottled or manufactured. Manufacturers rates apply. 
38.	(713) Bowling or box alley. 
First alley .....75.00 
Each additional alley .....10.00 
39.	(314) Box, basket or crate factory. Manufacturers rates apply. 
40.	(327) Brick factory. Manufacturers rates apply. 
41.	(811) Business machines. Agents or dealers, sales and repair. Merchants general rates apply. 
42.	(485) Bus terminal. Each person, firm or corporation operating, maintaining or engaged in the operation of a bus terminal, bus station, waiting room, ticket office, or other convenience in connection with the carriage of passengers for hire. Merchants general rates apply. 
43.	(447) Butane or propane gas. Each person dealing in, selling or delivering butane, propane and similar types of gas or fuel commonly known as bottled gas .....75.00 
44.	(444) Cabinet makers or woodworking shops. Merchants general rates apply. This license applies to each person, firm or corporation whose business is located outside the corporate limits or police jurisdiction but has jobs or does business within the city and police jurisdiction. In which case, license will be computed only on receipts of business transacted within the corporate limits and police jurisdiction. 
45.	(722) Cafes. Merchants general rates apply. Subject to health department regulations. 
46.	(339) Candy manufacturer. Each manufacturer of candy products. Manufacturer rates apply. If selling, delivering, distributing, or supplying candy products by vehicle, wholesale. See wholesale delivery and or wholesale merchant license. 
47.	(442) Carpet. Sales and installation. 
(a)	Established place of business. Merchants general rate apply.
(b)	Selling directly from vehicle:
Per day .....25.00 
Per week .....100.00 
48.	(485) Cars for hire. Each drive-it-yourself company or any similar business letting or renting cars or trucks for hire: 
First car or truck .....75.00 
Each additional car or truck .....25.00 
49.	(484) Carrier, motor. Each motor carrier company .....25.00 
50.	(711) Carnival. See shows. 
51.	(812) Caskets. Coffins and other undertaker goods. Merchants general rates apply. 
52.	(112) Cattle dealer. Each person, firm or corporation selling, offering for sale or trading cattle, sheep, hogs, etc., per year .....35.00 
53.	(327) Cement dealers. See concrete products. 
54.	(453) Cemeteries. Merchants general rates apply. 
State constitution reference- Cemeteries shall not be taxed when same are used exclusively for religious worship or for purposes purely charitable, § 91. 
55.	(454) Chicken and eggs. Each person, firm or corporation who deals in either of same and sells or ships the same to persons outside the municipality or wholesales to local merchants. Merchants wholesale rates apply; provided the said person, firm or corporation is not subject to retail merchants license. 
56.	(541) Chiropodist. Professional rates apply. 
57.	(541) Chiropractors. Professional rates apply. 
58.	(a)	(453) Cigars, cigarettes, tobacco and snuff. Retail dealer. Merchants general rates apply. 
(b)	(422) Cigars, cigarettes, tobacco and snuff. Wholesale dealer. Wholesale general rates apply. 
59.	(711) Circus or street fair. See Shows #219. 
60.	(561) Cleaning and pressing shops. Merchants general rates apply. 
61.	(622) Clinics. See Hospital. 
62.	(324) Coal, coke and wood dealers. Maintaining or operating coal, coke or wood yard and distributing or selling coal, wood or coke. Merchants general rates apply. 
63.	(454) Coin-operated machines. See Vending machines. 
64.	(493) Cold storage plant. Merchants general rates apply. 
65.	(522) Collection agency or credit bureau. Each person firm or corporation engaged in the business of operating a collection business or preparing or obtaining credit reports. Professional rates apply. 
66.	(711) Concerts or exhibitions. Dramatic or vaudeville. Any show exhibition other than those under schedule #219: 
Per day .....25.00 
Per week .....50.00 
This schedule shall not apply to concerts, exhibition, dramatic or vaudeville shows presented by religious, fraternal, educational or civic organizations. 
67.	(327) Concrete products. Each manufacturer of concrete pipe, culverts, vaults, blocks, curbing, tile or concrete products and each person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of mixing, delivering, or selling concrete whether mixed or prepared on the job or in fixed place of business. Manufacturers rates apply. 
68.	(236) Contractors and subcontractors. 
(a)	Any person, firm or corporation accepting orders, contracts or subcontracts and every person who undertakes to assume authority or control, or who supervises, manages or directs the work of others, or who is delegated by the owner to so do, whether at a fixed price or on a cost-plus basis or work done by the hour, for doing any work on or in any building or structure, or shall accept contracts or subcontracts to do any paving or curbing, or contract or subcontract to excavate earth, rock or other material, or contract or subcontract to construct any sewer, or contract or subcontract to construct highways, bridges, dams, railroads, or contracts or subcontracts for any other type of construction work shall pay a license based on his gross annual receipts as follows: 
On less than $5,000.00 .....35.00 
$5,000.00 and less than $20,000.00 .....50.00 
$20,000.00 and less than $40,000.00 .....75.00 
$40,000.00 and less than $60,000.00 .....100.00 
$60,000.00 and less than $100,000.00 .....150.00 
$100,000.00 and less than $250,000.00 .....250.00 
$250,000.00 and less than $500,000.00 .....350.00 
$500,000.00 and over .....500.00 
And in addition thereto, each itinerant contractor or subcontractor shall pay $0.50 on each $1,000.00 or fraction thereof of the contract price or the total cost to such licensee, whichever is greater, of each project for which a building permit is required by law. Said additional sum shall be paid prior to the commencement of work or any such project and it shall be illegal to do or perform any such work within the city without first paying said sum, which is levied in addition to any permit or inspection fees otherwise required by this Code. 
(b)	Each person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of constructing houses or building on contract, or who constructs one (1) or more houses or buildings in any one (1) calendar year, whether on contract or otherwise, or who maintains an office in the city used in connection with such construction within or without the city, shall pay the license tax as above provided. 
(c)	No permits for work of any kind for which a license is required by (a) or (b) above shall be issued to a contractor, owner or any authorized agency until all license taxes have been paid, unless herein otherwise provided. 
(d)	All general contractors shall upon request furnish the building inspector or the license inspector with a full and complete list showing the names, addresses and license numbers of all subcontractors to whom any work has been let or sublet to be done and will not allow any work to be done by such subcontractor until the required license due by said subcontractor has been paid. If all subcontracts have not been closed or awarded at the time application is made for a permit by the general contractor or by the owner, the general contractor or the owner shall not allow any work to proceed by any subcontractor until such subcontractor has exhibited to him his city license for the work to be done on the job, unless he is certified by the license department or by the building inspector as having paid the city license due by him. 
(e)	The issuance of a license hereunder shall in no wise waive the provisions of the building codes of the city, which provisions must be fully complied with by such licensees. 
(f)	Persons contracting for a portion of the work under a license who has paid the additional per job license tax of $0.50 per $1,000.00 or fractional part thereof as above provided, based on the total cost of work to be done shall not be subjected to such additional sum; provided, however, nothing herein shall be construed to exempt any person, firm or corporation from the payment of the annual license tax above set forth based upon gross annual receipts. 
(g)	In lieu of the foregoing license provisions, contractors engaged solely in the demolition of houses declared substandard under the ordinances and codes of the city shall pay an annual license of $10.00. 
69.	(236) Construction companies. Itinerant or with fixed place of business. Contractors rates apply. 
70.	(115) Corn or grist mill. Merchants general rates apply. 
71.	(454) Cosmetics. Each person or agent engaged in the business of the sale of cosmetics, Avon, Mary Kay and other related products, either retail or wholesale, without fixed place of business shall pay a license as follows: $10.00 on the first $3,000.00 of sales and 1/10 of 1 percent on all the sales in excess of that amount. No payment of license will be required until after the first sale is made. 
72.	(115) Cotton buyer. Each cotton buyer .....35.00 
Not subject to one-half-year license. 
73.	(115) Cotton gin. 
First gin stand .....80.00 
Each additional gin stand .....10.00 
Not subject to one-half-year license. 
74.	(313) Cotton mills. Manufacturers rates apply. 
75.	(522) Credit bureau. See Collection agency. 
76.	(311) Dairy products plant. Manufacturers rates apply. 
77.	(713) Dancing hall. Roadhouse, honky-tonk or other place where dances are permitted or allowed by the public. 
Per year .....1,000.00 
Provided that no license for any dance hall, roadhouse, honky-tonk or other places where dances are permitted shall be issued except upon application made to the mayor and approved by the city council. Provided further that the city council may, by resolution, permit the holding of dances by individuals or by social, charitable or other public organizations. 
78.	(711) Dancing school. Professional rates apply. 
79.	(722) Delicatessen. Same as restaurant. 
80.	(541) Dentists. Professional rates apply. 
81.	(446) Dental or other laboratory. Merchants general rates apply. 
82.	(524) Detective agency. Persons furnishing detective, investigative and security services. Professional rates apply. 
83.	(452) Directory. Each person making, compiling, selling or offering for sale any directory. Merchants general rates apply. 
84.	(541) Doctors. Professional rates apply. 
85.	(442) Drapery. Sales and installation. Merchants general rates apply. 
86.	(910) Drink box. Per year, per box .....12.00 
87.	(446) Drugstores. Merchants general rates apply. 
88.	(446) Dry cleaning. Merchants general rates apply. 
89.	(111) Egg dealer. See Chicken and eggs. 
90.	(221) Electric light or power plant. See Utilities. 
91.	(238) Electrician. Any person who solicits, engages in or follows the trade or profession of repairing or installing electrical wiring, same as contractors. Merchants general rates apply to any sale of goods or wares. Application must be made to the city building inspector and applicant must comply with ordinance requiring posting of surety bond in the amount as required by this Code and said bond being payable to the city and filed with the city clerk. Provided further that any employee helper must apply and become qualified with the city building inspector before being left on the job without the presence of his qualified supervisor. 
92.	(443) Electrical supplies or appliances. Merchants general rates apply. 
93.	(811) Electrical appliance repair. Merchants general rates apply. 
94.	(541) Engineering. Professional rates apply. 
95.	(711) Entertainment. Any type of entertainment not otherwise provided for where charges are made for admission, not for religious or charitable or school purposes, per day $25.00, plus 5 percent of gross receipts. 
96.	(484) Express companies. Each person, firm or corporation doing business as express company, commercially engaged in business in the city and receiving and sending packages to and from any point in the state, not including interstate commerce .....85.00 
97.	(561) Exterminatiors. Each person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of pest extermination, selling disinfectant, insecticide, or pest extermination in any manner .....75.00 
State law reference- See Code of Ala. 1940, Title 2, § 674-675, as last amended; 1958 Recompiled Edition as amended. 
98.	(541) Eye glasses. See Optician. 
99.	(339) Factories. See Manufacturers. 
100.	(441) Farm equipment and implement dealers. Same as automobile dealers if motor driven equipment sold. For sales of implements only, merchants general rates apply. 
101.	(115) Feed mill. See Mill. 
102.	(325) Fertilizer dealer. Merchants general rates apply. 
103.	(325) Fertilizer Factory. Each manufacturer or mixer of chemical or commercial fertilizer. Manufacturers rates apply. 
104.	(522) Finance company. Each person, firm or corporation engaged in the business or calling of operating a finance company or money loaning business, $100.00 plus 1/10 of 1 percent of gross receipts. 
105.	(114) Fish and oysters. For each transient, peddler, retail or wholesale dealer of seafoods. Merchants general rates apply. Subject to inspection and approval of county health department before issuance of license. 
106.	(453) Fireworks. Per year .....55.00 
107.	(453) Florist. Merchants general rates apply. 
108.	(812) Fortune teller. Each person practicing palmistry and all persons using any device for the purpose of telling fortunes and all spiritualists giving sittings, readings or exhibitions. 
Per day .....50.00 
109.	(314) Foundries. Manufacturers rates apply. 
110.	(454) Frozen food distributor. Any transient person, firm or corporation selling frozen foods directly or indirectly from vehicle, wholesale or retail, per day .....100.00 
No license shall be issued without written approval by Chilton County Health Department. 
111.	(454) Fruit and vegetable dealers. Fruit and vegetable peddlers or itinerate dealers. Wholesale or retailers in fruits, vegetables, nuts or produce in every kind or character or selling or disposing of the same, directly or indirectly, from a truck, automobile or other vehicle: 
Per year .....50.00 
Per week .....15.00 
Per day .....10.00 
All persons operating under grower's permit must file a copy of such grower's certificate in the office of the city clerk for each load of produce of any nature sold in the city and must make an affidavit such produce was actually grown by such person, setting forth the specific place in which it was grown, and circumstance under which it was grown, such affidavit to be in form prepared by the city clerk, and must obtain from the city clerk a permit to sell each load of such produce before selling it or any part thereof. 
112.	(812) Funeral directors. Each person, firm or corporation engaged in the business as a funeral director, undertaker, or mortician, including embalming, the sale of caskets, vaults, undertaking supplies. Merchants general rates apply. 
113.	(811) Furniture refinishing. Merchants general rates apply. This license applies to each person, firm or corporation outside corporate limits or the police jurisdiction who deliveries or picks up within corporate limits and police jurisdiction. In which case, license will be computed only on receipts of business transacted within the corporate limits and police jurisdiction. 
114.	(811) Garage or repair shop. Repair shop or garage for automobiles, trucks, tractors or trailers, etc. Merchants general rates apply. 
115.	(447) Gas-Butane or propane. See Butane. 
116.	(238) Gas fitters. Any person, firm or company, with or without an established place of business who contracts for, engages in, or solicits work as a gas fitter, or who works as a gas fitter, or who performs services pertaining to or in connection with the gas fitting business. Same as contractors. Merchants general rates apply to any sale of goods or wares. Application must be made to the city building inspector and applicant must comply with ordinance requiring posting of surety bond in the amount as required by this Code and said bond being payable to the city and filed with city clerk. Provided further that any employee helper must apply and become qualified with the city building inspector before being left on the job without the presence of his qualified supervisor. 
117.	(422) Gasoline distributor-Wholesale. Each person, firm or corporation or dealer who sells, disposes of, distributes or delivers gasoline, kerosene, or motor oil by pipe, truck or other vehicle. Merchants wholesale rates apply. 
118.	(447) Gasoline filling stations. Retail dealers: 
Each single hose pump .....20.00 
Each double hose pump .....40.00 
This license does not include the sale of other merchandise such as tires, batteries, accessories, oil, etc., for which a merchant retail license must be paid. Gross receipts from sales of gasoline should not be included in the computation of any other license required. 
119.	(713) Golf course. Miniature or otherwise .....50.00 
120.	(453) Green plants. See Florist or nursery. 
121.	(451) Gun shop. Sales and repair. Merchants general rates apply. 
122.	(484) Hauling, U-Haul, moving van. Each person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of hauling for others for hire .....100.00 
123.	(622) Hospital and/or clinic. Each person, firm or corporation operating a hospital, clinic, rest home or sanatorium for profit shall pay a license as follows: $100.00 plus 1/10 of 1 percent of gross receipts. 
124.	(721) Hotels/motels. 
Not exceeding 10 beds for guests .....60.00 
Exceeding 10 beds for guests .....100.00 
No license shall be issued under this subdivision except upon presentation to the city clerk of a certificate from the county health officer as required by state law. 
125.	(722) Ice cream parlor. Merchants general rates apply. 
126.	(314) Ice plant. Each manufacturer or retail dealer. Manufacturers rates apply. 
127.	(238) Insulation. See Contractors. 
128.	(524) Insurance-Fire and marine insurance companies. On each fire insurance company, there is levied a tax or license of 4 percent on each $100.00 or major fraction thereof of the gross premium less return premiums received by such company on risk in the city and police jurisdiction, which was written during the preceding year; Any new company who did not do business in the city during the preceding year and desiring to engage in business in the said city, shall pay $25.00 at the time of taking out such license and at the end of the year the sum shall be adjusted upon basis as herein provided immediately preceding. 
129.	(524) Insurance-Surety and bonding companies, etc. On all surety and bonding companies and other insurance companies, including domestic and foreign companies, there is hereby levied the following license tax, to-wit: $15.00 and $1.00 on each $100.00 or major fraction thereof, of gross premiums received during the preceding year, on all policies issued to citizens living in the city. Each person or company engaged in the business of insurance for the first time in the city shall pay a minimum license of $25.00 on which there shall be an adjustment on the above basis at the expiration of the year. 
The license tax required above on all insurance companies including fire, life and marine, shall be due January 1, and delinquent 60 days thereafter, and each company shall file with the mayor of the city, a statement sworn to by an officer authorized by the laws of the state, showing the gross amount of premiums received by it from business done within the city for the year or period required to determine said tax or license tax. Any company failing to furnish said statement within said period shall forfeit to the city the sum of $100.00 to be recovered in any court or competent jurisdiction, and said company or its agent shall also be subject to any other penalty provided in this article for doing business without a license. 
130.	(454) Itinerant person. Each transient or itinerant: Each person, firm or corporation doing business in the city, where said person, firm or corporation does not have a permanent location within the city and whereby said business is transient or itinerant, the license is fixed as follows: 
(1)	$300.00 per week or any portion or part thereof.
(2)	A license issued under this section shall be for a period of not to exceed 7 calendar days and must specify dates the business is to operate. 
(3)	License will cover only one sale.
(4)	In addition to the cost of the license as herein provided the applicant for the license shall make a deposit with the city clerk of said city of $300.00 as a deposit for sales tax due by the applicant. The applicant for the license shall also furnish to said city clerk the sales tax number with the department of finance. 
(5)	Each person, firm or corporation making application for a business license as a transient or itinerant must indicate the location of said business, which location must be approved by the license inspector of the city. Off-loading from a truck is not permitted, except in the event of a sale, or unless the off-loading is to place merchandise in a building that has been approved for occupancy. 
131.	(561) Janitorial services. Each person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of janitorial services with or without fixed place of business. Merchants general rates apply. 
132.	(448) Jewelers. Merchants general rates apply. 
133.	(323) Job printer. With or without established place of business. Merchants general rates apply. 
134.	(453) Junk dealer. Each dealer in scrap iron, sacks, rags, hides, second-hand automobile tires or parts, or similar articles .....50.00 
135.	(561) Landscaping, itinerate. Each person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of selling shrubs or plants, without fixed place of business: 
Per year .....50.00 
Per week .....15.00 
This license does not apply for delivery with a fixed place of business subject to retail merchants license. 
136.	(448) Laundries. Merchants general rates apply. 
137.	(448) Laundries-Self service. Merchants general rates apply. 
138.	(446) Linen and towel supplies. Merchants general rates apply. 
139.	(112) Livestock dealer. See Cattle dealer. 
140.	(522) Loan companies. See Finance company. 
141.	(515) Loud speakers. Operating, maintaining or permitting loud speakers, radio broadcasting or any other device on the street or sidewalk: 
Per year .....25.00 
Per day .....2.00 
Providing that no license shall be issued for any such broadcasting, loud speakers or other device until written application is made to city clerk and application approved by mayor of the city. 
142.	(444) Lumber dealer. Merchants general rates apply. 
143.	(321) Lumber, planing or saw mill. .....75.00. 
Also see pulpwood. In the event that lumber products are sold at retail, merchants general rates apply. 
144.	(722) Lunch stands. See Restaurants. Subject to inspection and approval by the county health department. 
145.	(811) Machine shop. See Shop. 
146.	(454) Mail order house. Merchants general rates apply. 
147.	(454) Magazines. Each transient person selling, soliciting orders for subscriptions to magazines, papers or publications, not subject to interstate commerce regulations, per person: 
Per year .....25.00 
Per week .....10.00 
This section does not apply to local, school, religious, civic, or fraternal organizations. 
148.	(314) Manufacturers. Each person, firm or corporation engaged in a business for which the manufacturers rates shall pay a license based on his gross annual receipts as follows: 
On sales less than $40,000.00 .....50.00 
$40,000.00 and less than $80,000.00 .....100.00 
$80,000.00 and less than $100,000.00 .....125.00 
$100,000.00 and less than $120,000.00 .....150.00 
$120,000.00 and less than $140,000.00 .....175.00 
$140,000.00 and less than $160,000.00 .....200.00 
$160,000.00 and less than $180,000.00 .....225.00 
$180,000.00 and less than $500,000.00 .....250.00 
$500,000.00 and less than $1,000,000.00 .....350.00 
$1,000,000.00 and over .....500.00 
149.	(238) Mason, brick. See Contractor or subcontractor. 
150.	(337) Mattress manufacturer or mattress repair. Manufacturers rates apply. 
151.	(311) Meat market. Merchants general rates apply. No license shall be issued under this section except upon presentation to the city clerk of a certificate from the county health officer as required by state law. 
152.	(454) Meat-Itinerant. See Frozen food. 
153.	(452) Merchants retail. Each person, firm or corporation operating or doing a retail business in the city shall pay a license on total gross receipts from said business for the year next preceding based on the merchants general rates as follows: 
On sales less than $5,000.00 .....35.00 
$5,000.00 and less than $20,000.00 .....50.00 
$20,000.00 and less than $30,000.00 .....75.00 
$30,000.00 and less than $40,000.00 .....90.00 
$40,000.00 and less than $50,000.00 .....105.00 
$50,000.00 and less than $60,000.00 .....120.00 
$60,000.00 and less than $70,000.00 .....130.00 
$70,000.00 and less than $80,000.00 .....145.00 
$80,000.00 and less than $90,000.00 .....155.00 
$90,000.00 and less than $100,000.00 .....170.00 
And also 1/10 of 1 percent on all gross annual receipts above $100,000.00. 
On new business subject to retail merchants license, the minimum license shall be paid, plus the amount based on estimate of sales for the license period. The amount paid will be adjusted at the end of the year license then will based on a full year's business or an estimate of same. 
154.	(421) Merchant-Wholesale. Each person, firm or corporation operating a wholesale business, or selling goods and entitled to the wholesale rate shall pay a wholesale license in lieu of the merchants general rates on his gross annual receipts as follows: 
On sales less than $40,000.00 .....50.00 
$40,000 and less than $60,000.00 .....75.00 
$60,000 and less than $80,000.00 .....80.00 
$80,000 and less than $100,000.00 .....90.00 
$100,000 and less than $120,000.00 .....105.00 
$120,000 and less than $140,000.00 .....120.00 
$140,000 and less than $160,000.00 .....140.00 
$160,000 and less than $180,000.00 .....160.00 
$180,000 and less than $200,000.00 .....175.00 
And also 1/10 of 1 percent on all gross annual receipts above $200,000.00. 
155.	(453) Metal dealers or metal processors. Each person, firm or corporation engaged primarily in the purchase and collection of scrap metals for the purpose of processing the same into scrap material for the metals recovery industry. Same as junk dealer. 
156.	(115) Mill. Any person, firm or corporation who operates a feed mill, crushing machine or mill for the purpose of mixing or manufacturing feedstuffs. Manufacturers rates apply. 
157.	(721) Mobile home parks. See Trailer parks. 
158.	(441) Mobile home sales. Each dealer for each place of business where new mobile homes are sold or offered for sale, that a business license shall be due and payable by each dealer, or each place of business as follows: 
(a)	For each place of business where the annual receipts do not exceed $400,000.00 .....500.00 
(b)	For each place of business where the annual receipts are in excess of $400,000.00 and do not exceed $1,000,000.00 .....700.00 
(c)	For each place of business where the annual receipts are in excess of $1,000,000.00 and do not exceed $2,000,000.00 .....800.00 
(d)	For each place of business where the annual receipts are in excess of $2,000,000.00 but do not exceed $3,000,000.00 .....900.00 
(e)	For each place of business where the annual receipts are in excess of $3,000,000.00 .....1,000.00 
Each dealer who deals in used mobile homes only, and is not paying a license as a dealer in new mobile homes, where the gross sales do not exceed $400,000.00 the amount of the license is $350.00. In addition thereof shall pay 1/20 of 1 percent on the total gross receipts in excess of $400,000.00. The duty shall be on the dealers to furnish sufficient proof to the city of the gross sales. 
159.	(522) Money lenders. 
(a)	Pawn brokers maintaining and operating an established place of business for lending money or accepting pawns, except legally organized bankers. Same as Finance company. 
(b)	Each person whose principal business is lending money and who does not maintain an established place of business. Same as Finance company. 
160.	(453) Monuments and tombstones. Each person, firm or corporation who sells, solicits orders for or erects monuments or tombstones. Merchants general rates apply. 
161.	(541) Mortician. See Funeral directors. 
162.	(523) Mortgage brokerage company. Professional rates apply. 
163.	(721) Motels. See Hotels. 
164.	(441) Motorboats, yachts, pleasure boats and motors. Sales. Merchants general rates apply. Repair. See Shop. 
165.	(484) Motor carrier. See Carrier. 
166.	(441) Motorcycles. Sales. Merchants general rates apply. Repair. See Shop. 
167.	(485) Motor vehicles. For hire, see Cars. 
168.	(512) Moving pictures. See Picture show. 
169.	(910) Music. 
(a)	Operating and using any music box, rockola, victrola or other coin-operated musical instrument, where machine is owned by the proprietor of the business .....30.00 
(b)	Rockola, victrola or other coin-operated musical instrument, each person, firm or corporation or association leasing, setting up, distributing, servicing, lending or placing the same on commission, each machine .....50.00 
170.	(453) Musical instrument dealer. Merchants general rates apply. 
171.	(511) Newspaper. Each publisher of same. Merchants general rates apply. 
172.	(454) News dealer or agent. Each agent, person, firm or corporation selling or distributing newspapers or other periodicals whether or not published within the city. Merchants general rates apply. 
173.	(444) Nursery or agents. Selling or delivering shrubbery or other nursery stock, local. Merchants general rates apply. 
Delivery only. See section on delivery. 
Itinerant. See Landscaping. 
The public welfare requiring it, no person shall be issued a license hereunder without first evidencing to the city clerk proof of compliance on his part with all statutes, rules and regulations of the state, and of its applicable departments, then in force relating to the activities sought to be engaged in by the applicant. 
State law reference- Title 2, Section 450 to 471, inclusive, as last amended, and Title 2, Section 672 to 677, inclusive as last amended, 1940 Code of Alabama, as amended (1958 Recompiled Edition, as amended). 
174.	(624) Nursery school. Each nursery school not operated in connection with a religious educational, civic or fraternal organization .....75.00 
175.	(623) Nursing home. Same as Hospital. 
176.	(115) Nuts. Each person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of buying, selling or cracking nuts at wholesale or retail who is not subject to annual retail merchants license .....40.00 
Not subject to one-half-year license. 
177.	(541) Optician or dealer in spectacles or eyeglasses exclusively. Professional rates apply. 
178.	(541) Optometrists, oculists and others examining eyes, or prescribing or fitting eyeglasses. Professional rates apply. 
179.	(238) Painter. Any person, business or company engaged in the business or calling of painting, or wall refinishers, with or without place of business. See Contractor and subcontractors. 
180.	(444) Paint shop. Merchants general rates apply. 
181.	(711) Parades. See Parade ordinance. 
182.	(522) Pawn shop or pawnbroker. See Money lenders. 
183.	(111) Peanuts. See Vending. 
184.	(454) Peddlers or itinerants. See Itinerants. 
185.	(910) Penny weighing machine. See Vending. 
186.	(541) Photographer. Each maintaining an office or established place of business .....75.00 
187.	(541) Photographer-Transient. Each photographer or photograph finisher, or solicitor of photographic business, where business is solicited by salesman or solicitors operating outside of said place of business, either by telephone, mail, direct sales, handbill or radio, per year .....75.00 
188.	(443) Piano or organ or phonographs or other musical instruments. Sales. Merchants general rates apply. 
189.	(811) Piano tuner or organ repair. Each person engaged in the business of tuning pianos or repairing organs or similar work: 
Per year .....20.00 
Per day .....2.00 
190.	(512) Picture show or moving picture theater. Merchants general rates apply. 
191.	(321) Planing mill. See Lumber. 
192.	(561) Plants. See Florist or nursery or landscaping. 
193.	(238) Plumbers. With or without established place of business, who contracts for, engages in or solicits business as a plumber or who performs services pertaining to or in connection with plumbing business. Same as contractors. Merchants general rates apply to any sale of goods or wares. Application must be made to the city building inspector and applicant must comply with ordinance requiring posting of surety bond in the amount required by city code and said bond being payable to the city and filed with city clerk. Provided further that any employee helper must apply and become qualified with city building inspector before being left on the job without the presence of his qualified supervisor. 
194.	(910) Popcorn. Provided that the person, firm or corporation is not subject to retail merchant license. 
Each machine .....15.00 
195.	(453) Premium store. Merchants general rates apply. See Stamp store. 
196.	(448) Pressing shop. See Cleaning and pressing. 
197.	(323) Printer. See Job printer. 
198.	(454) Produce. Peddling. See Fruit and vegetable. 
199.	(541) Professional. Each person, firm or corporation engaging in a business, calling or profession, and/or selling goods for which the professional rates apply shall pay a license based on his gross annual receipts as follows: 
On receipts less than $5,000.00 .....35.00 
$5,000.00 and less than $7,500.00 .....50.00 
$7,500.00 and less than $12,500.00 .....75.00 
$12,500.00 and less than $17,500.00 .....100.00 
$17,500.00 and less than $22,500.00 .....150.00 
$22,500.00 and over .....250.00 
200.	(482) Pullman. License tax is levied against all persons engaged in the business of operating cars for transportation, accommodation, comfort, convenience or safety of passengers on or over any railway line .....10.00 
201.	(113) Pulpwood. Each person, firm or corporation engaged in receiving, storing, distributing or shipping pulpwood .....75.00 
In the event that lumber products are sold at retail, merchants general rates apply. Also see Lumber. 
202.	(515) Radio braodcasting stations. $200.00 and also 1/5 of 1 percent of all annual gross receipts in excess of the sum of $50,000.00 
203.	(443) Radios and/or television. Sales. Merchants rates apply. Repairs. See Electrical appliance repair. 
204.	(482) Railroads. Each person, firm or corporation operating a railroad in the city, as a common carrier for the privilege of doing interstate business within the limits of said city, whether such company is incorporated under the laws of this state or any other state, or whether incorporated at all or not shall pay a privilege or license tax for engaging in business in said municipality as follows .....145.00 
Also see Pullman. 
205.	(531) Real estate agency. Professional rates apply. 
206.	(811) Repair shop. 
(a)	Where primary business is repairing. Merchants general rates apply.
(b)	Where primary business is manufacturing. Manufacturing rates apply.
207.	(722) Restaurant, cafes and lunch stands. Merchants general rates apply. No license shall be issued under this subdivision except upon presentation to the city clerk a certificate from the county health officer as required by state law. 
208.	(910) Rockola. See Music. 
209.	(454) Rummage sales. Per day .....1.00 
Note: The mayor shall be authorized to permit churches and other charitable organizations to hold rummage sales on specific occasions without paying the foregoing license. 
210.	(522) Savings and loan associations. See Banks. 
211.	(453) Sand and gravel. Dealer. Merchants general rates apply. 
212.	(321) Sawmill. See Lumber. 
213.	(453) Secondhand dealer. Merchants general rates apply. 
214.	(454) Septic tanks. Sales and cleaning. Merchants general rates apply. 
215.	(452) Sewing machine agent or dealer. Sales and/or service, with or without an established place of business Merchants general rates apply. 
216.	(811) Shoe repair shop. Merchants general rates apply. 
217.	(451) Shooting gallery. 
Per year .....100.00 
Per month .....25.00 
No license for shooting galleries shall be issued without approval of city council. 
218.	(811) Shops. Merchants general rates apply. Also see Garage or repair or welding. 
219.	(711) Shows. 
Carnivals, fair or circus, per day .....100.00 
Street fair, per day .....100.00 
Dog, pony or any side show: 
Per day .....25.00 
Per week .....125.00 
These rates are applicable when the said carnival, street fair, circus, dog, pony or any side show is sponsored by a local, civic, fraternal or religious organization. In the event that the same is not sponsored by a local, civic, fraternal or religious organization, $500.00 per day. Prior to the issuance of this license, application must be made to the mayor and approved by city council. 
220.	(561) Shrubs. See Nursery or landscaping. 
221.	(452) Signs. Electric or neon signs, etc., selling, leasing or servicing same. Merchants general rates apply. 
222.	(238) Sign painting. 
Per year .....35.00 
Per day .....5.00 
223.	(713) Skating rink. 
Where tent or other temporary structure is used, per month .....50.00 
Skating rink where business is conducted from permanent type building, per year .....100.00 
224.	(493) Slaughterhouse. See Cold storage plant. 
225.	(482) Sleeping car. See Pullman. 
226.	(722) Soda fountain. Merchants general rates apply. No license shall be issued except upon presentation of a certificate from the county health officer as required by state law. 
227.	(452) Stamp or premium store or agent. Premium redemption store. Each person, firm or corporation engaging in or operating a premium redemption store where trading stamps are redeemable for premiums or things of value shall be subject to the merchants general rates on the annual gross retail value of premiums delivered in redemption of such stamps during the preceding year. 
228.	(453) Stamps, trade. Each person, firm or corporation who furnishes or contracts to furnish or supply any trade stamps or other similar stamps or devices as a means of attracting customers or stimulating trade, per year .....100.00 
229.	(444) Stormwindows and doors, selling or erecting. Merchants general rates apply. 
230.	(541) Tax consultants. Person preparing income tax and/or other tax papers. Professional rates apply. 
231.	(485) Taxicabs. Each car .....30.00 
Before this license is issued, application must be approved by city council and applicant must meet requirements of furnishing copy of indemnity insurance policy as required by state law. These rates are fixed by the Code of Alabama. 
232.	(517) Telegraph company. Per year .....75.00 
233.	(517) Telephone exchange or company. 
Operating telephone exchange .....270.00 
Long distance .....68.00 
234.	(238) Tile. See Contractor or subcontractor. 
Where tile work is done in connection with established place of business. Merchants general rates apply. 
235.	(453) Tin shop and/or sheet metal shop. Merchants general rates apply. 
236.	(721) Tourist camp or cabins or homes. Same as Motel. 
237.	(721) Trailer courts, parks or camps. Where house trailers or mobile homes are used for living quarters: 
1 to 5 trailers .....50.00 
6 trailers or more .....75.00 
Note: Compliance with county health regulations must be met prior to the issuance of license. 
238.	(441) Trailers. Selling or dealing in house trailers. See Mobile Home Sales. 
239.	(453) Trade stamps. See Stamps. 
240.	(238) Tree surgeon or trimmer. See Contractor or subcontractor. 
241.	(811) TV and radio repair. See Electrical Appliance Repair. 
242.	(811) Typewriter machines, adding machines. Sales and/or repair. Merchants general rates apply. 
243.	(812) Undertaker. See Funeral director. 
244.	(442) Upholstery finisher. Merchants general rates apply. This license applies to each person, firm or corporation outside corporate limits or the police jurisdiction who picks up or delivers within corporate limits and police jurisdiction. In which case, license will be computed only on receipts of business transacted within the corporate limits and police jurisdiction. 
245.	(221) Utilities. State regulated. 
246.	(910) Vending machines. Any person, firm or corporation who possesses, operates or maintains for operation by others any vending machine for the sale of gum, candy, cookies, cigarettes, chips, milk, coffee, soft drinks, or any other type or kind of article, each machine .....12.00 
247.	(541) Veterinarian. Professional rates apply. 
248.	(493) Warehouse. Each person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of operating a public warehouse, per year .....40.00 
249.	(811) Watch and clock repair. Merchants general rates apply. 
250.	(811) Welding shop. Merchants general rates apply. 
251.	(324) Wood. Dealer in and hauling and delivering wood. See Coal, coke and wood dealer. 
252.	(221) Utilities. Electric light or power plant, public utilities. Any person, firm or corporation operating (electric-hydro-electric) street, railroad, electric light, power company, gas company, water work company, pipe line company or transporting or carrying gas, oil, gasoline, electric current, water or other commodities, gas distributing companies, whether by means of pipe line or by tank, drums, wire, tube, cylinder, or otherwise, heating companies, or other public utilities incorporated under the laws of this state or other states, or whether incorporated, at all or not, except telephone and telegraph, railroad and sleeping car company and express company which are otherwise licensed shall pay a privilege or license tax of 3 percent of the gross receipts of the business of such person in the city for the preceding year and 11/2 percent of the gross receipts of the business of such persons in the police jurisdiction of the city, and without the corporate limits of said city. 
253.	(238) Weather strippers. Contractor rates apply. 
254.	(999) Miscellaneous. All other business, profession, occupation or calling not herein specified: 
Per year .....50.00 
Per day .....5.00 
(Ord. No. 8-07, § 22, 10-8-07; Ord. No. 1-10, 2-22-2010) 
Sec. 10-48. - Exchange of information. 
(a)	The license officer may exchange tax returns, information, records, and other documents secured by the municipality, with other municipalities adopting similar ordinances for the exchange of taxpayer information, or with county or state authorities. The license officer may charge a reasonable fee for providing such information or documents. Any tax returns, information, records, or other documents so exchanged shall remain subject to the confidentiality provisions, restrictions, and criminal penalties for unauthorized disclosure as provided under state or municipal law. 
(b)	Any such exchange shall be for one (1) or more of the following purposes:
(1)	Collecting taxes due.
(2)	Ascertaining the amount of taxes due from any person.
(3)	Determining whether a person is liable for, or whether there is probable cause for believing a person might be liable for, the payment of any tax to a state, county, or municipal agency. 
(c)	Nothing herein shall prohibit the use of tax returns or tax information by the municipality in the proper administration of any matter administered by the license officer. The license officer may also divulge to a purchaser, prospective purchaser as defined pursuant to the regulations of the Alabama Department of Revenue, or successor of a business or stock of goods the outstanding sales, use, or rental tax liability of the seller for which the purchaser, prospective purchaser as defined pursuant to the regulations of the Alabama Department of Revenue, or successor may be liable pursuant to the Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 40-23-25, 40-23-82, or 40-12-224. 
(Ord. No. 8-07, § 23, 10-8-07) 
Sec. 10-49. - License fees in police jurisdiction. 
    Any person, firm, association, or corporation engaged in any business outside the municipality but within the police jurisdiction hereof shall pay one-half (1/2) of the amount of the license imposed for like business within the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 8-07, § 24, 10-8-07) 
Secs. 10-50-10-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PRIVILEGE TAX ON GROSS SALES, GROSS RECEIPTS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 06-01, §§ 1-13, effective Oct. 1, 2001, being not specifically amendatory of the Code has been treated as superceding the Art. III, §§ 10-66-10-70. The provisions of said ordinance have been added as a new art. III, §§ 10-66-10-78. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 10-66. - Definitions and use of phrases. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    "City" means the Municipal Corporation of Clanton in the State of Alabama. 
    "City treasurer" means the city treasurer of the city, or if there is no specifically designated treasurer, the city clerk. 
    "Council" means the governing body of the city as from time to time constituted. 
    "State department of revenue" means the Department of Revenue of the State of Alabama. 
    "State sales and use tax statutes" means Chapter 23 of Title 40 of the Code of Alabama, 1975, as amended and supplemented from time to time. 
    The definitions set forth in the state sales and use tax statutes shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this article. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those hereinabove specifically defined, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in the state sales and use tax statutes, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in the state sales and use tax statutes. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 10-67. - Levy of sales tax. 
    For the privilege of engaging or continuing within the city in the business activities hereinafter referred to, there is hereby levied, in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law, and shall be collected as herein provided, a privilege or license tax against the person on account of the business activities and in the amounts to be determined by the application of rates against gross proceeds of sales, or gross receipts, as the case may be, as follows: 
(1)	Upon every person, firm, or corporation, (including the State of Alabama, the University of Alabama, Auburn University, and all other institutions of higher learning in the state, whether the institutions be denominational, state, county, or municipal institutions, any association or other agency or instrumentality of the institutions) engaged or continuing within the city, in the business of selling at retail any tangible personal property whatsoever, including merchandise and commodities of every kind and character, (not including, however, bonds or other evidences of debts or stocks, nor sales of material and supplies to any person for use in fulfilling a contract for the painting, repair, or reconditioning of vessels, barges, ships, other watercraft, and commercial fishing vessels of over five tons load displacement as registered with the U. S. Coast Guard and licensed by the State of Alabama Department of Conservation and Natural Resources), an amount equal to three (3) percent of the gross proceeds of sales of the business except where a different amount is expressly provided herein. Provided, however, that any person engaging or continuing in business as a retailer and wholesaler or jobber shall pay the tax required on the gross proceeds of retail sales of the business at the rates specified, when his or her books are kept so as to show separately the gross proceeds of sales of each business, and when his or her books are not kept he or she shall pay the tax as a retailer, on the gross sales of the business. 
Where any used part, including tires, of an automotive vehicle or a truck trailer, semitrailer, or house trailer is taken in trade, or in a series of trades, as a credit or part payment on the sale of a new or rebuilt part or tire, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference, that is, the price of the new or used part or tire sold less the credit for the used part or tire taken in trade, provided, however, this provision shall not be construed to include batteries. 
(2)	Upon every person, firm, or corporation engaged or continuing within the city in the business of conducting or operating places of amusement or entertainment, billiard and pool rooms, bowling alleys, amusement devices, musical devices, theaters, opera houses, moving picture shows, vaudevilles, amusement parks, athletic contests, including wrestling matches, prize fights, boxing and wrestling exhibitions, football and baseball games, (including athletic contests, conducted by or under the auspices of any educational institution within this state, or any athletic association thereof, or other association whether the institution or association be a denominational, a state, or county, or a municipal institution, or association or a state, county, or city school, or other institution, association or school), skating rinks, race tracks, golf courses, or any other place at which any exhibition, display, amusement, or entertainment is offered to the public or place or places where an admission fee is charged, including public bathing places, public dance halls of every kind and description within the State of Alabama, an amount equal to three (3) percent of the gross receipts of any such business. Provided, however, notwithstanding any language to the contrary in the prior portion of this subdivision, the tax provisions so specified shall not apply to any athletic event conducted by a public primary or secondary school or any football playoff conducted by or under the auspices of the Alabama High School Athletic Association. The tax amount which would have been collected pursuant to this subdivision shall continue to be collected by the public primary or secondary school but shall be retained by the school which collected it and shall be used by the school for school purposes. 
(3)	Upon every person, firm, or corporation engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling at retail machines used in mining, quarrying, compounding, processing, and manufacturing of tangible personal property an amount equal to one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the gross proceeds of the sale of the machines. The term machine, as herein used, shall include machinery which is used for mining, quarrying, compounding, processing, or manufacturing tangible personal property, and the parts of the machines, attachments, and replacements therefor, which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of the machines and which are necessary to the operation of the machines and are customarily so used. 
(4)	Upon every person, firm, or corporation engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling at retail any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer, or house trailer, or mobile home set-up materials and supplies including but not limited to steps, blocks, anchoring, cable pipes, and any other materials pertaining thereto an amount equal to one-fourth of one (0.25) percent of the gross proceeds of sale of the automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer, or house trailer, or mobile home set-up materials and supplies provided, however, where a person subject to the tax provided for in this subdivision withdraws from his or her stock in trade any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer, or house trailer for use by him or her or by his or her employee or agent in the operation of the business, there shall be paid, in lieu of the tax levied herein, a fee of five dollars ($5.00) per year or part thereof during which the automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semitrailer, or house trailer shall remain the property of the person. Each year or part thereof shall begin with the day or anniversary date, as the case may be of such withdrawal and shall run for the twelve (12) succeeding months or part thereof during which the automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semitrailer, or house trailer shall remain the property of the person. 
Where any used automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer, or house trailer is taken in trade or in a series of trades, as a credit or part payment on the sale of a new or used vehicle the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference, that is, the price of the new or used vehicle sold less the credit for the used vehicle taken in trade. 
Sales of automobiles, motorcycles trucks, truck trailers, or semitrailers that will be registered or titled outside Alabama, that are exported or removed from Alabama within seventy-two (72) hours by the purchaser or his or her agent for first use outside Alabama are not subject to the Alabama sales tax. Sales of other vehicles such as mobile homes, motor bikes, all terrain vehicles, and boats do not qualify for the export exemption provision and are taxable unless the dealer can provide factual evidence that the vehicle was delivered outside of Alabama or to a common carrier for transportation outside Alabama. In order for the sale to be exempt from Alabama tax, the information relative to the exempt sale shall be documented on forms approved by the revenue department. 
(5)	Upon every person, firm, or corporation engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling through coin-operated dispensing machines, food and food products for human consumption, not including beverages other than coffee, milk, milk products, and substitutes therefor, there is levied a tax equal to three (3) percent of the cost of the food, food products, and beverages sold through the machines, which cost for the purpose of this subdivision shall be the gross proceeds of sales of the business. 
(6)	Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within the city in the business of selling at retail any machine, machinery or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating and harvesting farm products, or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock or poultry on farms, and the parts of such machines, machinery or equipment, attachments and replacements therefor which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, and which are necessary to and customarily used in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, an amount equal to one-fourth of one (0.25) percent of the gross proceeds of the sale thereof; provided, that the one-fourth of one (0.25) percent rate herein prescribed with respect to parts, attachments and replacements shall not apply to any automotive vehicle or trailer designed primarily for public highway use, except farm trailers used primarily in the production and harvesting of agricultural commodities. 
Where any used machine, machinery or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating and harvesting farm products, or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock and poultry on farms is taken in trade or in a series of trades as a credit or part payment on a sale of a new or used machine, machinery or equipment, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference, that is, the price of the new or used machine, machinery or equipment sold, less the credit for the used machine, machinery or equipment taken in trade. 
The tax levied by this subsection shall be in lieu of the sales tax levied by subsections (1), (2), (3), (4) and (5) hereof. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 2, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 10-68. - Levy of excise tax. 
(a)	An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property, not including, however, materials and supplies bought for use in fulfilling a contract for the painting, repairing or reconditioning of vessels, barges, ships, other watercraft and commercial fishing vessels of over five tons load displacement as registered in the U.S. Coast Guard and licensed by the State of Alabama Department of Conservation and Natural Resources, purchased at retail on or after October 1965, or storage, use or other consumption in the city after the effective date of this article at the rate of three (3) percent of the sales price of such property or the amount of tax collected by the seller, whichever is greater. 
(b)	An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of any machines used in mining, quarrying, compounding, processing and manufacturing of tangible personal property, purchased at retail on or after the effective date of this article, at the rate of one-half of one (0.5) percent of the sales price of any such machine; provided, that the term "machine," as herein used, shall include machinery which is used for mining, quarrying, compounding, processing, or manufacturing tangible personal property, and the parts of such machines, attachments and replacements therefor, which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machines and which are necessary to the operation of such machines and are customarily so used. 
(c)	An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer or house trailer, and mobile home set-up materials and supplies including but not limited to steps, blocks; anchoring, cable pipes and any other materials pertaining thereto, purchased at retail on or after the effective date of this article, for storage, use or other consumption in this state at the rate of one-fourth of one (0.25) percent of the sales price of such automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semitrailer or house trailer, and mobile home set-up materials and supplies as specified above. Where any used automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semitrailer or house trailer is taken in trade, or in a series of trades, as a credit or part payment on the sale of a new or used vehicle, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference, that is the price of the new or used vehicle sold less the credit for the used vehicle taken in trade. 
(d)	An excise tax is hereby imposed on the classes of tangible personal property, and at the rates imposed on such classes, specified in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section, on the storage, use, or other consumption in the performance of a contract in the city of any such tangible personal property, new or used, the tax to be measured by the sales price or the fair and reasonable market value of such tangible personal property when put into use in this state, whichever is less; provided, that the tax imposed by this subsection shall not apply where the taxes imposed by subsection (a), (b), or (c) of this section apply. 
(e)	There is hereby levied and imposed an excise tax on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of any machine, machinery, or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating and harvesting farm products, or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock or poultry, or farms, and the parts of such machines, machinery or equipment, attachments and replacements therefor which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, and which are necessary to and customarily used in the operation of such machine, machinery or equipment, which is purchased at retail after the effective date of this article, for storage, use or other consumption in this state, at the rate of one-fourth of one (0.25) percent of the sales price of such property. The tax herein levied and imposed shall be in lieu of the excise tax levied and imposed by subsections (a), (b), and (c) of this section; provided, that the one-fourth of one (0.25) percent rate herein prescribed with respect to parts, attachments and replacements shall not apply to any automotive vehicle or trailer designed primarily for public highway use except farm trailers used primarily in the production and harvesting of agricultural commodities. 
(f)	Every person storing, using or otherwise consuming in the city tangible personal property purchased at retail shall be liable for the tax imposed by this article, and the liability shall not be extinguished until the tax has been paid to the city. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 3, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 10-69. - Article subject to and construed in accordance with certain state statutes. 
(a)	This article and the taxes herein levied shall be subject to all definitions, exceptions, exemptions, proceedings, requirements, provisions, rules and regulations promulgated under the Alabama Administrative Procedures Act, direct pay permit and drive-out certificate procedures, statutes of limitations, penalties, fines, punishments, and deductions for the corresponding state tax as are provided by § 40-2A-7, Code of Alabama (1975) and the state sales and use tax statutes. 
(b)	This article and the taxes herein levied shall be construed so as to parallel the state sales and use tax statutes in all respects except rates of taxation. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 4, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 10-70. - Provisions of Sections 40-23-104 and 40-23-107, Code of Alabama (1975) applicable to this article and the taxes herein levied. 
    The taxes provided herein for any automotive vehicle, truck trailer, trailer, semi-trailer or travel trailer required to be licensed with the probate judge, which is not sold through a licensed Alabama dealer, or sold by a dealer that is not licensed in Alabama or sold by a licensed dealer who fails to collect municipal taxes at the point of sale shall be collected and fees paid in accordance with the provisions of Sections 40-23-104 and 40-23-107, Code of Alabama (1975), respectively, as amended and supplemented. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 5, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 10-71. - Payment of tax herein levied. 
    The tax levied under the provisions of this article shall be due and payable in monthly installments on or before the twentieth day of the month next succeeding the month in which the tax accrued. On or before the twentieth day of each month beginning with the month following the month during which this article becomes effective, every person on whom the tax levied by this article is imposed shall render a true and correct statement showing the gross sales, the gross proceeds of sales, or gross receipts of his business, as the case may be, for the then next preceding month, the amount of gross proceeds of sales or gross receipts which are not subject to the said tax or are not to be used as a measurement of the tax due by such person, and the nature thereof, together with such other information as may be required, as herein provided, and at the time of making said monthly report such person shall compute the amount of the tax due and shall pay the amount of tax shown to be due. The tax herein levied shall be collected by the city treasurer and the monthly statements or reports herein provided for shall be filed with the city treasurer or as otherwise directed and shall be in such form as the council may prescribe. If any person subject to this article should willfully make a false return or false statement of facts in any statement or report required hereunder, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 10-75 of this article. The council may, in its discretion, contract with the state department of revenue or other agency for the collection of the taxes herein levied, or for enforcement of this article, or for both purposes, and, in such case, in lieu of payment to the city treasurer payments shall instead be made as directed by the state department of revenue or other agency or its designated agent, agency, department or other subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 6, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 10-72. - Seller to collect tax and related provisions. 
(a)	Every person, firm, corporation, association or copartnership engaged in or continuing within the city in the business for which a license or privilege tax is required by this article shall add to the sales price and collect from the purchaser on all sales upon the gross receipts or gross proceeds of which there is levied by this article a sales tax at the rates herein provided. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association or copartnership described in this section to fail or refuse to add to the sales price and collect from the purchaser the amount required by this section to be so added to the sales price and collected from the purchaser; and it shall likewise be unlawful to refund or offer to refund all or any part of the amount collected, or to absorb or advertise directly or indirectly the absorption or refund of the amount required to be added to the sales price and collected from the purchaser, or any portion of such amount. Any person, firm, corporation, association, or copartnership violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined in a sum of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or may be imprisoned in the county jail for not more than six (6) months, or may be punished by both such fine and imprisonment, and each act in violation of the provisions of this division shall constitute a separate offense. The provisions of this section that there shall be added to the sale price and collected from the purchaser the amounts provided herein shall in no way relieve the person, firm, corporation, association, or co-partnership described in this section of the tax levied by this article. 
(c)	All taxes paid in pursuance to section 10-67 of this article shall conclusively be presumed to be a direct tax on the retail consumer, precollected for the purpose of convenience and facility only. 
(d)	Every such seller making sales of tangible personal property for storage, use or other consumption in the city, not exempted under the provisions of Section 40-23-62 Code of Alabama (1975) shall at the time of making such sales or, if the storage, use or other consumption of the tangible personal property is not then taxable hereunder, at the time such storage, use or other consumption becomes taxable hereunder, collect the tax imposed by this article from the purchaser, and give to the purchaser a receipt therefor in the manner and form prescribed by the state department of revenue. The tax required to be collected by the seller from the purchaser shall be displayed separately from the list, advertised in the premises, marked or other price on the sales check or other proof of sales. It shall be unlawful for any such seller to advertise or hold out or state to the public or to any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof imposed by this article will be assumed or absorbed by the seller or that it will not be added to the selling price of the property sold, or if added that it or any part thereof will be refunded. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The tax herein required to be collected by the seller shall constitute a debt owed by the seller to the city. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 7, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 10-73. - Reporting of credit sales. 
    Any person taxable under this article having cash and credit sales may, if he desires, report such cash sales only and he shall thereafter include in each monthly report all credit collections made during the month preceding and shall pay the taxes due thereon at the time of filing such report. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 8, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 10-74. - Records. 
    It shall be the duty of every person engaging or continuing in any business, for which a privilege tax is imposed by this article, to keep and preserve suitable records of the gross sales, gross proceeds of sales and gross receipts of such business and such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax for which he is liable under the provisions of this article, and it shall be the duty of every person to keep and preserve, for a period of three (3) years, all invoices of goods, wares and merchandise purchased for resale or otherwise, and all such books, invoices, accounts, and other records shall be open for examination at any time by the city and its agent. Any person selling both at wholesale and retail shall keep his books so as to show separately the gross proceeds of wholesale sales and the gross proceeds of retail sales. The books, records and accounts provided for in this section shall at all times be open to examination by the city treasurer and by any other person designated by the council. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 9, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 10-75. - Penalties for violation hereof. 
(a)	Failure to keep records, permit examinations thereof or make reports. Any person who shall fail to keep any records required by this article or who shall refuse to permit the examination thereof provided for herein, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. Each month in which such failure, refusal or violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. Any person failing to render any report required by this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), and each failure shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)	Failure to pay taxes herein levied. Any person who fails to pay, within the time provided in section 10-71 of this article, any tax levied in this article for which he is liable shall be deemed to be doing business without a license and shall pay, in addition to the tax, a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the tax due, together with interest thereon at the rate of twelve (12) percent per annum from the date on which the tax became due until it is paid, the penalty and interest to be assessed and collected as a part of the tax, provided, that the council may for good and sufficient reason shown to it waive or remit the said ten (10) percent penalty or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 10, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 10-76. - Discount for prompt payment. 
    A discount equal to five (5) percent of the first one hundred dollars ($100.00) or each monthly installment of the tax herein levied and two (2) percent of that portion of each monthly installment of the said tax in excess of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be allowed to each taxpayer on the filing of the monthly report with respect to such installment in the form and at the time herein provided, upon payment of the amount of such monthly installment (minus said discount) at the time when such installment is required herein to be paid. If the report is not filed and payment is not made within the time herein provided with respect to any monthly installment of the tax herein levied, the taxpayer shall not be entitled to the said discount with respect to that monthly installment but shall pay the full amount of the tax then due together with the penalty and interest provided for in section 10-75 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 11, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 10-77. - Use of proceeds from tax herein levied. 
    The proceeds from the tax herein levied shall be paid into the general fund of the city and may be used for any lawful purpose. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 12, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 10-78. - Article cumulative. 
    This article shall not be construed to repeal any of the provisions of the general license code or ordinance of the city or of any other ordinance of the city, but shall be held to be cumulative, and the amounts of the tax herein levied shall be in addition to the amounts of all other license taxes imposed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 13, 10-1-01) 
Secs. 10-79-10-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SALE AND STORAGE OF GASOLINE 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Privilege tax on gasoline stations and pumps, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-12-106; distributors of motor fuels, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-12-190 et seq.; gasoline tax, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 40-17-30 et seq., 40-17-220 et seq. (Back)
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-91. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Distributor or seller means any person who engages in the business of selling, distributing, delivering, storing or withdrawing from storage, gasoline, within the corporate limits of the city or its police jurisdiction. 
    Gasoline means gasoline, naphtha, any and all other liquid motor fuels, or any devises or substitutes therefor, commonly used in combustion engines, but shall not be held to apply to those products known commercially as kerosene oil, fuel oil or crude oil, used for lighting or heating purposes, nor to lubricating oils and greases. 
    Person means an individual, firm, corporation, partnership, company, trustee, agency or association, and any agent, servant, employee or officer thereof. 
    Storer means any person who is engaged in the business of shipping, or causing to be shipped, gasoline, into the city or its police jurisdiction, in lot quantities of as much as fifty (50) gallons, and there storing the gasoline for any purpose. 
(Code 1979, § 8-36) 
Sec. 10-92. - Exceptions to article. 
    None of the provisions of this article shall apply to acts or transactions which constitute interstate commerce, nor shall any provision of this article apply to United States, county, state or other government business. 
(Code 1979, § 8-43) 
Sec. 10-93. - Failure to file required statement; filing false statement. 
    It shall be unlawful for any seller, distributor or storer to fail or omit to make or file any statement provided for in this article and required within the time specified in this article, or to make any false or misleading statement therein. 
(Code 1979, § 8-45) 
Sec. 10-94. - Gasoline transport and delivery. 
(a)	Delivery prohibited during certain hours. It shall be unlawful for any person, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., to unload or deliver gasoline from motor trucks or other vehicles, or to convey gasoline by any other manner into storage tanks or other equipment located at any gasoline service station, or to any person, within the corporate limits or the police jurisdiction of the city, and it shall be unlawful for any such vehicle to be in such area between these hours; provided that this subsection shall not apply to deliveries made by and from licensed filling stations within the city or its police jurisdiction to motor vehicles in emergency cases. 
(b)	Haulers to carry bills of sale. Every person hauling, transporting or conveying gasoline over any of the public streets or highways within the city or its police jurisdiction must, during the entire time he is so engaged, have in his possession an invoice or bill of sale or other recorded evidence showing the true name and address of the person from whom he has received the gasoline, the number of gallons so originally received by him from such person, the true name and address of every person to whom he has made deliveries of the gasoline or any part thereof, and the number of gallons so delivered to each of the persons. The person hauling, transporting or conveying such gasoline shall, at the request of any person authorized or required by law to inquire into or investigate such matters, produce and offer for inspection the invoice, bill of sale, or other recorded evidence. If the person fails or refuses to produce the invoice or bill of sale or other recorded evidence or if, when produced, it fails to clearly disclose the information, this shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection. 
(c)	Marking of vehicles. No person shall haul, transport or convey gasoline over any of the public streets or highways within the city or its police jurisdiction except in vehicles plainly and visibly marked on each side and on the rear thereof with the word "gasoline" or other name of the motor fuel being transported, in letters at least four (4) inches high and of corresponding appropriate width, together with the name and address of the owner of the vehicle in which such gasoline is contained. 
(d)	Exceptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to gasoline contained in the fuel tank of any vehicle provided by the manufacturer of such vehicle for the carrying of gasoline for propelling the vehicle, which gasoline is to be used solely for the motive power of such vehicle, nor to a vehicle transporting gasoline in quantities of not more than five (5) gallons for emergency purposes, nor to gasoline being transported by common carriers in railroad cars, nor to vehicles owned and being operated by any government agency. 
(Code 1979, § 8-49) 
Secs. 10-95-10-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-106. - Rights of council. 
    The adoption of this division shall not abridge the right of the city council to change, alter, increase or decrease the license tax provided for in this division, or to revoke for cause the license provided for in this division, at any time, and when any increase is made, unless the increase is paid in thirty (30) days, the license shall be revoked and no further business carried on thereunder. 
(Code 1979, § 8-52) 
Sec. 10-107. - License required. 
    Each person engaging in the business for which a license tax is provided and required under this division without first obtaining and having a license therefor as required under this division shall be guilty of an offense against the city and shall be punished as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 8-42) 
Sec. 10-108. - Permit for persons without place of business within city. 
    It shall be unlawful for any seller, distributor or storer, or any other person, having no place of business within the corporate limits of the city or within the police jurisdiction thereof, to make any sale, distribution or delivery of gasoline therein, without first having obtained a permit so to do from the city clerk. Such person, seller, distributor or storer shall be liable for and pay the same license tax as that fixed and specified in section 10-110. 
(Code 1979, § 8-41) 
Sec. 10-109. - Issuance fee. 
    A fee of fifty cents ($0.50) shall be collected for issuing each license under this division. 
(Code 1979, § 8-50) 
Sec. 10-110. - Levy of tax. 
    Every distributor, seller or storer shall pay a license tax to the city, and a license tax is hereby fixed and created, which license tax shall be equal to one cent ($0.01) on each and every gallon of gasoline sold, distributed, delivered, stored or withdrawn from storage within the corporate limits of the city, and an amount equal to one-half of one cent ($0.005) on each and every gallon of gasoline sold, distributed, delivered, stored or withdrawn from storage outside the corporate limits of the city but within the police jurisdiction thereof, such license tax to be due and payable as set forth in this division. Any distributor, seller or storer may obtain the exemption provided for in section 10-111 by filing the statement provided for in section 10-111. The license tax fixed in this section on the business of selling, distributing, delivering, storing or withdrawing from storage of gasoline outside of the corporate limits of the city but within the police jurisdiction thereof is for administrative purposes and not for revenue. 
(Code 1979, § 8-37) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; police, Ch. 16. 
Sec. 10-111. - Exemption from tax. 
    Any seller, distributor or storer selling, distributing, delivering, storing or withdrawing from storage gasoline purchased in whole from any other seller, distributor or storer who has paid the license tax imposed in this division with respect to such gasoline shall not be required to pay any license tax under this division based on the sale, distribution, delivery, storage or withdrawal from storage of such gasoline so purchased; provided, however, that in order to obtain such exemption such seller, distributor or storer must, on or before February 20, and on or before the twentieth day of each and every month thereafter, file with the city clerk a written statement, sworn to and subscribed by such seller, distributor or storer, showing each and every purchase or procurement of gasoline made by such seller, distributor or storer during the calendar month next preceding, together with the name of the person from whom purchased or procured, and the disposition thereof by such seller, distributor or storer claiming the exemption, such statement to be made in the form prescribed by the city clerk. 
(Code 1979, § 8-38) 
Sec. 10-112. - Filing of monthly statement. 
    Each and every distributor, seller and storer, except such as claim and obtain exemption under the provisions of the section 10-111, shall, on or before February 20, and on or before the twentieth day of each and every month thereafter, file with the city clerk, on forms prescribed by the city clerk, a sworn statement of the amount and quantity of all gasoline sold, distributed, delivered, stored or withdrawn from storage by such distributor, seller or storer within the corporate limits of the city, and within its police jurisdiction, during the calendar month next preceding, and which also shall contain a detailed, itemized statement of the amount and quantity of all gasoline sold, distributed or delivered to any other distributor, seller or storer. Any distributor, seller or storer failing, refusing or omitting to file such statement within the time prescribed in this section shall be guilty of an offense against the city, which shall be a continuing offense, and each day that such default continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1979, § 8-39) 
Sec. 10-113. - Payment of tax; penalties for delinquency. 
    The license tax fixed and prescribed in this division shall be paid by each person against whom the tax is levied under this division, or who is liable or subject to such license under the provisions of this division, on or before the twentieth day of each calendar month, at the time of filing the statement required by section 10-112. The license tax shall be based on the sale, delivery, distribution, storage and withdrawal from storage of gasoline made during the calendar month next preceding. Any person failing, refusing or omitting to pay such license tax within the time prescribed in this division shall be guilty of an offense against the city, which shall be a continuing offense, and each day that such default continues shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the other penalties provided for in this article, there shall be added to such license tax a penalty of twenty (20) percent of the amount thereof for such delinquency. 
(Code 1979, § 8-40) 
Sec. 10-114. - Right of collection of tax. 
    The acceptance of any money paid for the license tax provided for in this division shall in no way preclude the collection of the amount actually due; provided, however, that any payment made shall be credited against the amount actually due. 
(Code 1979, § 8-44) 
Sec. 10-115. - Acting as agent for delinquent dealer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, after the license tax provided for in this division becomes delinquent, to act as agent, servant or employee for any person liable for such delinquent license tax, in engaging in or assisting in carrying on the business for which his principal or employer is required to pay such license, and each day such agent, servant or employee shall engage in or assist in carrying on such business shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1979, § 8-46) 
Sec. 10-116. - Audits. 
    Upon demand by the city clerk or his authorized deputy, auditor or representative, it shall be the duty of any person subject to the license tax imposed by this division to furnish to such city clerk or his authorized deputy, auditor or representative, without delay, all such information as may be required for determination of the correct amount of license tax to which such person is subject, and to that end it shall be the duty of such person to submit to the city clerk or his authorized deputy, auditor or representative, for inspection and examination, during reasonable business hours, at such person's place of business, all books of account, invoices, papers, reports and memoranda containing entries showing the amount of purchases, sales, receipts, inventories, and any other information from which the correct amount of license tax to which such person is subject may be determined, including exhibition of bank deposit books and bank statements. Any person failing or refusing to submit such records for such examination and inspection upon such demand shall be guilty of an offense against the city. 
(Code 1979, § 8-47) 
Sec. 10-117. - Assessment of tax when information not available. 
(a)	If any person subject to the provisions of this division does not have in his possession or under his control true and intelligible books of account, invoices, papers, reports or memoranda correctly showing the data and information necessary for determination of the correct amount of the license tax due, or if, having in his possession or under his control such books, invoices, papers, reports or memoranda, he fails or refuses to submit and exhibit the books, invoices, papers, reports or memoranda for inspection and examination as required by this division, then, in either event, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to ascertain, from such information and data as he may reasonably obtain, the correct amount of license tax due from such person, to assess the tax against such person, to give such person notice of the assessment, and to demand of such person immediate payment of the amount of such license tax ascertained to be due, less any amount such person may have theretofore paid upon the license tax. 
(b)	If the amount of the license tax so ascertained and demanded is not paid within ten (10) days after receipt of notice of the assessment and demand for payment thereof, the city clerk shall notify such person by registered mail that, at a time and place specified in the notice, which time shall be not less than five (5) days after the mailing of such notice, and which place shall be the usual meeting place of the city council, he will apply to the council for revocation of such person's license. At the time and place so specified, such person may appear before the council in person or by counsel, or both, and show cause, if there be any, why the license should not be revoked. 
(c)	At any such hearing, and for all other purposes, the decision and determination of the city clerk as to the amount of the license tax due shall be deemed correct and final, unless and until it is satisfactorily shown that such decision and determination is incorrect. 
(Code 1979, § 8-48) 
Secs. 10-118-10-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TOBACCO PRODUCTS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- State tobacco taxes, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-25-1 et seq.; basis of municipal tax levy on cigarettes, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-25-29; state license taxes on tobacco dealers, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 40-12-72, 40-12-73. (Back)
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 10-141-10-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CIGARETTES 

Sec. 10-151. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter genders. Whenever the context requires, the plural shall include the singular, and singular the plural. Any words or phrases used in this division and not defined in this division which are defined in the General Revenue Act of General Acts of Alabama of 1935, pages 530 to 584 inclusive, shall have the meaning ascribed to them by that act. 
    Corporate limits means the corporate limits of the city. 
    Dealer means any wholesale or retail dealer subject to this division. 
    Package means the individual box or other container from which or in which retail sales of the tobacco products mentioned in this division are normally made or intended to be made. 
    Person means a natural person, firm, corporation, club, association, joint stock company, receiver, estate, trustee or any other person acting in a fiduciary capacity. 
    Police jurisdiction means the territory outside, but within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits of the city. 
    Retail price means the usual retail selling price of the article before adding the amount of the tax assessed in this division or the tobacco tax assessed by the state. 
    Sale means any transfer of title or possession, or both, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, for a consideration or any agreement therefor, including rewards, prizes or premiums or the giving of tobacco products as a result of operations on punchboards, shooting galleries or other activities. 
    Stamps means the stamps by the use of which the tax levied under this division is paid. 
    Storer means any person who ships or causes to be shipped or receives tobacco products into the city or its police jurisdiction and stores the products in any manner or withdraws or uses the products for any purpose other than for resale or reshipment outside the city and police jurisdiction. 
    Tobacco products includes cigarettes and any substitution therefor. 
    Wholesale dealer and jobber means a person who sells or delivers, within the city or its police jurisdiction, any tobacco products, and all persons operating under a retail dealer's license. 
(Code 1979, § 8-53) 
Sec. 10-152. - Division cumulative. 
    This division shall not repeal any of the provisions of Article II, but shall be held to be cumulative. 
(Code 1979, § 8-60(c)) 
Sec. 10-153. - Exceptions to division. 
(a)	This division shall not be applied so as to impose any unlawful tax or unlawful burden on interstate commerce or any business of the United States government or any branch or agency thereof. 
(b)	This division shall not apply to tobacco products stored by a wholesale dealer for the purpose of resale or reshipment outside the city and its police jurisdiction and which are actually so resold or shipped. 
(Code 1979, § 8-60(a), (b)) 
Sec. 10-154. - Levy of tax. 
(a)	Within corporate limits. In addition to all other taxes imposed by law, every person who sells, stores or delivers any tobacco products shall pay a license tax to the city, and a license tax is hereby levied, which license tax shall be in the amounts fixed from time to time by the council, for the sale, storage or delivery of tobacco products in the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)	Police jurisdiction. Every person selling, delivering or storing any tobacco products in the police jurisdiction of the city shall pay to the city one-half the license tax levied under subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1979, §§ 8-54, 8-55) 
Sec. 10-155. - Form of stamps; purchase of stamps. 
    The city clerk shall keep on hand for sale an adequate quantity of stamps to be affixed to each package of tobacco products in denominations as required under this division. Each such stamp shall have inscribed thereon the words "City of Clanton, Alabama-Tobacco Tax," but the words need not be arranged in this order and may be abbreviated. The stamps may be sold to the wholesale dealer only by the city clerk at a price equal to ninety (90) percent of the full amount thereof, the remaining ten (10) percent of such full amount representing compensation to the wholesale dealer for the labor of affixing them to the tobacco products. All other persons, except such wholesale dealer, must pay the full face amount of the stamps, but no person or dealer shall be entitled to purchase any such number of the stamps as would cause the purchase price to include the fraction of a cent. 
(Code 1979, § 8-56) 
Sec. 10-156. - Affixing and cancellation of stamps. 
(a)	Before any tobacco products shall be sold or delivered within the corporate limits of the city or police jurisdiction by any dealer, such dealer shall affix to each package of tobacco products the stamps obtained from the city clerk, in the amounts provided for in this division, in payment of the license taxes imposed by this division. Every dealer shall, within one (1) hour after the receipt of any such tobacco products within the city or its police jurisdiction, unless sooner offered for sale, cause stamps to the requisite amount of the tax to be affixed as provided in this section and cause the stamps to be canceled by writing or stamping with waterproof ink across the face of each stamp the registered number furnished such dealer by the state department of revenue. 
(b)	After such stamping has been begun it shall be continued with reasonable diligence by such dealer until all the unstamped tobacco products have been stamped and the stamps canceled as provided in this section. No stamp required to be affixed to any package of tobacco products shall be used again in payment of any part of the tax levied under this division after the stamps have been affixed as provided in this section. Such stamps shall be affixed in such a manner that their removal will require continued application of water or steam. In the case of cigarettes sold by retail in package, the stamps shall be affixed to each individual package in such a way that such stamps shall be torn in two (2) or mutilated when such package is opened. 
(Code 1979, § 8-57) 
Sec. 10-157. - Subsequent sales or delivery after stamps have been affixed. 
    Whenever the requisite amount of stamps has been affixed to tobacco products as required under this division, this division shall not require additional stamps to be affixed thereto in case of subsequent sales, deliveries or storages; except, where such products have been properly stamped for sale, delivery or storage within the police jurisdiction, there must be properly affixed to such products and properly canceled an equal amount of stamps to those already affixed in case such products are sold, delivered or stored within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1979, § 8-60(e)) 
Sec. 10-158. - Records; report of receipt of unstamped articles. 
(a)	Every wholesale dealer shall, at the time of selling or delivering any tobacco products into the city or its police jurisdiction, make a true duplicate invoice of the sale or delivery which shall show full and complete details of the sale or delivery of such tobacco products, and shall retain the invoice subject to the use and inspection of the city clerk or his duly authorized deputy for a period of three (3) years. 
(b)	Wholesale and retail dealers shall also keep a record of the purchase, sale, exchange or receipt of all tobacco products and hold all books, records, canceled checks and all other memoranda pertaining to such purchase, sale, exchange or receipt for the period mentioned in this section, subject to the inspection of the city clerk or his duly authorized deputy, who shall have the power and authority to enter upon the premises of any dealer and to examine such books, records and memoranda at all reasonable times. 
(c)	Any person who purchases or receives in any manner whatsoever any tobacco product which does not have affixed the stamps required by this division shall, within three (3) days after receipt of such articles of tobacco, report the receipt and purchase of the tobacco products to the city clerk, giving the date of purchase or receipt, the name and address of the person from whom purchased or received, and a list describing the articles of tobacco purchased or received. Such report must be made by registered mail or in person. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or obstruct the city clerk or his deputy in the exercise of the power and authority conferred by this division. 
(Code 1979, § 8-58) 
Sec. 10-159. - Unlawful acts. 
    Among others, the following acts and omissions shall be unlawful: 
(1)	It shall be unlawful for any person required by this division to affix stamps to tobacco products to fail to affix such stamps or to cancel such stamps in the manner or within the time required by this division. 
(2)	It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale or deliver within the city or its police jurisdiction any tobacco products to which stamps have not been affixed and canceled as provided by this division. 
(3)	It shall be unlawful for any dealer to have in his possession or under his control any tobacco products not properly stamped as required by this division for more than six (6) hours after receipt of such products on the premises of such person, provided that this subsection shall not apply to tobacco products in the possession of wholesale dealers or jobbers kept for the purpose of resale or reshipment outside the city and its police jurisdiction, which products are actually so resold or reshipped. The possession of each article or commodity not having the proper stamps affixed thereto as required by this division shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(4)	It shall be unlawful to manufacture, buy, sell, offer for sale or possess any reproduction or counterfeit of the stamps provided for in this division, or attempt to do so, or to possess tools, implements, instruments or materials of any kind necessary or appropriate to reproduce or counterfeit such stamps or to alter or cause to be altered any stamp provided for in this division. 
(5)	It shall be unlawful to remove from a package or otherwise prepare any stamp with intent to use or cause the stamp to be used, or to buy, sell, offer for sale or give away, any washed, removed, altered or restored stamp to any person or to have in possession any such washed or removed or restored or altered stamp, or, for the purpose of indicating the payment of any tax under this division, to reuse any stamp which has theretofore been used for the payment of any tax provided in this division, or, except as to the city clerk, to sell any stamp provided for in this division. 
(6)	It shall be unlawful to reuse or refill with any tobacco products any package from which such tobacco products have been removed and on which the tax has theretofore been paid. 
(Code 1979, § 8-59) 
Secs. 10-160-10-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRODUCTS OTHER THAN CIGARETTES 

Sec. 10-171. - Exceptions to division. 
(a)	This division shall not be applied so as to impose any unlawful tax or unlawful burden on interstate commerce or any business of the United States government or any branch or agency thereof. 
(b)	This division shall not apply to the tobacco products mentioned in this division stored by a wholesale dealer for purpose of resale or reshipment outside the city when such tobacco products are actually so resold or reshipped. 
(Ord. No. 11-89, § 5, 12-20-89) 
Sec. 10-172. - Levy of tax. 
    In addition to all other taxes of every kind imposed by law, every person within the city who sells or stores or receives for the purpose of distribution to any person within the city cigars, cheroots, stogies, smoking tobacco, chewing tobacco, smokeless tobacco, snuff or any substitute therefor shall pay to the city, for municipal purposes only, a license, excise or privilege tax, which shall be measured by and graduated in accordance with the volume of sales of each person in the city. There is hereby levied a license, excise or privilege tax on articles containing tobacco, other than cigarettes, as enumerated in this section, in the following amounts: 
(1)	Cigarettes. Upon cigarettes of all descriptions made of tobacco, or any substitute therefor, packaged in twenty (20) items or less per package, five cents ($0.05) for each package. 
(2)	Little cigars, small cigars, cigarillos. Upon cigars of all descriptions made of tobacco, or any substitute therefor, packaged in twenty (20) items or less per package, five cents ($0.05) for each package. 
(3)	All other cigars, cheroots, stogies, etc. Upon cigars of all descriptions, other than those described in subsection (1) of this section, made of tobacco, or any substitute therefor, five cents ($0.05) per cigar. 
(4)	Smoking tobacco, chewing tobacco, smokeless tobacco, snuff, etc. Upon all smoking tobacco, including granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed and other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such manner as to be suitable for smoking in a pipe or cigarette, upon all chewing tobacco or smokeless tobacco prepared in such manners to be suitable for chewing only, and not suitable for smoking; and upon snuff, five cents ($0.05) per container. 
(Ord. No. 11-89, § 1, 12-20-89; Ord. No. 4-03, § 1, 8-25-03) 
Sec. 10-173. - Payment of tax; monthly statement of sales. 
(a)	The tax levied in this division shall be paid to the city by every person who is liable therefor, and against whom such tax is levied and fixed under the provisions of this division, on or before the twentieth day of each calendar month, based upon applicable sales during the preceding month. 
(b)	Every person liable for the payment of the tax levied in this division shall accompany the payment thereof, as required in subsection (a) of this section, with a sworn, written statement accurately reflecting sales by quantity and by gross receipts for each category of product described in this division. The city clerk shall make available to each taxpayer forms suitable to reflect the information required under this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 11-89, § 2, 12-20-89) 
Sec. 10-174. - Records. 
    Every wholesale dealer shall, at the time of selling and delivering any tobacco products subject to the tax imposed by this division into the city, make a true duplicate invoice of the sale and delivery, which shall show full and complete details of the sale and delivery of such tobacco products, and shall retain the invoice subject to the use and inspection of the city clerk or his duly authorized deputy for a period of three (3) years. Wholesale and retail dealers shall also keep a record of the purchase, sale, exchange and receipt of all tobacco products and shall hold all books, records, canceled checks and other memoranda pertaining to such purchase, sale, exchange and receipt for the period mentioned in this section, subject to the inspection of the city clerk or his duly authorized deputy, who shall have the power and authority to enter upon the premises of any dealer and to examine such books, records and memoranda at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. No. 11-89, § 3, 12-20-89) 
Sec. 10-175. - Addition of tax to sales price. 
    The tax levied in this division shall be paid to the city, accompanied by a monthly sworn written statement, as provided in this division. However, every wholesaler, distributor, jobber or retail dealer shall add the amount of the tax levied in this division to the price of the tobacco or tobacco products sold, it being the purpose and intent of this division that the tax levied is, in fact, a levy on the ultimate consumer or user, with the wholesaler, distributor, jobber or retail dealer acting merely as an agent of the state for collection and payment of the tax to the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to add to the sale price, and collect from the purchaser, the amount of the tax to be added to the sale price and collected from the purchaser under this division. 
(Ord. No. 11-89, § 4, 12-20-89) 
Secs. 10-176-10-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TOBACCO SMOKE IN FOOD AND BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENTS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2-05, §§ I-VIII, adopted Feb. 28, 2005, was not specifically amendatory of the Code and has been included as art. V, div. 4, §§ 10-181-10-188 at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 10-181. - Definitions and guidelines. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business agent. An individual who has been designated by the owner or operator of any establishment to be the manager or otherwise in charge of said establishment. 
    Employee. Any individual who performs services for an employer in return for wages or profit. 
    Enclosed. A space, structure, facility or any portion thereof, bounded by walls (with or without windows) continuous from floor to ceiling or deck above and served by heating, ventilating and air conditioning (HVAC) system(s), and through which air can circulate from one (1) portion to another, including, but not limited to offices, rooms, hallways, customer service areas, foyers, common areas, waiting areas, restrooms, lounges, and eating areas. 
    Food and/or beverage establishment. Any establishment which is required to have a business license from the City of Clanton and which provides food and/or beverage under a permit from the health department and/or an "on premises" liquor license from the alcohol and beverage control (ABC) board. 
    Smoking. Inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other lighted tobacco product in any manner or form. 
(Ord. No. 2-05, § I, 2-28-05) 
Sec. 10-182. - Designating food and beverage establishments as smoke-free or smoking. 
(a)	It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the food and beverage establishment to designate his/her establishment as one (1) of the following: 
(1)	Smoke-free or
(2)	Smoking.
(b)	For establishments designated as SMOKE-FREE, no smoking by any persons (employees or patrons) at anytime will be allowed in any part of the enclosed areas of the establishment, except as noted in section 10-182, subsections (h) and (i) below. 
(c)	For establishments designated as SMOKE-FREE, signage shall be posted conspicuously on or adjacent to each and every door to the establishment that is generally accessed by patrons or employees, plainly visible from the exterior of the building to persons entering through the door. Signage shall be no smaller than eight and one-half (8.5) inches by eleven (11) inches, with white lettering on a red or black background, and include the following statements; 
"This establishment is a SMOKE-FREE facility" with letters no smaller than 5 / 8 inch tall (approximately 66 pts.); "Smoking is prohibited throughout this facility at all times" with letters no smaller than 1/4 inch tall (approximately 36 pts.); and "City of Clanton Ordinance Book ____________, Page ____________" with letters no smaller than 1/8 inch tall (approximately 20 pts.). 
(d)	For establishments designated as SMOKING, smoking by patrons shall be allowed throughout all enclosed areas generally occupied by patrons. 
(1)	If an owner, operator, business agent, or other person who controls a food and/or beverage establishment that is designated as SMOKING wishes to have a non-smoking area within the premises, it shall be at the discretion of said owner, operator, business agent or other person who controls said establishment whether to declare and enforce a non-smoking policy within the premises. 
(e)	For establishments designated as SMOKING, signage shall be posted conspicuously on or adjacent to each and every door to the establishment that is generally accessed by patrons or employees, plainly visible from the exterior of the building to persons entering through the door. Signage shall be no smaller than eight and one-half (8.5) inches by eleven (11) inches, with white lettering on a red or black background, and include the following statements: "This establishment is a SMOKING facility" with letters no smaller than five-eighths (5/8) inch tall (approximately sixty-six (66) pts.); "Smoking is allowed throughout this facility at all times" with letters no smaller than one-quarter (1/4) inch tall (approximately thirty-six (36) pts.); "There is no nonsmoking section" with letters no smaller than one-quarter (1/4) inch tall (approximately thirty-six (36) pts.); and "City of Clanton Ordinance Book ____________, Page ____________" with letters no smaller than one-eighth (1/8) inch tall (approximately twenty (20) pts.). 
(f)	Two (2) or more food and beverage establishments operating under separate permits and/or licenses shall not be directly connected by any interior means of access including but not limited to doorways, windows, service bars or service windows, unless each has the same designation (SMOKE-FREE or SMOKING). If SMOKING is chosen for any but not all of the establishments, each one for which SMOKING is chosen must have HVAC system(s) which serve only that area, and the HVAC system shall be balanced so as to keep a zero percentage pressure environment in all doorways and windows, and be physically separated by barriers which are constructed in a manner so as to shield non-smoking patrons in their entirely from smoking patrons. 
(g)	A facility which is SMOKE-FREE but which has a SMOKING establishment within it may add additional language to the required signage (see section 10-182(c)), after "Smoking is prohibited throughout this facility at all times" stating "except in designated areas" in matching letters and signage is required for exterior doors only. If all areas/establishments within a facility are SMOKE-FREE, then signage shall be required for exterior doors only. 
(h)	Food and beverage establishments may offer a separate smoking lounge if it is physically separated by barriers which are constructed in a manner so as to shield non-smoking patrons in their entirety from smoking patrons, is served by HVAC system(s) which serve only that area, and the HVAC system shall be balanced so as to keep a zero percentage pressure environment in all doorways and windows. 
(i)	Smoking may be permitted in hotel, motel, inn, bed and breakfast and lodging rooms that are rented to guests designated as "smoking rooms". A facility which offers such rooms for rent to guests may add additional language to the required signage (see section 10-182(c)), after "Smoking is prohibited throughout this facility at all times" stating "Lodging rooms are available for guests who smoke" in matching letters and signage. 
(j)	Food and beverage establishments will be listed in a listing by status (SMOKE-FREE or SMOKING) to be published annually by the city clerk's office no later than March 1; the first listing will be done by July 1, 200____________; the listing will be available to the public from the city clerk's office and will also be posted on the city's website. 
(Ord. No. 2-05, § II, 2-28-05) 
Sec. 10-183. - Violations. 
(a)	It shall be the responsibility of the owner, business agent, manager or other person having control of such food and beverage establishment to ensure compliance with all sections of this division pertaining to his/her place of business. A violator of this division may receive: 
(1)	In the case of a first violation, a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00);
(2)	In the case of a second violation, within twenty-four (24) months of the first violation, a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00); and, 
(3)	In the case of three (3) or more violations within twenty-four (24) months of the second or current violation, a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. 
(b)	No provision, clause or sentence of this section of this division shall be interpreted as prohibiting the City of Clanton from suspending or revoking any license or permit issued by and within the jurisdiction of the City of Clanton for repeated violations of this division. 
(c)	If the owner, business agent, manager or other person having control of such food and beverage establishment attempts to enforce this division and a patron violates it (smoke in a SMOKE-FREE establishment), then the owner, business agent, manager or other person having control shall not be deemed to be in violation of this division and the patron shall be subject to a fine as follows: 
(1)	In the case of a first violation, a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00);
(2)	In the case of a second violation, within twenty-four (24) months of the first violation, a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00); and, 
(3)	In the case of three (3) or more violations within twenty-four (24) months of the second or current violation, a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. 
(d)	Each calendar day an owner, business agent, manager or other person having control of a food and beverage establishment operates in violation of any provision of this division shall be deemed a separate violation; each calendar day a patron violates this division (i.e., smokes in a SMOKE-FREE establishment) shall be deemed a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 2-05, § III, 2-28-05) 
Sec. 10-184. - Enforcement. 
(a)	Authority to enforce this division shall be held by the City of Clanton, its subsidiary programs or designees. 
(b)	An owner, manager, operator, or employee of an establishment regulated by this division shall inform persons violating this division of the appropriate provisions thereof. 
(c)	The City of Clanton's Fire Department, or its designee, the Chilton County Health Department, or its designee, shall, while in an establishment that is undergoing otherwise mandated inspection, or at any other time deemed necessary by these entities, inspect for compliance with this division. 
(d)	Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this division may initiate enforcement with the Magistrate of the City of Clanton. 
(e)	Any fines or fees collected under this division shall be used for the enforcement of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2-05, § IV, 2-28-05) 
Sec. 10-185. - Non-retaliation. 
    No owner, business agent, manager or other person having control of a food and beverage establishment shall discharge, refuse to hire, refuse to serve or in any manner retaliate or take any adverse personnel action or other adverse action against any employee, applicant, customer or person because such employee, applicant, customer or person takes any action in furtherance of the enforcement of this division or exercises any right conferred by this division. 
(Ord. No. 2-05, § V, 2-28-05) 
Sec. 10-186. - Conflict with other laws, ordinances or regulations. 
(a)	Nothing in this division shall be deemed to amend or repeal any applicable fire, health or other law, ordinance or regulation so as to permit smoking in areas where it is prohibited by such fire, health or other law, ordinance or regulation. 
(b)	Nothing in this division shall be deemed to preempt the further limitation of smoking in the City of Clanton by any local regulatory body within the limits of its authority and jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2-05, § VI, 2-28-05) 
Sec. 10-187. - Severability. 
    If any provision, clause, sentence, paragraph or word of this division or the application thereof to any person, entity or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions of this division which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application and to this end the provisions of this division are declared severable. 
(Ord. No. 2-05, § VII, 2-28-05) 
Sec. 10-188. - Effective date. 
    Food and beverage establishments legally permitted an/or licensed shall designate their status by notifying the city clerk's office in writing by May 01, 2005, and annually, thereafter, at the time of renewing their regular, annual business license. Food and beverage establishments shall implement the provisions of this division by June 01, 2005. Should an establishment opt to change its status prior to the regular annual renewal date for its business license, it will be required to purchase another business license at the same cost as the most recent regular annual one, in addition to any and all regular annual purchases. 
(Ord. No. 2-05, § VIII, 2-28-05) 
Secs. 10-189-10-195. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PEDDLERS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses schedule, § 10-45. (Back)
State Law reference- State and county licenses for certain peddlers, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 40-12-139, 40-12-174; itinerant vendor's bond under sales tax law, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-23-24. (Back)
Sec. 10-196. - Peddling of goods not produced by seller-Prohibited in certain areas. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, sell or offer for sale any goods, wares, merchandise, vegetables, fruits or produce not manufactured, raised or produced by the seller, on public streets, avenues, alleys or sidewalks and from any automobile, truck or motor vehicle parked upon the public streets, avenues alleys or sidewalks, in the area designated as follows: 
First Avenue, between the Louisville and Nashville Railroad and First Street. 
First Street, between Third Avenue North and Second Avenue South. 
Second Avenue North, between Eighth Street and First Street. 
Second Avenue South, between Sixth Street and First Street. 
Second Street, between Third Avenue North and Second Avenue South. 
Third Avenue North, between the Louisville and Nashville Railroad and First Street. 
Third Street, between Third Avenue North and Second Avenue South. 
Fourth Avenue North, between the Louisville and Nashville Railroad and Fourth Street. 
Fourth Street, between Fourth Avenue North and Second Avenue South. 
Fifth Avenue North, between Fifth Street and Seventh Street. 
Fifth Street, between Fifth Avenue North and Second Avenue South. 
Sixth Street, between Fifth Avenue North and Second Avenue South. 
Seventh Street, between Fifth Avenue North and Jackson Avenue. 
(Code 1979, § 9-21; Ord. No. 4-84, § 1, 4-9-84) 
Sec. 10-197. - Same-Areas where permitted. 
    It shall be lawful for any person to sell, peddle or offer for sale any goods, wares, merchandise, vegetables, fruits or produce not manufactured, raised or produced by the seller upon streets and alleys within the corporate limits of the city and outside and beyond the area prohibited in section 10-196. 
(Code 1979, § 9-22) 
Sec. 10-198. - Peddling of goods produced by seller. 
    It shall be lawful for any person who has raised, manufactured or produced any goods, wares, merchandise, vegetables, fruits or produce to sell, peddle or offer for sale such goods upon the streets, avenues, sidewalks or alleys of the city, after first obtaining the necessary producer's or grower's permit, and without the necessity of the purchase of a peddler's license. 
(Code 1979, § 9-23) 
Secs. 10-199-10-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CARNIVALS AND STREET FAIRS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- State license for street fairs and carnivals, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-12-163. (Back)
Sec. 10-221. - Definition. 
    For purposes of this article, the term "carnival" or "street fair" means an amusement enterprise consisting of sideshows, animal acts, vaudeville, games of chance and exhibitions, road shows, circuses, carnivals, exhibitions or amusements of every kind, character, Ferris wheels, merry-go-rounds, shooting galleries, games of skill, amusement rides, and rides of every character open to the public where an admission charge is charged, where a charge is made to enter onto the premises thereof, where a charge is made to enter into the various shows or exhibits thereof, or where a charge is made to participate in the games. 
(Code 1979, § 9-37) 
Sec. 10-222. - Application for license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to hold, present, sponsor or conduct, within the city limits or the police jurisdiction, any carnival or street fair, without the person sponsoring, presenting or conducting the carnival or street fair making an application for a license to the city clerk. The application must state the owner of the carnival or street fair, the sponsoring organization, the proposed location thereof, the length of time for the running or conducting thereof, and the number and type of restrooms and other sanitary facilities available on the premises for the use of the public thereon and the employees of the carnival or street fair. 
(Code 1979, § 9-38) 
Sec. 10-223. - License tax. 
    There is hereby levied a privilege license for each carnival or street fair as follows: 
(1)	In the city limits of the city where the carnival or street fair is sponsored by an organized local civic, fraternal or religious organization, one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day. 
(2)	In the police jurisdiction of the city where the carnival or street fair is sponsored by an organized local civic, fraternal or religious organization, fifty dollars ($50.00) per day. 
(3)	In the city limits of the city where the carnival or street fair is not sponsored by an organized local civic, fraternal or religious organization, five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day. 
(4)	In the police jurisdiction of the city where the carnival or street fair is not sponsored by an organized local civic, fraternal or religious organization, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day. 
(Code 1979, § 9-40) 
Sec. 10-224. - Cleanup deposit. 
    Prior to the issuance of a privilege license under this article, the carnival, street fair, or sponsoring organization must post with the city clerk a deposit in cash sufficient for the clearing and removal of all trash, paper or debris left upon the location of the carnival site, and conditioned upon the removal of all trash, paper or debris within three (3) days after the end of the carnival or street fair. If the trash, paper or debris is not so removed, then the cash amount may be forfeited to the city at the discretion of the mayor. 
(Code 1979, § 9-41) 
Sec. 10-225. - Sanitary facilities. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to promote, hold or conduct any carnival or street fair in the city limits or the police jurisdiction of the city unless proper and adequate restrooms or other sanitary facilities are provided on the premises for the use of the public and the use of the employees thereof. 
(Code 1979, § 9-39) 
Sec. 10-226. - Closing of unsuitable shows. 
    If the city council deems or determines that any show, sideshow, act or device is unsuitable for the public welfare, obscene or lewd, or not in the best public interest of the general public, then any or all of the carnival or street fair, upon the order of the city council, will be closed immediately. 
(Code 1979, § 9-42) 
Secs. 10-227-10-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - BILLIARD ROOMS AND POOLROOMS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Billiard rooms, Code of Ala. 1975, § 34-6-1 et seq.; general municipal powers as to billiard and pool tables, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-102. (Back)
Sec. 10-251. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Billiard room, poolroom or pool hall means any public place where the game of billiards or pool is permitted to be played, and for which a charge is made. 
    Billiards means any of the several games played on a table surrounded by an elastic ledge of cushions, with balls which are impelled by a cue, and shall include all forms of the game known as carom billiards, pocket billiards, pool, and English billiards. 
(Code 1979, § 9-43) 
Sec. 10-252. - Authority of council. 
    The city council may fix a license fee for the operation of billiard rooms and may make such additional regulations governing the operation of billiard rooms as it may deem proper. 
(Code 1979, § 9-47) 
Sec. 10-253. - Persons ineligible for license. 
    No license shall be issued to any person to operate any billiard room or poolroom to which the public has access for amusement and recreation who is not twenty-one (21) years of age and a citizen of the United States, or who has been convicted of a felony. 
(Code 1979, § 9-44) 
Sec. 10-254. - Application for license; bond. 
    Application for a license to operate a billiard room shall be made to the city clerk and shall be accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant, sworn to before an officer authorized by law to administer oaths, that the applicant is a citizen of the United States, that he is of good moral character, that he has not been convicted of a felony, that he will not permit any person under the influence of intoxicating liquors to frequent or play in his place of business, that the applicant will have sole personal charge and management of the business, and that he will not permit public gambling in such place of business or permit the billiard tables to be used in any manner other than as provided by law. There shall also be filed with such application a bond in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), payable to the state, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of all provisions of this article, signed by the applicant as principal and either a surety company or two (2) individuals as sureties. The bond shall be approved by the probate judge and filed in his office. 
(Code 1979, § 9-45) 
Sec. 10-255. - County license required. 
    Before any person shall be authorized to conduct a billiard room in the city, in addition to complying with the provisions of this article requiring the person to make application to the city clerk for a license, the applicant shall certify that application has been made to and a license granted to such applicant by the probate judge of the county. 
(Code 1979, § 9-46) 
Sec. 10-256. - Location of business. 
    No license shall be issued by the city council or by the city clerk to any person for the operation of a poolhall or billiard hall except where the poolhall or billiard hall is located adjacent to and fronting on a street or avenue in the city and on the street level of the city. 
(Code 1979, § 9-56) 
Sec. 10-257. - Penalty for operation without license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit to be kept or used any billiard table within the city without having applied for a license as provided by this article. 
(Code 1979, § 9-54) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 34-6-30. 
Sec. 10-258. - Closing hours. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a billiard room between the hours of 11:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., or to harbor or permit any person to be or remain in such billiard room between such hours, except regular employees performing necessary labor within the premises. 
(Code 1979, § 9-48) 
Sec. 10-259. - Permitting minors on premises; misrepresentation of age. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to play billiards, or to be permitted to remain in a billiard room for any purpose, who has not reached the age of nineteen (19) years, unless accompanied by a parent or guardian. If the keeper of a billiard room is of the opinion that any person desiring admission thereto is under the age of nineteen (19) years, he shall require such person to certify his age in writing, and it is hereby made a misdemeanor for any minor to make false certification as to his age. 
(Code 1979, § 9-49) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 34-6-9. 
Sec. 10-260. - Posting of age requirement. 
    Every licensed billiard room proprietor shall post in his room where the tables are operated a placard having section 10-259 conspicuously written upon or printed thereon, in letters of not less than one-fourth inch in height, for the information of his patrons. 
(Code 1979, § 9-55) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 34-6-11. 
Sec. 10-261. - Gambling, intoxicating liquors prohibited. 
    No dice, cards, dominoes or other games of chance shall be permitted, nor any form of gambling allowed, in any billiard room or in any room in which billiard tables are located, or in any cigar store or other business located in the same room; and no game prohibited by law shall be played in such premises. It is expressly provided that such games as are known as Kelly pool, keno, star pool, scrub and similar gambling devices are expressly prohibited, and that no racing or other betting pool shall be exhibited, permitted or sold in such place of business, and that no intoxicating liquors shall be sold, served or allowed to be used in or on the premises. 
(Code 1979, § 9-50) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 13. 
Sec. 10-262. - Sanitation. 
    All billiard rooms shall be kept at all times in a clean, healthful and sanitary condition and shall comply with all ordinances regulating billiard rooms, and shall be subject to all sanitary rules and regulations of the health department. 
(Code 1979, § 9-51) 
Sec. 10-263. - Obstructions to view of interior prohibited. 
    No billiard room proprietor operating under the provisions of this article shall allow or permit any screens, curtains, blinds, partitions or other obstructions to be placed between the entrance or room where billiards are played and back or rear wall of such billiard room. A clear view of the entire interior from the entrance to the rear of such room must be maintained at all times. No partitions forming rooms, stalls or other enclosures where the public may congregate shall be permitted. This section, however, shall not be construed to prohibit the maintenance of washrooms and toilet rooms for proper purposes or the maintenance of closets for storage purposes exclusively. 
(Code 1979, § 9-52) 
Sec. 10-264. - Connection with certain premises prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any billiard room proprietor to maintain, or permit to be maintained, any open or secret connection, through door, window or trapdoor, panel, stairway or other device with any place where gambling is conducted or where persons congregate for immoral purposes. 
(Code 1979, § 9-53) 
State law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 34-6-7. 
Sec. 10-265. - Membership list required for clubs. 
(a)	Each club, private club or similar organization where the games of billiards, carom billiards, pocket billiards, pool or English billiards are permitted to be played, or the president, secretary, manager or other appropriate officer of each club or private club where the games of billiards, carom billiards, pocket billiards, pool or English billiards are permitted to be played, or every club that provides tables or other devices for or permits such games to be played or furnishes to its members or for the use of the members of the club or private club such tables or devices, shall furnish to the city clerk, on or before the fifteenth day of each month or the first business day thereafter, a complete and accurate list of the names of all of the members of the club. 
(b)	Each club, private club or organization that does not file or cause to be filed a complete and accurate list of the names of all of the members of the club by the fifteenth day of each month or the first business day thereafter shall be closed by the chief of police until the club or private club complies with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1979, §§ 9-58, 9-59) 
Sec. 10-266. - Violations by club officers. 
    The president, secretary, manager or other appropriate officer of each club organized, chartered or doing business in the city limits or the police jurisdiction, who violates the provisions of this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1979, § 9-60) 
Secs. 10-267-10-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - TAXICABS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 11. (Back)
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-291. - Definition. 
    As used in this article, the word "taxicab" or "taxi" means any motor vehicle engaged in a business of carrying passengers for a reward and having a seating capacity of not more than seven (7) persons including the driver. 
(Code 1979, § 14-34) 
Sec. 10-292. - Operation by certain persons prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who has been convicted of any felony or any crime involving moral turpitude or of public drunkenness or driving while intoxicated or of violation of any prohibition law within the preceding five (5) years to drive or operate a taxicab in the city or its police jurisdiction. 
(Code 1979, § 14-41) 
Secs. 10-293-10-305. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 10-306. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to transport persons for hire, by any taxicab or taxi, within the corporate limits of the city or its police jurisdiction, without first obtaining a franchise or permit to engage in such business as provided in this division. 
(Code 1979, § 14-35) 
Sec. 10-307. - Application. 
    Any person desiring to operate a taxicab business or to drive a taxicab in the city or its police jurisdiction shall first make a written application therefor upon a form to be furnished by the city clerk. The application shall be filed with the clerk and may be received by the clerk only if properly filled in. 
(Code 1979, § 14-36) 
Sec. 10-308. - Investigation of applicant. 
    The application referred to in this division shall be referred by the city clerk to the chief of police for investigation. The chief of police, with the assistance of other police officers of the city, shall make a comprehensive investigation of the applicant as to his financial responsibility, equipment to be used in the operation of taxicabs, and moral standing, whether or not the applicant has been previously convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude, violation of the prohibition laws or traffic violations, and such other matters as may involve the ability of the applicant to properly operate taxicabs within the city. 
(Code 1979, § 14-37) 
Sec. 10-309. - Granting. 
    After making the investigation required under this division, if the police officers of the city are satisfied that the applicant is a fit and proper person to safely operate and cause the operation of taxicabs in the city and that in all other respects the applicant has complied with the provisions of the traffic ordinances of the city, the police officers shall so report, in writing, to the city clerk, and the application shall be referred to the city council for the granting or refusal of the permit. No application shall be referred to the city council by the city clerk unless a majority of the police officers of the city then employed recommend the granting of such permit or franchise. If the application is not recommended to the city council by the police officers within ten (10) days from the date the application is referred by the clerk to the chief of police, the applicant may, in writing, by stating the facts, apply directly to the city council for such permit. No application shall be considered by the council, individually or collectively, until such application is filed with the city clerk as provided in this division and referred by the city clerk to the chief of police for investigation as provided in this division. 
(Code 1979, § 14-38) 
Sec. 10-310. - Making false statements in application. 
    No person shall be granted a permit to drive or to have taxicabs driven for him on the streets of the city who makes any false statement in his application for a permit. 
(Code 1979, § 14-39) 
Sec. 10-311. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)	Any permit which may be granted to any person for the privilege of operating taxicabs or having taxicabs operated for him under this division is subject to suspension or revocation, or both. It shall be the duty of the person to whom such franchise or permit is granted: 
(1)	To employ careful drivers of reasonably good moral character;
(2)	Not to employ drivers who are known to be or suspected to be engaged in the violation of any laws involving moral turpitude or laws against the use of intoxicating liquors, or who are habitual violators of traffic laws; and 
(3)	Not to employ as a driver of any taxicab or to permit any taxicab to be operated by any person who has, during the preceding five (5) years, been convicted of any felony, any crime involving moral turpitude or the violation of any law regulating the use of intoxicating liquors. 
(b)	The permit or franchise granted under authority of this division may be revoked or suspended for a breach of any of the duties imposed on the holder of such permit in this section. It shall be the duty of the police officers of the city, upon receiving information of any breach of any law or of any duty on the part of anyone to whom any permit or franchise is granted, or on the part of any driver or operator of any taxicab under authority of this division, to report such violation, in writing, to the city council. The council shall appoint three (3) of the members of the council as a committee to investigate such charge, and may revoke or suspend such franchise or permit or may, at its discretion, revoke the license of the driver for any such violation if, in its opinion, it will be in the public interest that such permit or franchise be revoked or the license of such driver be revoked or suspended. It shall be the duty of the city council to suspend or revoke any permit or franchise granted under authority of this division whenever the city council is satisfied that it will be to the interest of the public welfare, whether the holder of such permit or franchise or any driver or operator of any taxicab be convicted of the violation of any law referred to in this section or not, the operation of taxicabs upon the streets of the city being a mere privilege and not a right. 
(Code 1979, § 14-40) 
Secs. 10-312-10-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference- Taxation, Ch. 19. (Back)
Sec. 10-331. - Article cumulative. 
    This article shall not be construed to repeal any of the provisions of Article II, but shall be held to be cumulative, and the amounts of the taxes levied in this article shall be in addition to the amounts of all other license taxes imposed by the city by Article II. 
(Ord. No. 7-89, § 4, 8-28-89) 
Sec. 10-332. - Levy. 
(a)	For the privilege of engaging or continuing within the city in the business activities referred to in this section, there is hereby levied, in addition to all other taxes of every kind imposed by law, and shall be collected as provided in this article, a privilege or license tax against the person on account of the business activities, in the amounts to be determined by the application of rates against gross receipts as provided in this section. 
(b)	There is hereby levied and imposed, in addition to all other taxes of every kind imposed by law, a privilege or license tax upon every person engaging in the business of renting or furnishing any rooms, lodgings or accommodations to transients in any hotel, motel, inn, tourist camp, tourist cabin or any other place in which rooms, lodgings or accommodations are regularly furnished to transients for a consideration, in an amount to be determined by the application of the rate of four (4) percent of the charge for such rooms, lodgings or accommodations, including the charge for use or rental of personal property and services furnished in such room; provided, however, that any rental or service taxed under the provisions of Article II, levying the city privilege or license tax, is exempted from the tax levied under this article. The tax shall not apply to rooms, lodgings or accommodations supplied for a period of thirty (30) continuous days or more in any place. 
(Ord. No. 7-89, § 1, 8-28-89) 
Sec. 10-333. - Applicability of state statutes. 
    This article and the taxes levied in this article shall be subject to all definitions, exceptions, exemptions, proceedings, requirements, rules, regulations, provisions, penalties, fines, punishments and deductions that are applicable to the taxes levied by the state lodgings tax statutes, except where inapplicable or where otherwise provided in this article, including all provisions of the state lodgings tax statutes for enforcement and collection of taxes. 
(Ord. No. 7-89, § 2, 8-28-89) 
State law reference- Transient occupancy tax, Code of Ala. 1975, § 40-26-1 et seq. 
Sec. 10-334. - Addition of tax to rental. 
    Any person on whom the taxes levied by this article are imposed may add the tax levied in this article to the receipts from rental of rooms, lodgings or accommodations and may collect the tax from the occupants of such rooms, but this section is not mandatory. 
(Ord. No. 7-89, § 3, 8-28-89) 
Secs. 10-335-10-355. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - PURCHASE OF PRECIOUS METALS OR PRECIOUS STONES 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference- Public auctions, Code of Ala. 1975, § 8-14-1 et seq.; lien of jewelers, watchmakers and silversmiths, Code of Ala. 1975, § 35-11-150 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 10-356. - Definition. 
    As used in this article, the term "precious metals or precious stones" means all gold, silver, pearls, diamonds, rubies and other precious stones and any ornament or item made from or containing gold or silver or on which is set or displayed pearls, diamonds, rubies or other precious stones, including coins. 
(Ord. No. 1-81, § I, 1-12-81) 
Sec. 10-357. - Compliance with article. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city limits or the police jurisdiction to engage in the business of purchasing precious metals or precious stones without complying with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1-81, § VI, 1-12-81) 
Sec. 10-358. - Police chief to be notified of intent to engage in business. 
    Any person within the corporate limits or the police jurisdiction of the city who engages in the business of purchasing precious metals or precious stones or who purchases precious metals or precious stones or who, pursuant to any advertisement wherein the proposed purchaser holds himself out as such purchaser, offers to buy precious metals or precious stones shall, before engaging in such business or enterprise, notify the chief of police of the city, by letter, that such business or enterprise will be conducted. The letter shall contain the name of the person who is conducting the business and the address at which such business will be conducted, the days of the week of the conducting of the business, and the time for the opening and the closing thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1-81, § II, 1-12-81) 
Cross reference- Police, Ch. 16. 
Sec. 10-359. - Record of purchases. 
    Every person engaging in the business or enterprise of purchasing precious metals or precious stones shall provide and keep a book and enter therein, as each purchase or acquisition is made, the following information: 
(1)	The name, address, date of birth, and the driver's license number of the seller. If the seller does not have a driver's license, then other adequate and positive identification, which shall be required before a purchase is made, shall be shown. 
(2)	The time and date of the purchase.
(3)	An accurate and detailed description of the item purchased, which shall include any marking or inscription, the make and pattern, if available, and the maker or style, if appropriate. Each description shall be detailed and accurate and shall include a reference to the size, weight and height. Where appropriate, an indication shall be made whether the item was made for use by a male or female. If precious stones are purchased, the kind, size and setting of the stone shall be included, together with such other information which may be necessary or useful in making a positive identification of the item purchased. 
Such book shall be kept for six (6) months, subsequent to any purchase and shall be open to the inspection, during business hours, of any authorized law enforcement officer who may make a request to examine the book. 
(Ord. No. 1-81, § III, 1-12-81) 
Sec. 10-360. - Separation of purchases; disposal of purchases. 
    Every item purchased from one (1) seller shall be separately packaged, or kept separately, and not intermingled or confused with items purchased from another seller, for a period of five (5) working days following the mailing of the report of purchase as required under this article; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to coins, which may be intermingled or disposed of immediately after the notification of the chief of police of the purchase as required under this article. No person engaging in the business or enterprise of purchasing precious metals or precious stones shall sell or otherwise dispose of, permit to be sold or otherwise disposed of, remove or permit to be removed from his place of business, intermingle with other jewelry or stones, or alter, change, or deface or permit to be altered, changed or defaced any such precious metals or precious stones purchased, until after the expiration of five (5) working days from the notification to the chief of police of the purchase, as required under this division; provided, however, such items may be removed from the place of business for storage or safekeeping to another place within the jurisdiction of the city approved by the chief of police prior to such removal. 
(Ord. No. 1-81, § IV, 1-12-81) 
Sec. 10-361. - Daily report. 
    Each person engaging in the business or enterprise of purchasing precious metals or precious stones shall mail or otherwise deliver to the chief of police of the city a daily report, which report shall furnish to the city the information required under section 10-359 regarding each item purchased during the preceding workday. 
(Ord. No. 1-81, § V, 1-12-81) 
Secs. 10-362-10-385. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - SOLICITATIONS 

Sec. 10-386. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Charitable or religious purpose means the use of the money or property for the benefit of: 
(1)	Charity or philanthropy, or underprivileged, needy, refugee, diseased, disabled or handicapped persons or persons in need of rehabilitation; 
(2)	A church, religious society or other religious sect, group or order;
(3)	Patriotism, that is, for the teaching of patriotism or the relief or assistance of veterans or veteran's organizations; or 
(4)	Existing educational institutions, or for the establishment or endowment of educational institutions or in aid of educational institutions or in aid of the education of any person or group of persons. 
    Conduct a solicitation means to manage, organize, direct, administer or be responsible for a solicitation on behalf of any person. 
    Cost of the solicitation means the amount of funds collected in excess of the amount spent for the direct benefit of the stated purpose of the solicitation, including but not limited to informational materials and activities, recruitment, training and compensation of solicitors, and management and administration of the solicitation and disbursement of the funds. 
    Funds spent for the direct benefit of the stated purpose of the solicitation means money expended directly for the specific purpose stated in the registration. 
    Person includes an individual, organization, society, church, corporation or any agent, member or representative thereof. 
    Solicit or solicitation means to: 
(1)	Request property, financial aid, money or anything of value;
(2)	Sell or offer to sell a product, article, tag, service, publication, document, advertising space, membership, subscription or tickets; or 
(3)	Hold, promote or participate in an entertainment, sports event, benefit dance, fair, bazaar or other type of organized social entertainment. 
(Ord. No. 3-81, § II, 3-9-81) 
Sec. 10-387. - Purpose of article. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the City of Clanton, Alabama and the public at large by regulating door to door solicitation in the city limits of the City of Clanton. The city has promulgated reasonable time, place and manner restrictions on door to door solicitations occurring in residential areas in order to reduce crimes such as fraud, identity theft, larceny, burglary, harassment, and home invasion; to protect its citizens from annoying, intrusive or dangerous solicitations and to assist law enforcement personnel in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 3-81, § I, 3-9-81; Ord. No. 3-13, § I, 6-24-2013) 
Sec. 10-388. - Registration procedure; identification badge. 
(a)	Registration under this article shall be complete when the person seeking to solicit or conduct a solicitation pays the registration fee and files with the city clerk the following information under oath on forms furnished or approved by the city: 
(1)	The name, local and permanent address and telephone number and headquarters of the person registering. 
(2)	If the registrant is not an individual, the names and addresses of the registrant's principal officers and managers and a copy of the resolution, if any, authorizing such solicitation, certified to as a true and correct copy of the original by the officer having charge of registrant's records. 
(3)	The purpose for which such solicitation is to be made, the total amount of funds proposed to be raised thereby, and the use or disposition to be made of any receipts therefrom. 
(4)	The names and addresses and official position of the persons by whom the receipts of such solicitations shall be disbursed for the stated purpose. 
(5)	The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be in direct charge of conducting the solicitation and the names and addresses of all promoters connected or to be connected with the proposed solicitation. 
(6)	An outline of the method to be used in conducting the solicitations.
(7)	The time when such solicitations shall be made, giving the preferred dates for the beginning and ending of such solicitation; and, if such period shall exceed thirty (30) days, the specified reasons for the need of such excess time. 
(8)	The estimated cost of the solicitation.
(9)	The amount of any wages, fees, commissions, expenses or emoluments to be expended or paid to any person in connection with such solicitations, and the names, addresses and social security numbers of all individual solicitors to be used in the solicitation. 
(10)	A financial statement for the last preceding fiscal year of any funds collected for charitable purposes by the registrant within the city, giving the amount of money so raised, together with the cost of raising it, and the final distribution thereof. 
(11)	A full statement of the character and extent of the charitable work being done by the registrant within the city. 
(12)	A statement that the actual cost of the solicitation will not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total amount to be raised. 
(b)	Upon receipt of the information required by subsection (a) of this section, the city clerk shall designate or approve an identification badge containing the name of the organization conducting the solicitation, the name or photograph of the authorized solicitor, the purpose of the solicitation and an authorization number. The identification badge shall be nontransferable and valid only during the period of the solicitation and shall in no way constitute an approval by the city of the purpose of the solicitation. Each solicitor shall display this identification badge in a prominent position on the outer clothing, clearly visible to the person from whom solicitations are sought. The identification badge shall be provided at the expense of the solicitor. 
(Ord. No. 3-81, § IV(1), (2), 3-9-81) 
Sec. 10-389. - Investigation; revocation or suspension of registration. 
(a)	Following registration to solicit under this article, the city clerk shall forthwith submit the registration information to the chief of police or his designated agent, for investigation into the truth and accuracy of the registrant and a preliminary determination of whether the registrant qualifies as an approved solicitor. 
(b)	If the police chief determines that the registrant is in accordance with the standards set forth in this article, no further action shall be taken. If the police chief makes a preliminary determination that the registrant does not so qualify or has materially violated a provision of this article or has made a material misstatement of fact in his registration information, then he shall so notify the registrant in writing, giving his reasons therefor, and advising the registrant of the next regular city council meeting, not sooner than four (4) days after mailing of the notice, at which time the question of revocation of the registration shall be on the council agenda and all interested parties heard, for the city council to determine whether the registrant qualifies as a solicitor under this article or whether such registration should be revoked, suspended or modified. Misstatements of material fact which could mislead the public are grounds for revocation. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 3-81, § VI, 3-9-81) 
Sec. 10-390. - Prohibited acts; exceptions. 
(a)	No person shall solicit or conduct a solicitation within the boundaries of the city on the plea or representation, express or implied, that the proceeds from the solicitation are for a charitable or religious purpose, unless the person is properly registered with the city and is prominently displaying identification as provided by this article. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful and an offense for anyone to solicit by telephone canvass or door to door solicitation, go from house to house or door to door ring the doorbell, rap or knock upon the door, or create any sound in a manner calculated to attract attention of the occupant thereof for the purpose of engaging in solicitation at a residence, a residential neighborhood, an apartment complex, or public housing facility except between the hours of 10:00 a.m. CST and 4:30 p.m. CST, in the absence of a specific invitation or appointment from the occupant of the residence and without first obtaining a business license. This section shall not apply to non-profit organizations such as but not limited to: Girl Scouts, Boy Scouts, school fund raisers, fire departments, etc. 
(1)	It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person engaged in solicitation within a residential area to remain on private property, in a private residence, or upon the premises of a private residence after the owner or occupant has requested the person to leave. 
(2)	It shall be unlawful and on offense for a person engaged in solicitation within a residential area at a private residence that has a posted sign indicating that the resident or occupant does not want such activities upon their property. Examples of such signs include but are not limited to, "No Solicitation," "Keep Out," or "No Trespassing." 
(c)	The provisions of this section do not apply to:
(1)	A person that solicits solely from its own membership or from foundations;
(2)	A person who does not collect more than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) within a twelve-month period; and 
(3)	A person who solicits solely through the use of the public broadcasting media.
(Ord. No. 3-81, § III(1-3), 3-9-81; Ord. No. 3-13, § II, 6-24-2013) 
Sec. 10-391. - Soliciting on streets, etc. 
    No person shall solicit on streets, alleys or right-of-ways of the city at any time. 
(Ord. No. 3-81, § III(4), 3-9-81) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 18. 
Sec. 10-392. - Receipt for contributions. 
    Any solicitor receiving money or anything having a value of ten dollars ($10.00) or more from any contributor shall give the contributor a written receipt containing the name and authorization number of the soliciting organization, the name of the solicitor signed on the receipt, the date, the amount received, and the portion of the contribution which is tax deductible. 
(Ord. No. 3-81, § IV(3), 3-9-81) 
Sec. 10-393. - Use of funds. 
    No person shall use or disburse funds collected pursuant to a charitable or religious solicitation for a purpose other than that stated in the statement filed with the city clerk and the actual and necessary expenses incident to the solicitation, collection and disbursement of funds; provided that expenses shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the amount received after deduction of the actual cost of any tangible property given or otherwise transferred to contributors. 
(Ord. No. 3-81, § IV(4), 3-9-81) 
Sec. 10-394. - Financial report; access to records. 
(a)	Every person authorized to conduct a solicitation under this article shall file a financial report under oath with the city clerk within thirty (30) days after the solicitation has been completed. 
(1)	The report shall state in detail the amount of funds collected, the cost of any tangible property given to contributors, the expenses incurred in management and administration of the solicitation, and the distribution of the balance of the funds collected. 
(2)	The report shall state the name, address and social security number of each person receiving any wages, fees, commissions or expense either independently or based on the funds collected. 
(b)	All books, records and papers relating to the solicitation shall be available to the city clerk at city hall upon written request to the person authorized to conduct the solicitation. 
(Ord. No. 3-81, § V, 3-9-81) 
Secs. 10-395-10-410. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - YARD SALES 

Sec. 10-411. - License required; limitation on yard sales. 
(a)	Effective January 1, 2012, any person, firm or corporation engaged in the sale or the promoting for sale of any yard sale or rummage sale not held in conjunction with any established business subject to a retail merchant's license shall first obtain a license for the conducting of said business for ten dollars ($10.00) each day and not to extend for more than two (2) consecutive days. The city clerk is directed, in the issuing of said license, to designate on said license the days during which the sale may be conducted and not in excess of two (2) consecutive days. 
(b)	Not more than four (4) yard sales shall be permitted to be conducted in any location within the limits of the city or the police jurisdiction thereof within any one (1) calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 4-93, § II, 3-22-93; Ord. No. 16-93, § II-A, 11-9-93; Ord. No. 14-94, §§ II, II-A, 9-12-94; Ord. No. 6-11, § II, 11-28-2011) 
Sec. 10-412. - Cleanup of premises. 
    At the end of each sale day, the premises shall be cleaned up and left in an orderly manner. 
(Ord. No. 4-93, § III, 3-22-93; Ord. No. 14-94, § III, 9-12-94) 
Sec. 10-413. - Exceptions to license requirement. 
    The mayor shall be authorized to permit churches, fraternal, charitable, educational, religious and civic organizations to conduct yard sales or rummage sales according to the terms of this article except without the payment of the foregoing license. 
(Ord. No. 4-93, § IV, 3-22-93; Ord. No. 14-94, § IV, 9-12-94) 
Sec. 10-414. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person in violation of any of the terms of this article shall, on conviction, be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and may also be sentenced to hard labor for the county not exceeding thirty (30) days, one (1) or both. 
(Ord. No. 4-93, § V, 3-22-93; Ord. No. 14-94, § V, 9-12-94) 
Secs. 10-415-10-424. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-425. - Rummage sales. 
    Persons and/or organizations holding rummage sales shall not be required to obtain a license therefor, but shall be required to obtain a permit from the city clerk. The fee for said permit shall be one dollar ($1.00). 
Note-The Mayor shall be authorized to permit churches and other charitable organizations to hold rummage sales on specific occasions without paying the permit fee. 
(Ord. No. 22-99, § 214, 12-22-99) 
Sec. 10-426. - Issuance fee. 
    Before any person, firm or organization shall engage in or carry on any business or do any act within the corporate limits or within the police jurisdiction of the city for which a license, as opposed to a permit, is required by this schedule, such person, firm or organization shall pay to the city clerk the amount required herein for such license, plus a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for the issuance thereof. 
(Ord. No. 22-99, § 262, 12-22-99) 
Secs. 10-427-10-440. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - FLEA MARKETS 

Sec. 10-441. - Definition. 
    For the purpose of this article, a flea market is hereby defined as any type of open air or enclosed public market place where new or used items of merchandise are placed on display for sale; a public sales area where a number of vendors may assemble or congregate for the purpose of the sale of merchandise and where individual vendors offer for sale merchandise from a designated sales area. 
(Ord. No. 8-93, § I, 6-28-93; Ord. No. 3-94, § I, 2-28-94) 
Sec. 10-442. - License fee. 
    All owners or operators of a flea market, as defined in section 10-441, shall pay to the city a license fee per year for each location for the operation thereof as follows: 
Number of VendorsAmount of License 1-24$ 35.0025-49100.0050 or above250.00 
(Ord. No. 8-93, § II, 6-28-93; Ord. No. 3-94, § II, 2-28-94) 
Sec. 10-443. - Rental tax. 
    All owners or operators of a flea market who offer a sale space or sale area to individual vendors for the sale of merchandise shall collect a rental tax for the city in the amount of one dollar ($1.00) for each table, booth or space rented for each day rented. 
(Ord. No. 8-93, § III, 6-28-93; Ord. No. 3-94, § III, 2-28-94) 
Sec. 10-444. - Rental receipt; display. 
    The owner or operator of a flea market shall keep on file a numbered copy of each rental receipt written. The holder of a rental receipt must display the rental tax receipt at a prominent location on or near the table, booth or space rented. 
(Ord. No. 8-93, § IV, 6-28-93; Ord. No. 3-94, § IV, 2-28-94) 
Sec. 10-445. - Report of rental tax collected; penalty. 
(a)	The owner or operator of a flea market shall report to the city clerk, at the end of each month, on forms furnished by the city clerk, the total amount of rental tax collected for the month. 
(b)	Failure to file this report and pay the amount specified on the form by the fifteenth day of the following month shall result in a ten (10) percent penalty being added to the full amount of the tax due the city. 
(Ord. No. 8-93, § V, 6-28-93; Ord. No. 3-94, § V, 2-28-94) 
Sec. 10-446. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to fraternal, educational, religious or civic organizations operating a flea market as a fund-raising enterprise. 
(Ord. No. 8-93, § VI, 6-28-93; Ord. No. 3-94, § VI, 2-28-94) 
Secs. 10-447-10-460. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - PRIVATE SECURITY GUARDS AND/OR PRIVATE DETECTIVES 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3-03, §§ 1-13, adopted Aug. 11, 2003, was not specifically amendatory of the Code and has been included as art. XV, §§ 10-461-10-473 at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 10-461. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words are used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    "City" is the City of Clanton, Alabama, a municipal corporation. 
    "Employee" shall include any person paid by, retained, supervised, employed or under the control of any private detective or private security guard as defined herein, for the discharge of any of the duties or responsibilities of a private detective or a private security guard. 
    "Person" is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
    "Private detective" is any person who accepts employment for hire, fee, or reward to furnish or supply information as to the persons, character or actions or identity of any person or as to the character or kind of business or occupation of any person. The term shall include within its meaning a private investigator employed exclusively for one (1) employer in connection with a business of a collection agency. Nor shall it include any officer belonging to any official enforcement agency of the United States, the State of Alabama, the City of Clanton, Alabama, or of any state, county or city. The term "private detective" shall include a private investigator or detective agency as defined by the ordinances and codes of the City of Clanton or the State of Alabama. 
    "Private security guard" is any person who accepts employment for hire, fee or reward to furnish or supply security services for the protection of any person, or any property either real or personal by placement of guards, guard dogs, periodic patrols or otherwise. The term shall specifically include private security guards employed exclusively by one (1) employer to provide security only for the person or property of the employer. However, the term shall not include any officer employed by any law enforcement agency of the United States, the State of Alabama, Chilton County or the City of Clanton. 
(Ord. No. 3-03, § 1, 8-11-03) 
Sec. 10-462. - License required. 
    No person shall operate as a private detective, a private security guard, or an employee (as defined herein) or either of them in the city without first obtaining a license as hereinafter provided from City of Clanton, Alabama. 
(Ord. No. 3-03, § 2, 8-11-03) 
Sec. 10-463. - Application for license. 
    Applications for licenses issued hereunder shall be made upon forms prepared and made available by the City of Clanton, Alabama, and shall state: 
(1)	The full name, age residence, present and previous occupations of the applicant;
(2)	Whether the person signing the application is a citizen of the United States;
(3)	A specific description of the location of the principal place of business of the applicant (not simply post office box number); 
(4)	The number of years experience the applicant has had a private detective or in related fields; 
(5)	The length of time applicant has been a bona fide resident of this city and the State of Alabama immediately preceding the filing of the application; 
(6)	The names, addresses and ages of any proposed or actual employees of the applicant or the name of the applicants employer, as the case may be; 
(7)	The application required hereunder shall be accompanied by a full set of fingerprints and a recent photograph; 
(8)	A full and complete criminal history listing any and all misdemeanor charges and/or convictions entered against the applicant during his lifetime, including the date, charge, court of record, disposition and any and all related and pertinent information regarding the same; 
(9)	Such other information as the City of Clanton shall find reasonably necessary to effectuate the general purpose of this ordinance and to make a fair determination of whether the terms of this ordinance have been complied with; 
(10)	The application required hereunder shall be accompanied by an application fee to be set an established by a vote of the Clanton City Council. 
(Ord. No. 3-03, § 3, 8-11-03) 
Sec. 10-464. - Investigation by chief of police or designated investigative agency. 
    Within thirty (30) days after receipt of an application as provided herein, the chief of police or other investigative agency designated by the City of Clanton shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant and/or his proposed operation as well as an investigation of each employee of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 3-03, § 4, 8-11-03) 
Sec. 10-465. - Standards for issuance of license. 
    The chief of police or investigative agency shall recommend to the City of Clanton that a license for a private investigator or private security guard shall be issued to the applicant when it finds: 
(1)	That the applicant is of good moral character;
(2)	That the applicant has never been convicted of any felony, or any crime of moral turpitude;
(3)	That the applicant is a natural born or fully naturalized citizen of the United States;
(4)	That the applicant does not believe in or advocate the overthrow of the government of the United States, or of the State of Alabama, by force or violence, and that the applicant is not a member of any organization or party which believes in or teaches directly or indirectly the overthrow of the government of the United States, or of the State of Alabama, by force or violence; 
(5)	That the issuance of a license to the applicant will not jeopardize the health, safety, welfare and morals of the City of Clanton and of the citizens thereof; 
(6)	That each proposed or actual employee of the applicant satisfies the foregoing requirements of subsection (e)(1) through (5); 
(7)	Any applicant intending to carry a firearm shall upon application present a proper permit for the possession and use of such firearm. Otherwise the person so licensed shall have not right to possess or use firearms. 
(Ord. No. 3-03, § 5, 8-11-03) 
Sec. 10-466. - Standards applicable to employees. 
    All employees of any person having or applying for a license hereunder shall meet the standards set forth above, and shall be subject to all regulations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3-03, § 6, 8-11-03) 
Sec. 10-467. - Notice of rejection. 
    The City of Clanton shall act upon the application seeking a license hereunder within forty-five (45) days after the filing thereof. Upon the recommendation of the chief of police or other investigative agency designated by the city, and if the chief or investigative agency disapproves the application for a license, notice of the same shall be furnished the applicant within ten (10) days of the taking of said action. 
(Ord. No. 3-03, § 7, 8-11-03) 
Sec. 10-468. - Appeal procedure. 
    Any person aggrieved shall have the right to repeal the denial of any license provided for herein to the city council. The appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days after notice thereof. The council shall act upon the appeal within thirty (30) days after its receipt. 
(Ord. No. 3-03, § 8, 8-11-03) 
Sec. 10-469. - License fee. 
    A license shall be issued to a successful applicant for private detective or private security guard license by the City of Clanton upon payment of a license fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for one (1) to four (4) employees; one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) for five (5) to ten (10) employees and one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for more than ten (10) employees (the term "employee" in this section is intended to mean only those persons covered by this article). 
(Ord. No. 3-03, § 9, 8-11-03) 
Sec. 10-470. - Conditions of licensing. 
(a)	Transferability. Licenses issued hereunder shall not be transferable. 
(b)	Revocation and suspension. Licenses issued hereunder shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the City of Clanton for violation or any of the provisions of this article or misconduct by the licensee or his employees, after reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard has been given to the licensee. The chief of police shall immediately notify any licensee, by personal service, of such suspension or revocation. 
(c)	Renewal. The City of Clanton shall issue renewal licenses to all licensees whose licenses have not been suspended at the time said licenses have expired, upon payment of the license fee set our herein. 
(d)	Term of license. All licenses issued hereunder shall be for a term of one (1) year. 
(e)	Evidence of insurance required. No license shall be issued hereunder unless the applicant first files with the City of Clanton an evidence of liability insurance in full force and effect in the amount of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00), issued by an approved insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Alabama and conditioned upon the compliance by the applicant with all the terms and provisions of this article, as may be approved by the City of Clanton, and also conditioned upon the careful, faithful and honest conduct of the services to be performed by the applicant, or his or its employees hereunder. Said insurance relieving and holding the City of Clanton harmless against any liability in connection therewith and fully indemnifying the City of Clanton for the same. Before the license provided hereunder is issued, said insurance policy shall be approved by the City of Clanton as to form, execution and sufficiency. The insurance policy so issued shall provide that the issuing company shall notify the City of Clanton in the event of nonpayment of premium by the licensee, cancellation of the policy for any reason by the insurance company and that said insurance company will further furnish the City of Clanton with a copy of the policy issued in accord with the terms of this provision and that the same shall include a loss payable endorsement in favor of the City of Clanton. 
(1)	Protection to public. The insurance provided herein shall be taken in the name of the people of the State of Alabama, and every person injured by the negligent, willful, malicious or wrongful act of the principal, his agent, servant, or employee, in the conduct of business, may bring an action on the insurance in his own name to recover damages for such negligent, willful, malicious or wrongful act. 
(2)	Action by the city. The city and the city council thereof shall also have a right to bring an action on the insurance required for the negligent, willful, malicious or wrongful act of the principal, his agent, servant or employee, in the conduct of business of private detective. 
(3)	Suspension of license on failure of security. The City of Clanton shall suspend any license, upon the recommendation of the chief of police or the city attorney, when the insurance required herein shall have lapsed or is reduced by reason of a judgment thereon, or for any reason is no longer in force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 3-03, § 10, 8-11-03) 
Sec. 10-471. - Promulgation of regulations by the chief of police and the City of Clanton. 
    The chief of police and the City of Clanton shall have the authority to enact and enforce reasonable rules and regulations for the operation of private detectives and private security guards in the interest of public safety, morals and welfare, and to effectuate the general purpose of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3-03, § 11, 8-11-03) 
Sec. 10-472. - Duties of licensees. 
(a)	Carry and post license certificated. The licensees hereunder shall cause a certificate of such license to be displayed at all times in a conspicuous place in or on his place of business described in such license. The licensee shall carry on his person at all times when performing services as a private detective a certificate of the license issued hereunder. 
(b)	Impersonation of state police officers. No person licensed hereunder shall impersonate or hold himself out as a peace officer of this state or of this city; nor shall such person operate or permit to be operated a motor vehicle with a siren, blinker light, or with any insignia thereon bearing likeness to the insignia used by the peace officers of the State of Alabama, or of this city. 
(Ord. No. 3-03, § 12, 8-11-03) 
Sec. 10-473. - Penalty. 
    The penalty prescribed for violation of this ordinance shall be revocation of the license required herein. In addition, the licensee shall be liable for any and all penalties prescribed by the ordinances of this city for any violation of the City Code of the City of Clanton or of any criminal ordinance thereof. 
(Ord. No. 3-03, § 13, 8-11-03) 
Chapter 11 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 10; abandoned vehicles, § 13-101 et seq.; parades and demonstrations, Ch. 14; police, Ch. 16; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 18; taxicabs, § 10-291 et seq.; advertising on street from vehicle, § 18-3; off-street automobile storage, App. A, § 9(2). (Back)
State Law reference- Ordinances to provide for public safety, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-1; power of city to regulate the standing and running of trains, automobiles, etc., Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-47-114, 32-5-1; local traffic-control devices, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5-31; Alabama Rules of the Road Act, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-1 et seq.; uniform system of traffic-control devices, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-30; magistrates, uniform traffic infractions, Rules 18-20, Rules of Judicial Administration, Code of Ala. 1975, Vol. 23. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Adoption of state law; violations. 
(a)	The laws of Alabama entitled Regulation of Operation of Motor Vehicles, Etc., Generally, Ch. 5, and the laws of Alabama entitled Rules of the Road, Ch. 5A, of Title 32 of the Code of Ala. 1975, are hereby adopted. 
(b)	In addition to subsection (a) and all provisions of law relating to the speed and operation of motor vehicles in the city, there are hereby adopted all laws of the state and all rules and regulations of the state highway department pertaining to the control of traffic and motor vehicles on highways that are misdemeanors under the state laws, and a violation of such laws, rules and regulations in the city or in the police jurisdiction thereof shall be violations of this chapter. 
(Code 1979, §§ 14-1, 14-12) 
Sec. 11-2. - Penalty. 
(a)	Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, any person found to be in violation of section 11-1 shall be punished as provided in section 1-9 
(b)	Any person found to be in violation of Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-191, as amended, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and may be imprisoned or sentenced to hard labor for not more than one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 13-83, § 5, 8-8-83) 
Sec. 11-3. - Use of motor vehicle without consent of owner. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent, expressed or implied, of the owner, to use the motor vehicle of such owner on any public highway, street or avenue or elsewhere in the city. 
(Code 1979, § 14-8) 
Sec. 11-4. - Sitting in or tampering with vehicle of another. 
    Any person who, without the consent of the owner or person in charge of an automobile or other vehicle parked or left standing at or near any church, schoolhouse, on the streets, roads, avenues or public highways, in front of any private residence, or at any other public place, shall loiter or sit in the automobile or other vehicle, or blow the horn, turn the switch, put on the lights, or in any way meddle with the ways, works or machinery of the automobile or other vehicle, or who shall deface, scratch or mutilate the vehicle while the vehicle is left parked or standing at such place, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and may also be imprisoned or sentenced to hard labor for the city for not more than six (6) months. 
(Code 1979, § 14-9) 
Sec. 11-5. - Loading or unloading of goods in street. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for the driver of any truck or van used for loading, unloading or delivery of goods, wares or merchandise to stop or park the truck or van in any traffic lane or public way in the city between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. for the purpose of loading, unloading or making deliveries from the truck or van. 
(b)	Nothing in this section shall prevent any police officer of the city from authorizing such truck or van driver to stop or park in a traffic lane as described in this section, for the purpose of loading, unloading or delivery, when such loading, unloading or delivery cannot be accomplished otherwise. 
(Code 1979, § 14-13) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 18. 
Sec. 11-6. - Vehicle weight limits. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle having a gross vehicular weight of five (5) tons or more on the following public thoroughfares within the corporate limits of the city: 
Ollie Avenue, from U.S. Highway No. 31 to the Lay Dam Highway. 
Thirteenth Street, from Second Avenue South to Kincheon Road. 
(b)	Proper signs shall be posted along such streets in such size and at such places so as to adequately inform the public of such gross vehicular weight limit. 
(Ord. No. 7-85, §§ 1, 2, 11-25-85) 
Sec. 11-7. - Use of restraining devices. 
    All operators or passengers of all motor vehicles, including automobiles, trucks and equipment owned by the city, shall use restraining devices, commonly referred to as seat belts, in the event that such motor vehicle, automobile, truck or equipment is equipped with such restraining devices or seat belts. 
(Ord. No. 1-92, § 1, 1-20-92) 
Editor's note- 
Ord. No. 1-92, § 1, adopted Jan. 20, 1992, not specifically amendatory of this Code, has been codified as § 11-7 at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 11-8-11-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 11-31. - Manner of parking at night. 
    Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped on a street or avenue of the city, whether attended or unattended, during the period of time from one-half hour before sunset to one-half hour before sunrise, such vehicle shall be so parked or stopped as to leave open a space for travel upon the street or highway not less than eighteen (18) feet in width, such space to be at least nine (9) feet on each side of the center of the street or avenue. 
(Code 1979, § 14-18) 
Sec. 11-32. - Parking in designated areas of city parks. 
(a)	Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them as follows: 
(1)	City park or park is defined as that area embraced within a city park where the public frequents or is invited and including the area where the athletic fields are located, the recreation area, swimming pool area, concession stands, and the area embraced within such city park. 
(2)	Motor vehicle is defined as a self-propelled vehicle, including automobile, truck, motorcycle, motor bike or like vehicle. 
(b)	Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for the operator of a motor vehicle, as defined in this section, to park or leave standing, either attended or unattended, any motor vehicle in any area of such park where parking is prohibited or to park or leave standing such vehicle in an area designated as a no parking area. 
(c)	Presumption of violation. The operator of any motor vehicle, upon being ordered to remove a vehicle improperly parked, and who fails or refuses to immediately do so, is presumed to be in violation of this section. 
(d)	Penalty. Any person found to be in violation of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by the payment of a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) and imprisoned or sentenced to hard labor for the city for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, one or both, at the discretion of the court trying the case. 
(Ord. No. 15-96, §§ 1-3, 5, 11-6-96) 
Secs. 11-33-11-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESTRICTED PARKING ZONES 

Sec. 11-41. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Operator means every individual who operates a vehicle as the owner thereof, or as the agent, employee or permittee of the owner, or who is in actual physical control of the vehicle. 
    Park or parking means the standing of a vehicle, whether or not upon a street, otherwise than in obedience to traffic regulations, signs or signals, or an involuntary stopping of the vehicle by reason of causes beyond the control of the operator of the vehicle. 
    Parking space means any space which is duly designated for the parking of a single vehicle by lines painted, or otherwise durably marked, on the curb or on the surface of the street adjacent to or adjoining the curb or sidewalk, and shall include that area designated for angular parking as well as that area designated for parallel parking. 
    Street means any public street, avenue, road, alley, highway, lane or path, or other public place located in the city and established for the use of vehicles. 
    Vehicle means any device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported upon a street or highway, except a device which is operated upon rails or tracks. 
(Ord. No. 5-84, § 1, 4-23-84) 
Sec. 11-42. - Interpretation of division. 
    This division shall be deemed and construed to be an exercise of the police power of the city for the preservation of public safety and all of its provisions shall be liberally construed with a view of the effectuation of such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 5-84, § 8, 4-23-84) 
Sec. 11-43. - Enforcement of division. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of the chief of police and the police officers of the city, or any person named or designated by the mayor and city council, to check the parking spaces within the restricted parking zones established in this division, and, by the employment of some mark or chalk or other device, to determine whether a vehicle parked within the restricted parking zone has been permitted by the person or the operator thereof to remain standing or parked in the restricted area in excess of two (2) hours on the days and within the hours when such parking restriction is in effect, in violation of this division. Such violation shall be subject to the penalties provided in this division. 
(b)	The chief of police, the police officers, and other persons named or designated by the mayor and city council shall make or cause to be made records or reports of the vehicles parked in violation of the provisions of this division, the name of the owner and operator of such vehicle, if known, the make and state license tag number of such vehicle, and the location of the vehicle in violation, and any other facts necessary to a thorough understanding of the circumstances attending such violation. 
(c)	There shall be attached to such vehicle, in a conspicuous place, a notice of the parking violation sufficient to inform the owner or operator of the vehicle that the vehicle has been parked in violation of this division and the time of the violation, and instructing the owner or operator thereof to report at a certain designated time and place to the municipal court of the city in regard to such violation. 
(Ord. No. 5-84, § 6, 4-23-84) 
Sec. 11-44. - Penalty; payment of fine. 
(a)	Any person or operator of a motor vehicle who violates or fails to comply with any of the terms of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)	Any person or operator of any motor vehicle who causes or permits a motor vehicle to remain parked in any such parking space beyond the parking time of two (2) hours shall be considered as parking overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time and such parking shall be deemed a violation of this division. 
(c)	For each violation of this division, the person or operator of the motor vehicle is hereby assessed a fine of five dollars ($5.00), provided that the fine is paid within seven (7) days of the time of the violation as shown on the parking ticket. If the fine is not paid within the period of seven (7) days from the violation, there is hereby assessed a fine of ten dollars ($10.00), provided that the fine is paid within the period of fourteen (14) days of the time of the parking ticket. 
(d)	Any person or operator who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the terms of this division or who shall conceal, aid or abet any such violation or fail to comply with this division, or who fails or refuses to pay the fine as provided in this section within fourteen (14) days from the time of the parking ticket, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period not to exceed three (3) months, either or both penalties to be imposed by the court trying the case. 
(e)	The fine imposed by this section shall be paid to the municipal court clerk, or the person designated by that office to receive the fines, at the city hall or other building of the city. 
(Ord. No. 5-84, § 7, 4-23-84) 
Sec. 11-45. - Zones established. 
    The following streets and avenues and areas or portions of streets lying within the corporate limits of the city shall constitute the restricted parking zones: 
Fifth Street, between Third Avenue North and First Avenue. 
Second Avenue North, between Eighth Street and Fifth Street. 
Seventh Street, between Fourth Avenue North and First Avenue. 
Sixth Street, between Fourth Avenue North and First Avenue. 
(Ord. No. 5-84, § 2, 4-23-84) 
Sec. 11-46. - Marking of spaces; manner of parking. 
    The superintendent of streets or such other employees of the city as may be designated under the jurisdiction of the mayor and city council are hereby directed and authorized to mark off individual parking spaces in the restricted parking zones established in this division, the parking spaces to be designated by lines painted or durably marked on the curbing or surface of the street. At each space so marked, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in such a way that the vehicle is not entirely within the lines designating the parking space. 
(Ord. No. 5-84, § 3, 4-23-84) 
Sec. 11-47. - Parking time limit. 
(a)	No vehicle, except in a period of emergency determined by an officer of the police department or of the fire department or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control signal or sign, shall be parked or left standing in any parking space in the restricted parking zones established in this division for a period of time in excess of two (2) hours during the hours set out in this section, except on Sundays and holidays. 
(b)	This section shall be in effect between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. each day except Sunday and holidays. Holidays as used in this section means the holidays that the city generally observes. 
(c)	If any vehicle shall remain parked in any such parking space beyond the period of two (2) hours, the parking time of the vehicle shall be considered as parking overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time and such parking shall be deemed a violation of this division. 
(d)	Each person or operator of any vehicle permitted to remain parked in any such parking space beyond the parking time set out for such parking shall be deemed a violator of this division. 
(Ord. No. 5-84, § 5, 4-23-84) 
Sec. 11-48. - Loading zones. 
    The superintendent of streets or such other employees of the city as may be designated under the jurisdiction of the mayor and city council are hereby directed and authorized to mark off loading zones as may from time to time be designated by the mayor and city council within the restricted parking zones established in this division, in such locations as in the opinion of the mayor and city council will serve the general public. 
(Ord. No. 5-84, § 4, 4-23-84) 
Secs. 11-49-11-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPEED LIMITS 

Sec. 11-71. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Operator means every individual who operates a vehicle as the owner thereof, or as the agent, servant, employee or permittee of the owner, or who is in actual physical control of the vehicle. 
    School zone means a street, avenue, highway or other public way in close proximity to a public or private school, where in close proximity to the school, where the students or school personnel are using the street, avenue or other public way, and the location where students and school personnel are entering and leaving school buses. 
    Street means any public street, avenue, road, alley, highway or other public place located in the city and established for the use of vehicles. 
    Vehicle means any device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported upon a street or highway, including motor vehicles, passenger vehicles, pickups or pickup trucks or trucks. 
(Ord. No. 16-86, § 1, 11-10-86) 
Sec. 11-72. - Compliance with article. 
(a)	The city council has determined and does hereby declare a reasonable and safe maximum speed within the corporate limits of the city and the police jurisdiction thereof as provided in this article. 
(b)	No person shall operate a vehicle within the corporate limits of the city or the police jurisdiction thereof at a speed greater than designated in this article within the area designated. 
(Ord. No. 16-86, §§ 2, 5, 11-10-86) 
Sec. 11-73. - School zones. 
    No person shall operate a vehicle in a school zone during the days of Monday through Friday or any other day when school is in session and between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 8:15 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. and 3:15 p.m. in excess of the speed and in the areas as follows: 
Twenty miles per hour: 
Lake Mitchell Road, which runs east and west, beginning at the intersection of First Street, east a distance of 0.2 mile. 
Temple Road, which runs east and west, between the intersection of U.S. 31 and Thrash Road, a distance of 0.5 mile. 
Thirty-five miles per hour: 
U.S. Highway No. 31, which runs north and south, between the intersection of Poplar Springs Road and Newport Avenue, a distance of 0.5 mile. 
(Ord. No. 16-86, § 4, 11-10-86) 
Sec. 11-74. - Twenty-five miles per hour zones. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a greater speed than twenty-five (25) miles per hour in the following listed zones of the city: 
Alabama Highway No. 22, beginning at Ninth Street (Enterprise Road) (m.p. 67.95), thence easterly along Alabama Highway No. 22 to U.S. Highway No. 31 (Alabama Highway No. 3) (m.p. 68.15) a distance of 0.20 miles. 
Alabama Highway No. 145, beginning at U.S. Highway No. 31 (Alabama Highway No. 3) (m.p. 0.00), thence northerly along Alabama Highway No. 145 to a point 250 feet north of First Street (right) (m.p. 0.50), a distance of 0.50 miles. 
U.S. Highway No. 31 (Alabama Highway No. 3), beginning at Jackson Avenue (m.p. 222.00), thence northerly along U.S. Highway No. 31 (Alabama Highway No. 3) to Glenview Avenue (right) (m.p. 222.50), a distance of 0.50 miles. 
(Code 1979, § 14-32; Ord. No. 1-95, § IV, 1-9-95; Ord. No. 6-95, § V, 4-24-95) 
Sec. 11-75. - Thirty miles per hour zones. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a greater speed than thirty (30) miles per hour in the following listed zones of the city: 
Airport Road, which runs east and west, between the intersection of Lay Dam Road and the entrance to the Gragg-Wade Airport, a distance of 0.8 mile. 
Blacksnake Road, which runs east and west, between the intersection of U.S. Highway No. 31 and Yellowleaf Road, a distance of 0.2 mile. 
Cherokee Drive, which runs east and west, between the intersection of Studdard Drive and Thrash Road, a distance of 0.5 mile. 
Enterprise Road, which runs north and south, between the intersection of Second Avenue North and Pipes Avenue, a distance of 0.6 mile. 
Hinkle Road, which runs north and south, between the intersection of Second Avenue North and Penter Avenue, a distance of 0.3 mile. 
McGuire Garage Road, which runs north and south, between the intersection of Airport Road and Lake Mitchell Road, a distance of 0.4 mile. 
Miller Dairy Road, which runs east and west, between the intersection of Pinedale Road and Keystone Drive, a distance of 0.6 mile. 
Ollie Avenue, which runs east and west, between the intersection of Alabama Highway No. 145 and U.S. Highway No. 31, a distance of 0.7 mile. 
Studdard Drive, which runs north and south, between the intersection of Temple Road and Cherokee Drive, a distance of 1.1 miles. 
Wyatt-Minor Road, which runs east and west, between the intersection of Pinedale Road and Moatts Drive, a distance of 0.6 mile. 
Yellowleaf Road, which runs north and south, between the intersection of Ollie Avenue and Friendship Road, a distance of 0.7 mile. 
(Ord. No. 16-86, § 5, 11-10-86) 
Sec. 11-76. - Thirty-five miles per hour zones. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a greater speed than thirty-five (35) miles per hour in the following listed zones of the city: 
Alabama Highway No. 22, beginning at Eleventh Street North (m.p. 67.80), thence easterly along Alabama Highway No. 22 to Ninth Street (Enterprise Road) (m.p. 67.95) a distance of 0.15 miles. 
Alabama Highway No. 145, from the intersection of Alabama Highway No. 145 and Fifth Street east to the intersection of Alabama Highway No. 145 and First Street, a distance of 0.27 mile. 
Alabama Highway No. 145, beginning at a point 200 feet north of First Street (right) (m.p. 0.50), thence northerly along Alabama Highway No. 145 to a point 250 feet south of Goosepond Creek (m.p. 0.65) a distance of 0.15 miles. 
Lake Mitchell Road, which runs east and west, between the intersection of Wyatt Road and the Adair Jr. High School zone, a distance of 0.3 mile. 
Temple Road, which runs east and west, between the intersection of Thrash Road and the Clanton Elementary School zone, a distance of 0.4 mile. 
Thrash Road, which runs north and south, between the intersection of Lake Mitchell Road, through the intersection of Temple Road, to the intersection of Poplar Springs Road, a distance of 1.7 miles. 
U.S. Highway No. 31 (Alabama Highway No. 3), beginning at Short Street (left) (m.p. 221.10), thence northerly along U.S. Highway No. 31 (Alabama Highway No. 3) to Jackson Avenue (m.p. 222.00), a distance of 0.90 miles. 
U.S. Highway No. 31 (Alabama Highway No. 3), beginning at Glenview Avenue (right) (m.p. 222.50), thence northerly along U.S. Highway No. 31 (Alabama Highway No. 3) to a point 100 feet of Goosepond Creek (m.p. 222.75) a distance of 0.25 miles. 
(Code 1979, § 14-31; Ord. No. 16-86, § 5, 11-10-86; Ord. No. 1-95, § III, 1-9-95; Ord. No. 6-95, § VI, 4-24-95) 
Sec. 11-76.5. - Forty miles per hour zones. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a greater speed than forty (40) miles per hour in the following listed zones of the city: 
Alabama Highway No. 22, beginning at Thirteenth Street (Highland Avenue) (m.p. 67.60) thence easterly along Alabama Highway No. 22 to Eleventh Street North (m.p. 67.80) a distance of 0.20 miles. 
Alabama Highway No. 145, beginning at a point 250 feet south of Goosepond Creek (m.p. 0.65), thence northerly along Alabama Highway No. 145 to a point 200 feet north of Chilton County Highway No. 32 (Airport Road) (right) (m.p. 0.80) a distance of 0.15 miles. 
U.S. Highway No. 31 (Alabama Highway No. 3), beginning at a point 100 feet south of Goosepond Creek (m.p. 222.75), thence northerly along U.S. Highway No. 31 (Alabama Highway No. 3) to a point 250 feet north of Sixteenth Avenue North (m.p. 223.15) a distance of 0.40 miles. 
(Ord. No. 6-95, § III, 4-24-95) 
Sec. 11-77. - Forty-five miles per hour zones. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a greater speed than forty-five (45) miles per hour in the following listed zones of the city: 
Airport Road, which runs east and west, between the intersection of the Gragg-Wade Airport entrance and the city limits, a distance of 0.8 mile. 
Alabama Highway No. 22, beginning at a point 250 feet west of Chilton County Highway No. 53 (Tom Littlejohn Road) (left) (m.p. 66.60), thence easterly along Alabama Highway No. 22 to Thirteenth Street (Highland Avenue) (m.p. 67.60), a distance of 1.00 miles. 
Alabama Highway No. 145, beginning at a point 250 feet north of Chilton County Highway No. 32 (Airport Road) (right) (m.p. 0.80), thence northerly along Alabama Highway No. 145, to a point 250 north of Chilton County Highway No. 51 (Friendship Road) (left) (Pinedale Road) (right) (m.p. 1.70), a distance of 0.90 miles. 
Enterprise Road, which runs north and south, between the intersection of Pipes Avenue and the city limits. 
Friendship Road, which runs east and west, between the intersection of Yellowleaf Road and Alabama Highway No. 145, a distance of 0.8 mile. 
Hinkle Road, which runs north and south, between the intersection of Penter Avenue and the city limits, a distance of 1.4 miles. 
Kincheon Road, which runs east and west, between the intersection of Enterprise Road and the city limits, a distance of 1.5 miles. 
Lake Mitchell Road, which runs east and west, between the intersection of Wyatt Road and the city limits, a distance of 1.5 miles. 
Logan Road, which runs east and west, between the intersection of U.S. Highway No. 31 and Enterprise Road, a distance of 0.6 mile. 
New Harmony Road, which runs east and west, between the intersection of U.S. Highway No. 31 and Yellowleaf Road, a distance of 0.9 mile. 
Poplar Springs Road, which runs east and west, between the intersection of U.S. Highway No. 31 and the city limits, a distance of 2 miles. 
Samaria Road, which runs east and west, between the intersection of Enterprise Road and Hinkle Road, a distance of 1.7 miles. 
Temple Road, which runs east and west, between the intersection of Thrash Road and the city limits, a distance of 1 mile. 
Thirteenth Street, which runs north and south, between the intersection of Kincheon Road and Samaria Road, a distance of 0.8 mile. 
Yellowleaf Road, which runs north and south, between the intersection of Friendship Road and the city limits, a distance of 1.6 miles. 
U.S. Highway No. 31 (Alabama Highway No. 3), beginning at a point 528 feet south of Chilton County Highway No. 7 (left) (m.p. 219.75), thence northerly along U.S. Highway No. 31 (Alabama Highway No. 3) to Short Street (left) (m.p. 221.10), a distance of 1.35 miles. 
U.S. Highway No. 31 (Alabama Highway No. 3), beginning at a point 250 feet north of Sixteenth Avenue North (m.p. 223.15), thence northerly along U.S. Highway No. 31 (Alabama Highway No. 3) to Chilton County Highway No. 51 (Blacksnake Road) (right) (Sims Drive) (left) (m.p. 223.70), a distance of 0.55 miles. 
U.S. Highway No. 31 (Alabama Highway No. 3) Beginning at Short Street and running thence southerly along U.S. Highway 31 (Alabama Highway No. 3) to the intersection of U.S. Highway 31 with interstate Highway 65. 
Note-This speed limit limitation shall be temporary and shall exist for the entire time that the Alabama Department of Transportation is performing construction work on U.S. Highway 31 in the City of Clanton until its completion or for a period of eighteen (18) months from the adoption of this resolution, whichever first occurs, at which time the provisions of this amendment shall become null and void and the speed limit on the aforedescribed ordinance and amendments thereto. 
(Code 1979, § 14-30; Ord. No. 16-86, § 5, 11-10-86; Ord. No. 1-95, § II, 1-9-95; Ord. No. 6-95, § II, 4-24-95; Ord. No. 7-02, 10-28-02) 
Sec. 11-78. - Fifty-five miles per hour zones. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a greater speed than fifty-five (55) miles per hour in the following listed zones of the city: 
Alabama Highway No. 22, beginning at the west city limits (m.p. 65.30), thence easterly along Alabama Highway No. 22 to a point 250 feet west of Chilton County Highway No. 53 (Tom Littlejohn Road) (left) (m.p. 66.60), a distance of 1.30 miles. 
Alabama Highway No. 145, beginning at a point 250 feet north of Chilton County Highway No. 51 (Friendship Road) (left) (Pinedale Road) (right) (m.p. 1.70), thence northerly along Alabama Highway No. 145 to the north city limits (m.p. 3.65), a distance of 1.95 miles. 
U.S. Highway No. 31 (Alabama Highway No. 3), beginning at the south city limits (m.p. 217.40), thence northerly along U.S. Highway No. 31 (Alabama Highway No. 3), to a point 528 feet south of Chilton County Highway No. 7 (left) (m.p. 219.75), a distance of 2.35 miles. 
U.S. Highway No. 31 (Alabama Highway No. 3), beginning at Chilton County Highway No. 51 (Blacksnake Road) (right) (Sims Drive) (left) (m.p. 223.70), thence northerly along U.S. Highway No. 31 (Alabama Highway No. 3) to the north city limits (m.p. 225.70), a distance of 2.00 miles. 
(Code 1979, § 14-29; Ord. No. 1-95, § I, 1-9-95; Ord. No. 6-95, § I, 4-24-95) 
Sec. 11-79. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person or persons violating this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished for such violation by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) and may also be imprisoned and sentenced to hard labor upon the streets or public works or in the workhouse or house of corrections of the city not exceeding six (6) months. 
(Ord. No. 1-95, § VII, 1-9-95) 
Sec. 11-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SALE OF VEHICLES; REGULATIONS 

Sec. 11-81. - Display for sale upon occupied property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to display for sale more than one vehicle, recreational vehicle, ATV, boat, Sea-Do, four wheeler or motorcycle upon any occupied lot or parcel of real property within the city. 
(Ord. No. 16-99, § 1, 6-28-99) 
Sec. 11-82. - Display for sale upon property of another. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner, tenant or person in charge of premises to display for sale upon such premises, or permit same to be done; of any vehicle, recreational vehicle, ATV, boat, Sea-Do, four wheeler or motorcycle not owned by said owner, tenant or person in charge. 
(Ord. No. 16-99, § 1, 6-28-99) 
Sec. 11-83. - Display for sale on public property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to display any vehicle, recreational vehicle, ATV, boat, Sea-Do, four wheeler or motorcycle for sale upon the public right-of-way or other public property within the city. In addition to the penalties provided herein, any vehicle found to be in violation of this section may be towed away and impounded at the owner's expense, with the towing service being responsible for the protection of the vehicle from deterioration. 
(Ord. No. 16-99, § 1, 6-28-99) 
Sec. 11-84. - Display for sale upon unoccupied property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to display for sale any vehicle, recreational vehicle, ATV, boats, Sea-Do, four wheeler, or motorcycle upon any vacant lot or parcel of real property within the city. 
(Ord. No. 16-99, § 1, 6-28-99) 
Sec. 11-85. - Exemption. 
    The foregoing, except section 11-83, shall not apply to any person properly licensed to engage in the business of selling vehicles, recreational vehicles, ATVs, boats, Sea-Dos, four wheelers, or motorcycles at the location designated upon such license. 
(Ord. No. 16-99, § 1, 6-28-99) 
Sec. 11-86. - Penalty. 
    The penalty for violation of any provision herein shall be as specified for general penalty under section 1-9 of this Code, or by a schedule of fines established by resolution of the city council. Each day a violation is permitted to occur constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 16-99, § 1, 6-28-99) 
Chapter 12 - MUNICIPAL COURT 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. (Back)
State Law reference- Power of city to enforce ordinances, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-45-1; municipal courts, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-1 et seq.; bail, Ala. Rules of Judicial Administration (Code of Ala. 1975, Vol. 23), Rule 2; magistrates, Ala. Rules of Judicial Administration (Code of Ala. 1975, Vol. 23), Rule 18; uniform traffic infractions, Ala. Rules of Judicial Administration (Code of Ala. 1975, Vol. 23), Rule 19; vesting of criminal jurisdiction, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-1-3; general powers of courts, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-1-7 et seq.; travel expenses of municipal judges, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-1-18. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Time and place of holding court. 
    The municipal court of the city shall hold court at such time and place as the city council may determine with the advice of the municipal judge. 
(Code 1979, § 10-3) 
Sec. 12-2. - Powers of court; court costs. 
(a)	The municipal judge shall have the authority to punish any person convicted of violating any municipal ordinance as provided in section 1-9 
(b)	Upon each conviction in municipal court for a violation of any ordinance of the city, there shall be taxed against the defendant as court costs the sum of ten dollars ($10.00), and there shall also be taxed as costs the additional costs and fees imposed by the statutes of the state, and the latter such costs and fees shall be remitted pursuant to the state statutes. All costs taxed for the city as provided in this section shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(Code 1979, § 10-6) 
State law reference- Powers of municipal court, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-10 et seq.; court costs, Code of Ala. 1975, § 12-14-14. 
Sec. 12-3. - Appointment, term of judge. 
(a)	There shall be one (1) municipal judge. The judge shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years. The municipal judge shall be eligible for reappointment upon the expiration of his term. 
(b)	Any person appointed to the office of municipal judge shall be eligible to serve two (2) years from the date appointed. 
(Code 1979, § 10-4) 
Sec. 12-4. - Compensation of judge. 
    The annual salary of the municipal judge shall be payable in twelve (12) equal monthly installments. 
(Code 1979, § 10-5) 
Sec. 12-5. - Reports by judge. 
(a)	The municipal judge shall report on the proceedings of the municipal court as required by law or rule. 
(b)	The municipal judge shall be required to make a report to the council on the operation of the municipal court every month. 
(Code 1979, §§ 10-12, 10-13) 
Sec. 12-6. - Magistrates. 
    The municipal court magistrates shall be selected as follows: 
(1)	The clerk of the municipal court and any person within the clerk's office designated by the state administrative director of courts (ADC), upon written recommendation of the clerk to serve as magistrate; and 
(2)	All persons appointed to serve as magistrates by the ADC upon the written recommendation of the municipal judge. 
(Code 1979, § 10-10) 
_____
Sec. 12-7. - [Traffic and non-traffic offenses.] 
COURT COSTS & FINES-TRAFFIC OFFENSES 
VIOLATIONSFINECOSTSTOTALATTEMPTING TO ELUDE$300.00$97.50$397.50BLOCKING THE HIGHWAY$50.00$97.50$147.50DRIVING ON WRONG SIDE OF ROAD$50.00$97.50$147.50DRIVING WHILE CANCELLED$200.00$147.50$347.50DRIVING WHILE REVOKED$300.00$147.50$447.50DRIVING WHILE SUSPENDED$200.00$147.50$347.50D.U.I. (1st Offense) ( D.U.I. School) $250.00$477.50$727.50D.U.I. (2nd Offense) (5 days jail or 30 days cserv) $500.00 $727.50$1,227.50D.U.I. (3rd Offense) (60 days jail) $1,000.00$1,227.50$2,227.50FAILURE TO DIM LIGHTS$20.00$97.50$117.50FAILURE TO STOP AT RAILROAD CROSSING$30.00$97.50$127.50FAILURE TO STOP AT STOP SIGN$30.00$97.50$127.50FAILURE TO YIELD TO 
EMERGENCY VEHICLE$150.00$97.50$247.50FAILURE TO YIELD RIGHT OF WAY$30.00$97.50$127.50FOLLOWING EMERGENCY 
VEHICLE$100.00$97.50$197.50FOLLOWING TOO CLOSE$40.00$97.50$137.50IMPROPER BACKING$40.00$97.50$137.50IMPROPER BRAKES$30.00$97.50$127.50IMPROPER LIGHTS$30.00$97.50$127.50IMPROPER MUFFLER$20.00$97.50$117.50IMPROPER OR NO REAR VIEW MIRROR$20.00$97.50$117.50IMPROPER PARKING$20.00$97.50$117.50IMPROPER PASSING$30.00$97.50$127.50IMPROPER SIGNAL (No Signal)$20.00$97.50$117.50IMPROPER TIRES$25.00$97.50$122.50IMPROPER TURN$30.00$97.50$127.50LEAVING THE SCENE OF AN 
ACCIDENT$400.00$97.50$497.50NO CHILD RESTRAINT$30.00$97.50$127.50NO DRIVER'S LICENSE$25.00$147.50$172.50NO HELMET$20.00$97.50$117.50NO TAG (Includes Imp. & Exp. Tags)$25.00$97.50$122.50FAILURE TO OBEY POLICE 
OFFICER$100.00$97.50$197.50OBSTRUCTION OF VIEW IN 
WINDSHIELD$20.00$97.50$117.50PASSING IN PROHIBITED ZONE$50.00$97.50$147.50PASSING STOPPED SCHOOL BUS$200.00$97.50$297.50RECKLESS DRIVING$150.00$97.50$247.50RUNNING RED LIGHT$40.00$97.50$137.50SEAT BELT VIOLATION $10.00----$10.00SPEEDING ($60.00 Fine over 25mph)$40.00 ($60.00)$97.50 ($157.50)$137.50STOPPING ON HIGHWAY$30.00$97.50$127.50SPILLING LOAD$100.00$97.50$197.50VIO. DRIVER'S LICENSE 
RESTRICTION$60.00$97.50$157.50WINDOW TINTING VIOLATION$100.00$97.50$197.50MANDATORY INSURANCE$300.00$97.50$397.50 
COURT COSTS & FINES-NON-TRAFFIC OFFENSES 
VIOLATIONS/MISDEMEANORSFINECOSTSFINESASSAULT 3RD $200.00$131.00$331.00CARRYING PISTOL WITHOUT 
PERMIT$200.00$131.00$331.00CRIMINAL LITTERING$250.00$131.00$381.00CRIMINAL MISCHIEF$200.00$131.00$331.00CRIMINAL TRESPASSING$200.00$131.00$331.00DISORDERLY CONDUCT$200.00$131.00$331.00FALSE REPORTING TO POLICE 
OFFICER$200.00$131.00$331.00GIVING FALSE INFO. TO OBTAIN REFUND$200.00$131.00$331.00HARASSMENT$200.00$131.00$331.00INDECENT EXPOSURE$200.00$131.00$331.00POSSESSION OF MARIJUANA 2ND $251.00$470.00$721.00MENACING$200.00$131.00$331.00MINOR IN POSSESSION OF 
ALCOHOL$150.00$131.00$281.00NOISE ORDINANCE VIOLATION$100.00$131.00$231.00OPEN POSSESSION OF ALCOHOL$150.00$131.00$281.00POSSESSION OF DRUG 
PARAPHERNALIA$251.00$470.00$721.00PUBLIC INTOXICATION$150.00$131.00$281.00PUBLIC LEWDNESS$200.00$131.00$331.00RECKLESS ENDANGERMENT$200.00$131.00$331.00RESISTING ARREST$200.00$131.00$331.00THEFT OF PROPERTY 3RD $250.00$131.00$381.00UNAUTHORIZED USE OF VEHICLE$300.00$131.00$431.00OPERATING JUNK YARD$100.00$131.00$231.00 
(Ord. No. 14-06, 11-13-06) 
Sec. 12-8. - Municipal corrections fund established. 
    In accord with the authority contained in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-7.1, as last amended, a municipal corrections fund cost shall be added, on conviction, to the fines and court costs being presently collected in all traffic cases in the total amount of forty-four dollars and fifty cents ($44.50) and in all non-traffic misdemeanor cases in the total amount of forty-four dollars ($44.00) per case, all as collected in the municipal court in the City of Clanton, Alabama. 
(Ord. No. 5-10, 4-26-2010; Ord. No. 1-11, 5-23-2011) 
Editor's note- 
Ord. No. 5-10, adopted April 26, 2010, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as § 12-8 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 12-9. - Fees established for failure to appear at court. 
    Having determined that failure to appear at court is causing a burden on the municipal court, the City Council of the City of Clanton has established a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each traffic violation and two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each non-traffic, municipal and misdemeanor violation for which the defendant fails to appear at court. 
    The city council has also determined that failure to appear at court has placed an additional burden on the Clanton Municipal Court and Clanton Police Department by, at times, having to travel out of Chilton County to transport those whom have failed to appear at court. Hence, the city council hereby adopts a transportation fee as established by the State of Alabama and the administrative office of courts. 
    The magistrate shall add these charges to the fine and court cost upon conviction, and said monies will be deposited into the general funds for the City of Clanton, Alabama. 
(Ord. No. 4-10, 4-26-2010) 
Editor's note- 
Ord. No. 4-10, adopted April 26, 2010, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as § 12-9 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 12-10. - Fee established for housing and medical expenses of prisoners in county jail. 
    The city council has determined that the housing of inmates in the Chilton County Jail and the inmate medical expenses are causing a financial burden on the city. To offset these costs, the city council has established a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) per day, not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), plus all medical expenses incurred while the prisoner is incarcerated in the Chilton County Jail. The magistrate shall add these charges to the fine and court cost upon conviction. 
(Ord. No. 3-10, 4-26-2010) 
Editor's note- 
Ord. No. 3-10, adopted April 26, 2010, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as § 12-10 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 12-11-12-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC SAFETY/EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4-12, adopted March 12, 2012, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as Art. II, §§ 12-21-12-26, was at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 12-21. - Alcohol abuse educational program established. 
    There is hereby established an alcohol abuse educational program to be hereby known as "MADD Alabama Victim Impact Panels and Minor in Possession Classes" which shall [be] under the supervision of the Clanton Municipal Court Clerk and/or the Clanton Municipal Probation Officers. Each person attending the class shall not be charged more than seventy-five dollars ($75.00), for evaluation, registration, and cost of the class. Such fees are to be assessed by the municipal court judge as appropriate, unless the same is waived by the municipal court judge or by the clerk of the municipal court in such cases where the individual is being referred by an outside agency. 
(Ord. No. 4-12, 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 12-22. - Traffic safety educational program established. 
    There is hereby established a traffic safety educational program which shall be under the supervision of the municipal court clerk and/or the Clanton Municipal Court Probation Officers. Each person attending the seminar shall be charged no more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for registration, evaluation, and cost of the class. Such fees are to be assessed by the municipal court judge, unless the same is waived by the municipal court judge or by the clerk of the court in such cases where the individual is being referred by an outside agency. 
(Ord. No. 4-12, 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 12-23. - Advisory committee established. 
    There is established an advisory committee consisting of the chief of police or his/her designee, the municipal court judge or his/her designee, and the municipal court clerk and his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 4-12, 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 12-24. - Administrative duties. 
    The clerk of the court or the municipal court probation officers will be responsible for scheduling such classes, instructors, facilitators and setting reasonable fees for payment of the instructors or facilitators. The clerk of the court shall establish such rules for these classes as approved by the municipal court judge. 
(Ord. No. 4-12, 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 12-25. - Payment of fees. 
    All monies shall be collected by the clerk of the court in advance of such classes. All monies will be turned into the Chief Financial Officer of the City of Clanton to be maintained in a separate account to be used to defray the cost of such classes, purchase supplies for such classes, purchase equipment for such classes, pay outside instructors/facilitators, to provide other traffic safety programs, and to purchase other traffic safety equipment to be utilized throughout the City of Clanton as relates to traffic safety. The collection of monies will be under the supervision of the Clanton Municipal Court Clerk. 
(Ord. No. 4-12, 3-12-2012) 
_____
Sec. 12-26. - Fee schedule. 
Clanton Municipal Court 
DEFENSIVE DRIVING/TRAFFIC SAFETY PROGRAM 
601 1st Avenue, Clanton, Alabama 35045 
Defensive Driving Course, 4 hours (DDC-4) $100.00Alive @ 25, 4 hours (DDC-A25) $100.00Defensive Driving Course, 8 hours (DDC-8) $150.00MADD Alabama Victim Impact Panel and Minor in Possession, 2 hours  Registration $40.00  Class Fee* $35.00  Total $85.00 
* Payable to MADD night of class. Registration paid in advance. 
(Ord. No. 4-12, 3-12-2012) 
Chapter 13 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, Ch. 4; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; flood damage prevention, Ch. 8; housing, Ch. 9; fire-related offenses, § 7-5 et seq.; gambling in billiard rooms, § 10-261. (Back)
State Law reference- General municipal police powers, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-110 et seq.; Alabama Criminal Code, Code of Ala. 1975, Title 13A. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Injuring or trapping animals protected by law. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, kill, take, catch, capture or to attempt to injure, take, kill or capture any squirrel, mockingbird, brown thrush, catbird, redbird, bluebird, or any other bird protected by the laws of the state or of the United States, within the city. 
(Code 1979, § 9-10) 
Cross reference- Animals, Ch. 4. 
State law reference- Hunting and trapping of birds, Code of Ala. 1975, § 9-11-230 et seq. 
Sec. 13-2. - Discharge of firearms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or discharge any shotgun, pistol, rifle or other firearm in the city. 
(Code 1979, § 9-11) 
Sec. 13-3. - Discharge of air guns, pellet guns. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city or the police jurisdiction thereof to fire, shoot or discharge or cause to be fired, shot or discharged any air gun, air rifle, pellet gun or any pneumatic gun which discharges shot, bullets, missiles or pellets by means of the elastic force of compressed air or a spring, appliance, apparatus or other device. 
(Code 1979, § 9-13) 
Sec. 13-4. - Operation of firing ranges for training of law enforcement officers. 
    Notwithstanding sections 13-2 and 13-3, federal, state, county or municipal law enforcement officers or organizations under the direct control of such federal, state, county or municipal law enforcement officers may operate, construct or maintain a firing range or other like facilities for training in the use of firearms or in the discharge of shotguns, pistols, rifles, air guns, air rifles, pellet guns or pneumatic guns within the corporate limits or within the police jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 5-83, § 1, 4-11-83) 
Sec. 13-5. - Posting of advertisements. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to post or paste or otherwise attach any signboard, bill, advertisement or other paper: 
(1)	Upon a pole erected by any telegraph, telephone, electric light or power company;
(2)	To fire alarm poles;
(3)	To any tree growing on any street in the city; or
(4)	To any fixed object on city-owned property.
(Code 1979, § 9-18) 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, Ch. 10. 
Sec. 13-6. - Throwing harmful material on streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit or leave, in any public street, bottles, fragments of glass, tacks, nails or other things likely to injure persons or vehicles passing along the street. 
(Code 1979, § 9-20) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 18. 
State law reference- Criminal littering, Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-7-29. 
Sec. 13-7. - Insurance, permit for use of high-pressure boilers. 
    Each and every person, before operating, using or maintaining any high-pressure steam boiler or other high-pressure boiler carrying more than fifteen (15) pounds of pressure or capable of carrying more than fifteen (15) pounds of pressure, shall first procure on the boiler a standard policy of insurance in the sum of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), payable to the person using or operating the boiler, and conditioned to indemnify any person against loss by accident on account of the use, maintenance or operation of the boiler, in a form approved by the city clerk. Every person, before using, maintaining or operating any boiler described in this section, shall first present the policy of insurance provided for in this section to the city clerk, and if found by the clerk to be sufficient as provided in this section, the city clerk shall then issue a permit for the use, operation and maintenance of the boiler for a period not exceeding the expiration date of the policy of insurance. The applicant shall pay the city clerk one dollar ($1.00) for the application. 
(Code 1979, § 9-25) 
Sec. 13-8. - Failure to return library property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully retain or fail to return any book, periodical, magazine, pamphlet, manuscript or other property belonging to or on deposit with the city public library, for a period exceeding thirty (30) days after notification by certified mail, return receipt requested, for delivery to addressee only, with the return card showing receipt of the notice or the refusal of the notice by the addressee, addressed to the last known borrower, the notification being given after the expiration time during which, by the rules of the library, such article or other property may legally be kept. The notice shall contain a copy of this section. 
(Code 1979, § 9-31) 
Sec. 13-9. - Giving false information for purpose of obtaining refund. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to give any false information to obtain or as a part of any attempt to obtain a refund for merchandise returned to a business establishment when such false information is calculated to induce such business establishment to give a refund which would otherwise not be given. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to give a false or fictitious name or address as his own, or to give the name or address of any other person without that person's knowledge and approval, for the purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain a refund on a ticket or other document which is evidence of a service purchased from a business establishment, which service is yet to be performed. 
(Ord. No. 5-87, §§ 1, 2, 3-23-87) 
Sec. 13-10. - Fireworks-Defined. 
    For the purpose of section 13-11, the term "fireworks" means any explosive composition or any substances or combination of substances, or any article prepared for the purpose of producing an audible effect by explosion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, toy cannons, in which explosives are used, the type of balloons which require fire underneath to propel the balloons, firecrackers, sparklers, torpedoes, sky rockets, Roman candles, bombs, or other devices containing any explosive substances; provided, however, that the term "fireworks" shall not include pistol caps containing twenty-five-hundredths grains or less of explosive compound, toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper caps containing twenty-five-hundredths grains or less of explosive compound are used, providing they are so constructed that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion. 
(Code 1979, § 9-15) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7. 
Sec. 13-11. - Same-Selling, possessing, discharging prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, possess or discharge any fireworks, as defined in section 13-10 within the corporate limits, or police jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1979, § 9-16) 
Sec. 13-12. - Discharge of firearms. 
(a)	Permitted discharge. It shall be legal to discharge a firearm commonly referred to as a shotgun in the corporate limits of the city during the period of time designated on an annual basis for the hunting of doves by the state department of conservation in the county, except as hereinafter provided in this section. 
(b)	Permitted hours. The hours for legal hunting of doves shall be prescribed by the state department of conservation for the hunting of doves in the county. 
(c)	Prohibited discharge. It is provided, however, that it shall be illegal to discharge a firearm commonly referred to as a shotgun within three hundred (300) feet of a currently inhabited dwelling house. 
(d)	Size of shot allowed. In the discharge of shotguns as provided in this section, no shot larger than number seven (7) size shall be allowed. 
(e)	Application required. Each landowner, before shooting is allowed over his property, shall first make written application filed with the chief of police of the city, stating the date and hours of the proposed hunt, the estimated number of hunters, and the application must be made not less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the hunt. The chief of police is directed, before such hunt is authorized, to make an investigation and inspection of the premises, and if the chief of police then determines that the area of land is suitable, he may then issue the necessary permit in writing. 
(f)	Abuse of permit. During any hunt permitted by this section, if the chief of police determines that the permit authorized herein is being abused, the chief of police may, in his discretion, revoke such permit and terminate the hunt. 
(g)	Conflict with other rules. Nothing in this section shall be construed to be in conflict with any rules or regulations promulgated by the state department of conservation or any federal hunting rules or regulations. It is not the intent of this section to be in conflict with any hunting rules or regulations promulgated by the state or the federal government. 
(h)	Penalty for violation. Any person in violation of any provision of this section, on conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-9 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 11-92, §§ 1-7, 10-12-92) 
Sec. 13-13. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- 
Ord. No. 2-07, §§ 1-13, adopted January 22, 2007, set out provisions pertaining to noise control. At the discretion of the editor, § 13-13, which pertained to loud or excessive noise and derived from Ord. No. 3-93, §§ I-III, 2-22-93, has been reserved and the users' attention is directed to Art. VI, §§ 13-151 et seq. of this chapter. 
Secs. 13-14-13-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STATE OFFENSES 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 6-96, §§ 1-5, adopted Apr. 22, 1996, amended this article in its entirety, in effect repealing former §§ 13-36 and 13-37 and enacting similar new provisions in lieu thereof as herein set out. Formerly, such sections derived from Ord. No. 13-83, §§ 1-4, adopted Aug. 8, 1983. 
Sec. 13-36. - Offenses. 
(a)	Any person or corporation committing an offense within the corporate limits of the city or within the police jurisdiction thereof, which is declared by a law or laws of the state now existing or hereafter enacted to be a misdemeanor, shall be guilty of an offense against the city. 
(b)	Any person or corporation committing an offense within the corporate limits of the city or within the police jurisdiction thereof, which is declared by a law or laws of the state now existing or hereafter enacted to be a violation, shall be guilty of an offense against the city. 
(c)	Any person or corporation committing, within the corporate limits of the city or within the police jurisdiction thereof, an offense as defined by Section 13A-1-2 of the Alabama Criminal Code, which offense is not declared by a law or laws of the state now existing or hereafter enacted to be a felony, misdemeanor or violation, shall be guilty of an offense against the city. 
(Ord. No. 6-96, §§ 1-3, 4-22-96) 
Sec. 13-37. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)	Any person found to be in violation of section 13-36 shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or may be imprisoned or sentenced to hard labor for the city for a period not exceeding six (6) months, at the discretion of the court trying the case, unless otherwise provided by subsection (b) of this section. Any corporation found to be in violation of section 13-36 shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), at the discretion of the court trying the case. 
(b)	Any person found to be in violation of Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-191, as amended, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and may be imprisoned or sentenced to hard labor for not more than one (1) year. This subsection specifically adopts the provisions of Act No. 95-784 approved August 9, 1995. 
(Ord. No. 6-96, §§ 4, 5, 4-22-96) 
Secs. 13-38-13-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC NUISANCES 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Abatement of nuisances under zoning ordinance, App. A, § 9(12). (Back)
State Law reference- Action to abate or enjoin public nuisance, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 6-5-122, 11-47-118; abatement of nuisances generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-117. (Back)
Sec. 13-61. - Interpretation of article. 
    This article shall not be construed to repeal, amend or otherwise alter any other ordinance of the city, and nothing contained in this article shall be construed, interpreted or taken to limit the city in its rights to proceed by injunction or other civil remedy against any person who causes, creates or maintains a public nuisance within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1979, § 9-36) 
Sec. 13-62. - Continuing violations. 
    Each day's or part of a day's continuance of anything prohibited by this article shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1979, § 9-35) 
Sec. 13-63. - Public nuisance defined; nuisances enumerated. 
(a)	The causing, creating or maintaining of a public nuisance, as prohibited under this article, shall be interpreted and construed according to the definition of a "public nuisance" as that term is defined or understood according to the common law and statutory law in force and effect in the state. 
(b)	Without affecting or limiting the generality of subsection (a) of this section or the meaning of the term "nuisance" as used in this article, it is hereby declared that all of the following are public nuisances within the meaning of this article: 
(1)	Any unsightly building, billboard or other structure, any old, abandoned or partially destroyed building or structure, any building or structure commenced and left unfinished, any building or structure which has been deemed to be unsuitable or unfit for human occupancy or habitation by any duly constituted official of the state department of health or the county department of health, any building which has been deemed by the building inspector of the city to fail to comply with the minimum building codes in force and effect in the city, or any abandoned well or excavation not properly protected and which may attract children and endanger them in the course of play. 
(2)	Accumulations of manure or rubbish which are breeding places for flies, mosquitoes, mice, rats or other vermin. 
(3)	Filthy, littered or trash-covered cellars, house yards, factory yards, vacant areas in the rear of stores, vacant lots, houses, buildings or premises containing trash, litter, rags, accumulations of empty barrels, boxes, crates, packing cases, paper, lumber or firewood not neatly piled, scrap iron, tin and other metal not neatly piled, or anything whatsoever in which flies or rats may breed or multiply or which may be a fire danger. 
(4)	Allowing diseased animals to run at large, allowing stagnant pools of water to accumulate, or maintaining a privy or outdoor closet where connections to a sanitary sewer are available. 
(Code 1979, § 9-34) 
Cross reference- Animals, Ch. 4; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7. 
State law reference- Distinction between public and private nuisances, Code of Ala. 1975, § 6-5-121. 
Sec. 13-64. - Creation, maintenance prohibited. 
(a)	Every person who causes, creates or maintains a public nuisance within the corporate limits of the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)	The continued maintenance of such nuisance, once created or caused, shall be interpreted and construed to be a separate offense which shall be punishable under this section. 
(Code 1979, § 9-33) 
Secs. 13-65-13-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ABANDONED VEHICLES; GRASS, WEED AND BUILDING NUISANCES 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2-03, adopted June 23, 2003 was not specifically amendatory of the Code and has been treated as superceding the provisions of former art. IV entitled abandoned vehicles. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of repeal and inclusion. 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 11; police, ch. 16; streets and sidewalks, ch. 18. (Back)
Sec. 13-101. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, certain terms as defined as follows: 
    Abandoned vehicles: Any motor vehicle which; 
(1)	Is in a wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, discarded or otherwise inoperable condition; or 
(2)	Does not have affixed thereto an unexpired license plate, and has been parked, stored or left, whether attended or not, upon any public or private property in the city for a period of time in excess of seven (7) days. 
    The term includes any boat which is in a wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, discarded or otherwise inoperable condition. The term does not include any motor vehicle: 
(1)	Enclosed within a building on private property;
(2)	Held in connection with a business enterprise, lawfully licensed by the city on property zoned for a junkyard, vehicle repair facility or a temporary storage facility for repairs not to exceed thirty (30) days; 
(3)	In operable condition specifically adapted or designed for operation on drag strips or raceways; or 
(4)	Retained primarily as an antique collector's item and registered under state law as an antique vehicle. 
    Building nuisance: Any nuisance condition involving a residential or nonresidential structure, including remains from demolition, remains from fire, parts of buildings, part of uninhabitable structures. 
    Enforcing official: Any official of the city police department or any other city employee designated by the mayor as the person to exercise the authority and perform the duties delegated by this article to the enforcing official. For a grass and weed nuisance the enforcing officials may also be any organization (including its employees) or individual with which the city may contact to provide such service. 
    Grass or weed nuisance: Any abundance of overgrown grass or weeds within the city which is injurious to the general public health, safety and general welfare by providing breeding grounds and shelter for rats, mice, snakes, mosquitoes and other vermin, insects and pests; or attaining such heights and dryness so as to constitute serious fire threat or hazard; or bearing wingy or downy seeds, when mature, that cause the spread of seeds and, when breathed, irritation to the throat, lung and eyes of the public; or hiding debris, such as broken glass or metal, which could inflict injury on any person going upon the property; or being unsightly; or any growth of grass or seeds, other than ornamental plant growth, which exceeds twelve (12) inches in height. 
    Improved subdivision: A division of a tract of land or acreage into tracts or parcels, and the improvement thereof by construction of streets, water lines and, where applicable, sewer lines to serve the subdivided property. 
    Natural condition: Uncultivated and unseeded land, still in a state of nature. But any growth on land, once it has been cleared or plowed, is not a natural condition, even though it has not been planted or cultivated by anyone. 
    Nuisance: Anything that unlawfully causes hurt, inconvenience or damage; that class of wrongs that arises from the unreasonable, unwarrantable or unlawful use by a person of such person's own property, either real or personal, or from such person's own improper, indecent, unsightly or unlawful personal conduct, working an obstruction of or injury to the right of another or of the public, and producing material annoyance, inconvenience, discomfort or hurt to another person or to the general public; anything which is injurious to health, or is indecent or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property of another. 
    Owner of property: Includes legal title holder, or lessee, or occupant of property, or agent of legal title holder or lessee, in charge, possession or control of said property. For a building nuisance only, includes any mortgage holder of record. 
(Ord. No. 2-03, § 1, 6-23-03) 
Sec. 13-102. - Nuisance unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or maintain the existence of any nuisance on any property under such person's ownership or control. Property under a person's ownership and control includes those areas referred to in section 13-103. A person with a duty to abate any nuisance is liable for separate and distinct offenses for each day the nuisance is allowed to remain after it has become such person's duty by notice of the enforcing official to abate it. 
(Ord. No. 2-03, § 2, 6-23-03) 
Sec. 13-103. - Duties of owner. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner of any real property located within the city to maintain any grass or weeds growing upon said property in such a manner as not to constitute a nuisance. The duties and obligations of the owner extend to and include any real property situated with a dedicated right-of-way or easement burdening the property, except to the extent that it may be impracticable to do so because of public facilities located thereon. Such rights-of-way and easement must be maintained by the owner in a manner consistent with the maintenance of the owner's remaining property and within the requirements in this article, except to the extent it may be impracticable to do because of public facilities located thereon. 
(Ord. No. 2-03, § 3, 6-23-03) 
Sec. 13-104. - Maintenance practices of city. 
    The dedication and existence of a right-of-way for public road or of an easement for drainage or for public utilities represents the grant of only a limited interest in property and does not change the actual ownership of the property upon which the right-of-way or easement is located. The public authority maintains rights-of-way and easements only to the extent necessary to maintain the public facility and to maintain safety. The owner of the burdened property continues to control the property, except to the extent that such control interferes with the public use. The public authority does not cut grass, weeds and other growth upon rights-of-way or easements, except to the extent necessary for operations and safety purposes. All other maintenance is the responsibility of the owner of the property upon which the right-of-way or easement is located. 
(Ord. No. 2-03, § 4, 6-23-03) 
Sec. 13-105. - Overgrowth. 
    It shall be unlawful and a nuisance, in violation of this article, for the owner of any real property situated within the corporate limits of the city to allow such real property to become overgrown with tall grass, or with any weed or plant such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, cocklebur or other weed of like kind, or any weed or plant bearing wingy or downy seeds, or any weed or plant that is otherwise noxious, dangerous, harmful or poisonous. Overgrown means a height of twelve (12) inches or more. 
(Ord. No. 2-03, § 5, 6-23-03) 
Sec. 13-106. - Debris. 
    An accumulation or storage of debris, refuse, rubbish, brush, used building material, parts of buildings, remains from building demolition, parts of untenantable or uninhabitable structures, used machinery, used tires, used vehicles, parts of vehicles, abandoned vehicles, or any other materials which may provide a breeding place for mosquitoes, harmful insects, rodents or snakes, or is so unsightly as to be offensive to the surrounding area is a nuisance in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2-03, § 6, 6-23-03) 
Sec. 13-107. - Enforcement. 
(a)	Whenever in the opinion of the enforcing official nuisance exists, the official shall order the owner of the property of which the nuisance is located to abate the condition. 
(b)	The enforcing official shall give the owner written notice in person or by first class mail. The notice shall require the owner to comply with this article within the time stated in the notice or to request an administrative hearing before the code enforcement officer or other person designated by the mayor to determine whether there has been a violation. The notice shall apprise the owner of the facts of the alleged nuisance and shall name the particular date, time and place for such hearing if requested. For a building nuisance the notice shall contain the names of all owners and lienholders of the property, a legal description of the property and the nature of the proceeding. 
(c)	The notice shall be sent to that person shown by the records of the county tax collector to have been the last person assessed for payment of ad valorem tax on the property where the nuisance is situated. It shall be the responsibility of that person to promptly advise the enforcing official of any change of ownership or interest in the property. It shall be unlawful to knowingly fail to notify the enforcing official of any such change of ownership or interest. The enforcing official shall cause of copy of each building nuisance notice to be recorded in the office of probate judge. 
(d)	The notice shall also be posted in a conspicuous place on the property, preferably within three (3) feet of an entrance to the building or structure. If there is no entrance or no structure, notice may be posted at any location on the property. 
(e)	The notice shall require the owner to complete abatement of the nuisance within the following periods, provided the enforcing official may stipulate additional time, but in no case more than total of one hundred fifty (150) days: 
(1)	Fourteen (14) days from the date of notice if it is a grass and weed nuisance.
(2)	One hundred twenty (120) days from the date of notice if it is a building nuisance.
(3)	Seven (7) days from the date of notice if it is an abandoned vehicle.
(4)	Thirty (30) days from the date of notice if it is any other type of nuisance including but not limited to, burned structures. 
(Ord. No. 2-03, § 7, 6-23-03; Ord. No. 1-05, 1-10-05) 
Sec. 13-108. - Hearing. 
    A hearing before the code enforcement officer must be requested within five (5) days of the date of the notice by the enforcing official. The enforcing official shall notify the owner by personal service or by first class mail of the determination of the hearing official. If the hearing official determines that a nuisance exists, the owner must comply with the initial order to abate issued by the enforcing official, with such modifications as may be made by the hearing official. 
(Ord. No. 2-03, § 8, 6-23-03) 
Sec. 13-109. - Failure to comply with notice to abate. 
(a)	If the owner fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the notice to abate the nuisance, the enforcing official may proceed to prosecute said person for a violation of provisions of the Code. The enforcing official may issue a summons and complaint to the owner of the property, requiring the owner to appear in municipal court to answer charges for the violation of this article. The summons and complaint shall name the party charged, the address of the property where the alleged violation is located, and the nature of the offense or violation. It shall also apprise the owner of the date, time and place at which to appear for court. The summons and complaint, returnable to municipal court, shall be served on the owner by any enforcing official, who shall forthwith appear and take an oath as to the alleged offense before a judge or magistrate of the municipal court. This provision for the issuance of a summons or complaint to municipal court shall not prevent any enforcing official from appearing before a municipal court judge or magistrate and making oath as to the facts and applying for a warrant with respect to any alleged offense, in lieu of issuing a summons and complaint. 
(b)	All violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by:
(1)	A fine of the minimum sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to the maximum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) 
(2)	Imprisonment in the municipal jail for a term not to exceed six (6) months;
(3)	Both such fine and imprisonment; and
(4)	An order to abate the nuisance.
(c)	The enforcing official may institute the enforcement procedure set forth in paragraph (a) and those set out below. The institution of one procedure does not preclude the subsequent or simultaneous institution of the other procedure, provided the criminal procedure is not used to collect any outstanding civil assessments against the subject property. 
(d)	If the owner fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the notice to abate a grass or weeds nuisance, the enforcing official shall cause the cutting of the offending grass or weeds. A minimum hourly assessment of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) plus total wages paid, value of the use of equipment and materials purchased will be charged by the City of Clanton in the event that the city is required to abate the grass and weed nuisance. The costs incurred by the city shall constitute a special assessment against the land and shall constitute a lien on said property. 
(e)	After the public hearing, the city council may by resolution order the enforcing official to proceed with the work specified in such notice or may order such nuisance demolished or removed, or may find that no nuisance exists. If the owner appears at the public hearing, no further notice or the order of the city council shall be required. If the owner fails to appear, notice of the order of the city council shall be mailed to such person's last known address and shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(f)	Upon the expiration of seven (7) days from the date of the resolution, the enforcing official shall proceed to carry out the decision of the council. 
(Ord. No. 2-03, § 9, 6-23-03; Ord. No. 10-04, 6-14-04) 
Sec. 13-110. - Assessment of cost. 
(a)	Upon completion of the abatement work performed by the city (including work by contractors employed by the city), the enforcing official shall compute the actual expense, including, but not limited to, total wages paid, value of the use of equipment, advertising expenses, postage, materials purchased, which was incurred by the city as a result of such work. An itemized statement of such expenses shall be given by first class mail to the last known address of the owner of the property. This notice shall be sent at least five (5) days in advance of the time fixed by the city council to consider the assessment of the cost against the property. 
(b)	At the time fixed for receiving and considering the statement, the council shall hear the same, together with any objections which maybe raised by the owner whose property is liable to be assessed for the work and thereupon make such modifications in the statement as they deem necessary, after which a resolution may assess the cost. The cost stated in the resolution shall constitute a special assessment against the land and shall constitute a lien on said property. After adoption of the resolution, a copy shall be turned over to the city clerk who shall charge the assessments against the respective lots and parcels of land for municipal purposes. Thereafter said amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal assessment are collected, and shall be subject to same penalties and same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal assessments. 
(c)	The city clerk shall cause a certified copy of the resolution assessing the cost of abatement to be filed for recording in the office of the probate judge. 
(d)	Satisfaction of liens. Upon payment of the itemized accounts arising under this ordinance, any liens or assessments filed hereunder may be marked "satisfied" and "paid in full" by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2-03, § 10, 6-23-03) 
Sec. 13-111. - Construction of article. 
    The article shall be construed to contain all power granted to municipalities under sections; 11-40-10, 11-47-117, 11-47-140, and 11-48-1 through 11-48-106, Code of Alabama, as amended, providing for controlling nuisances, sanitation and good public health and safety conditions, and for assessment of public improvement liens. 
(Ord. No. 2-03, § 11, 6-23-03) 
Secs. 13-112-13-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TOBACCO 

Sec. 13-120. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.] 
(a)	Smoking or smoke or smokeless tobacco shall include the carrying, holding or possession of lighted smoking materials in any form, including, but not limited to, the possession of lighted cigarettes, cigars, pipes and smokeless tobacco products. 
(b)	Public or public place shall include any enclosed or unenclosed area, including, but not limited to, the City Hall, city shops, and city parks used in connection with and under the control of the City of Clanton wherein the city employees are assigned or work. 
(Ord. No. 6-99, § I, 3-22-99; Ord. No. 3-05, § I, 3-28-2005) 
Sec. 13-121. - Offenses. 
(a)	Hereafter and upon the adoption of this article, smoking is prohibited in the City Hall building, city shops, or enclosures used in connection with and under the control of the City of Clanton, except as hereinafter provided. 
(b)	Hereafter and upon the adoption of this article, smoking is prohibited in the city parks, except as hereinafter provided. 
(1)	Clanton City Park. Smoking and smokeless tobacco will be allowed outside the wood-fenced areas at Clanton City Park. For areas at Clanton City Park not enclosed by a wood fence, namely, the football field and baseball/softball fields #4 and #5, smoking and smokeless tobacco will be allowed outside one hundred (100) feet from the bleachers. 
Smoking and smokeless tobacco will be allowed outside the pool facilities. 
There will be no smoking or smokeless tobacco within playground areas. 
(2)	Goosepond Park. No smoking or smokeless tobacco is allowed beyond the bridge entrance. 
(3)	E. M. Henry Park. No smoking or smokeless tobacco is allowed within the fenced areas. 
(Ord. No. 6-99, § II, 3-22-99; Ord. No. 3-05, § II, 3-28-2005) 
Sec. 13-122. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this article do not apply to areas designated as "smoking areas". 
(Ord. No. 6-99, § III, 3-22-99; Ord. No. 3-05, § III, 3-28-2005) 
Sec. 13-123. - Designation of smoking and non-smoking areas. 
    The officers of the city shall within thirty (30) days following the adoption of this article, designate by signs, notices, or other appropriate means posted in conspicuous places, the areas where smoking is permitted and where smoking is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 6-99, § IV, 3-22-99) 
Sec. 13-124. - Penalty. 
    Any person in willful violation of this article or any person who willfully smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited, shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction may be fined not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 6-99, § V, 3-22-99) 
Secs. 13-125-13-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - NOISE CONTROL 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2-07, §§ 1-10, adopted January 22, 2007, set out provisions pertaining to noise control and did not specifically amend the Code, hence inclusion as Article VI, §§ 13-151-13-160 has been at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 13-151. - Short title. 
    This article may be cited as the "Noise Control Ordinance". 
(Ord. No. 2-07, § 1, 1-22-07) 
Sec. 13-152. - Authority. 
    This article is approved and adopted by the Clanton, Alabama in the exercise of its general police powers under the laws of the State of Alabama, specifically including but not limited to Title 11-45-1, et seq., Code of Alabama, 1975. 
(Ord. No. 2-07, § 2, 1-22-07) 
Sec. 13-153. - Purpose. 
    This article is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety, welfare, peace and quiet for the citizens of Clanton, Alabama through the reduction, control and prevention of excessive sound or other noise. It is the intent of this article to establish standards that will eliminate and reduce unnecessary and excessive community sounds or other unreasonable noises which are physically harmful and otherwise detrimental to individuals and the community in the enjoyment of life, property and conduct of business. 
(Ord. No. 2-07, § 3, 1-22-07) 
Sec. 13-154. - Definitions. 
    All technical terminology used in this article shall, for the purpose of this article, have the meanings hereinafter ascribed to them. 
    City means the City of Clanton, Alabama. 
    Commercial area means any area designated for commercial uses under the zoning ordinance of the city. 
    Construction means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration or similar action, but excluding demolition. 
    Demolition means any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces or similar property. 
    Emergency means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action. 
    Emergency work means any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency. 
    Impulsive sound means sound of short duration, usually less than one (1) second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of impulsive sound include explosions, drop forge impacts and the discharge of firearms. 
    Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is propelled or drawn on land by a motor, such as, but not limited to, passenger cars, trucks, truck-trailers, semi-trailers, campers, go-carts, snowmobiles, amphibious craft on land, dune buggies or racing vehicles, but not including motorcycles. 
    Motorcycle means an unenclosed motor vehicle having a seat for the use of the operator and two (2) or three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, including, but not limited to, motor scooters and mini-bikes. 
    Muffler or sound dissipative device means a device for abating the sound of escaping gasses of an internal combustion engine. 
    Noise means any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans. 
    Noise disturbance means any sound which endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals, or annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities, or endangers or injures personal or real property. 
    Person means any individual, association, partnership, corporation or other legal entity. 
    Powered model vehicle means any self-propelled airborne, waterborne or land borne plane, vessel or vehicle, which is not designed to carry persons, including, but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car or rocket. 
    Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk or alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
    Public space means any real property or structures thereon which are owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
    Real property boundary means a line along the ground surface and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person, but not including intrabuilding real property divisions. 
    Residential area means an area designated for any residential use under the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2-07, § 4, 1-22-07) 
Sec. 13-155. - Scope. 
    It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unreasonably loud, disturbing, unnecessary or excessive noise which unreasonably interferes with the comfort, health or safety of others within the jurisdiction of the City of Clanton, Alabama. It shall also be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to permit any such noise to be made in or upon any house or premises owned or possessed by him or under his management or control. 
(Ord. No. 2-07, § 5, 1-22-07) 
Sec. 13-156. - Specific violations. 
    In addition to the general prohibition set out above, the following specific acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing or unnecessary noises and are declared to be in violation of this article; provided, however, that such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive. It is hereby declared a nuisance and shall be unlawful: 
(a)	Music in motor vehicles and pedestrians. 
(1)	To operate or play any radio, musical instrument or similar device whether from a motor vehicle or by a pedestrian in such a manner as to be plainly audible to any person other than the player or operator of the device at a distance of twenty (20) feet in the case of a motor vehicle or thirty (30) feet in the case of a pedestrian. 
(2)	Regardless of any other provision contained in this article or any section thereof, no person, firm or corporation shall operate or play any radio, stereo system, musical instrument or other or similar device which generates any noise or sound from any motor or other vehicle located on or within any public road or right-of-way within the city, at such a sound level or in a manner where same may be detectable by or audible to the normal unaided human ear beyond or outside of the right-of-way boundaries or lines of such public road or right-of-way. 
(b)	Electronic devices and musical instruments. 
(1)	To operate or play any radio, television, phonograph, musical instrument or similar device which produces or reproduces sound whether from a business, residence or other premises in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet to any person in a commercial, residential, multi-family dwelling, professional office building, institutional or public place. 
(2)	Anything contained in this article to the contrary notwithstanding, it is further provided that it is hereby declared a nuisance and shall be unlawful to operate or play any radio, television, musical instrument or similar device or to produce live music, sound or noise in any manner which produces or reproduces sound or noise, whether from a business, residence or any other premises, in such manner as to be plainly audible outside of the real property boundary of such business, residence or other premises between the hours of 10 o'clock p.m. and the following morning at 9 o'clock a.m. 
(3)	Anything contained in this article to the contrary notwithstanding, it is further provided that it is hereby declared a nuisance for any person, firm or corporation to operate or play any radio, musical instrument or similar device or to generate live music, noise or sound, whether from a motor vehicle, a pedestrian or from a commercial or residential premise which may, between the hours of 10 o'clock p.m. and the following morning at 9 o'clock a.m. be heard in such manner as to be plainly audible to any person other than the player or operator of the device, or the provider of said music, or the persons located on the premises from which said music, sound or noise emanates. 
(4)	Anything contained in this article to the contrary notwithstanding, it is further provided that no person, firm or corporation shall transmit or allow to be transmitted any live or electronically produced music or other sound on any property at a sound level which is detectable by the normal unaided human ear beyond the real property boundary of the person, firm, or corporation upon whose property said sound or other noise is emanating from. 
(c)	Blowing horns. To sound any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except as a danger signal when and as required by ordinances of the city or by the Code of Alabama; to create by means of any such signal device of any unreasonable, loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of such device for an unnecessary or unreasonable period of time. The provisions of this section regulating the sounding of a horn or signal device on vehicles shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles while the driver of such vehicle is operating the same in an emergency in the necessary performance of public duties, and when the sounding of such horn or signal device is made as a warning or danger signal. 
(d)	Pets. To keep any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of any ordinary person in the vicinity. 
(e)	Unmuffled engine exhausts. To discharge into the open air the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or motor boat engine, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent the emission of loud or explosive noises therefrom. No person shall operate a motor vehicle which causes excessive noise levels as a result of a defective or modified exhaust system or as a result of an unnecessary rapid acceleration, deceleration, engine revving or tire squealing. 
(f)	Peddlers. etc. To shout or cry by peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(g)	Fireworks. To explode firecrackers, skyrockets, Roman candles, pinwheels or any other form of fireworks, except the display of fireworks in public parks or other open places within the city under a permit issued by the fire marshal, pursuant to the fire prevention code of the city. 
(h)	Use of noisemakers for advertising purposes. To use any drum, pan, pail, bell, horn, trumpet, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention or intended to attract attention to any performance, show or sale or display of merchandise, or for any other advertising purposes; provided, that the provisions of this subsection (h) shall not apply to any type of carillon which is located in or on any premises in the city and is played, operated or sounded so as to cause music or musical notes or a time strike to emanate from such carillon or from amplifiers attached thereto and located in or on the same premises. 
(i)	Calliopes or amplifiers on vehicles. To use calliopes, mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on any vehicles used for advertising or other purposes, except when a permit for such use over a specified route is issued by the mayor and except within the times specified in the permit. 
(j)	Disorderly or unruly conduct. A person violates this article if, with intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, recklessly creating a risk thereof, he or she makes unreasonable noise. 
(k)	Loading and unloading. To load, unload, open, close or other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans or similar objects between the hours of 10 o'clock p.m. and 7 o'clock a.m. the following day in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary. 
(l)	Construction. To operate or permit the operation of any tools or equipment used in construction, drilling or demolition work between the hours of 10 o'clock p.m. and 7 o'clock a.m. the following day on weekdays or at any time on weekends or holidays, such that the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary, except for emergency work or public service utilities. 
(m)	Powered model vehicles. To operate or permit the operation of powered model vehicles so as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary, in a public space or within a noise sensitive zone between the hours of 10 o'clock p.m. and 7 o'clock a.m. the following day. 
(n)	Stationary non-emergency signaling devices. 
(1)	To sound or permit the sounding of any signal from any stationary bell, chime, siren, whistle or similar device, intended primarily for non-emergency purposes, from any place, for more than one (1) minute in any hourly period. 
(2)	Devices used in conjunction with a place of religious worship and educational institutions shall be exempt from the operation of this provision. 
(o)	Domestic power tools. To operate or permit the operation of any mechanically powered saw, sander, drill, grinder, lawn or garden tool, snowblower or similar device used outdoors in residential areas between the hours of 10 o'clock p.m. and 7 o'clock a.m. the following day so as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary. 
(Ord. No. 2-07, § 6, 1-22-07) 
Sec. 13-157. - Exceptions. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit: 
(a)	Special performances by a band or orchestra in a hall, building or in the open air after proper permits have been obtained from the mayor. 
(b)	The ringing of bells or chimes by churches within the city.
(c)	Any noises or sounds produced by radios, sirens or other equipment attached to, or being operated by, any police, fire, rescue or other emergency vehicles or personnel. 
(d)	The conducting of live remote broadcasts by duly licensed radio stations, upon business premises, at the request of the owner of the business. Said live broadcasts shall be limited to daylight hours only. 
(e)	Organized school-related programs, activities and other events are exempt from the terms and provisions of this article. 
(f)	Organized public programs, activities and events and parades or other public programs, activities or events authorized by the mayor are exempt from the terms and provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2-07, § 7, 1-22-07) 
Sec. 13-158. - Fines and punishment. 
    Any person found to be in violation of any section of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or may be imprisoned or sentenced to hard labor for the city for a period not exceeding six (6) months, at the discretion of the court trying the case. The violation of this article or any part thereof on more than one (1) day shall each constitute separate offenses. 
(Ord. No. 2-07, § 8, 1-22-07) 
Sec. 13-159. - Summons and complaint in lieu of arrest warrant. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of § 11-45-9.1 of the 1975 Code of Alabama, as last amended, which authorizes municipalities to issue summons and complaints in lieu of arrest warrants for violation of certain municipal ordinances. 
(a)	That any law enforcement officer of the City of Clanton, Alabama may issue a summons and complaint to any person charged with committing the offense of nuisance-unreasonable noise, in violation of Ordinance Number 2-07 of the City of Clanton, Alabama and release such person from custody upon his or her written promise to appear in court at the designated time and place as evidenced by his or her signature on the summons and complaint. 
(b)	The summons and complaint form, as described in the preceding sub-section, shall be in the same form as the summons and complaint forms presently used by the municipal court of the City of Clanton, Alabama. 
(Ord. No. 2-07, § 9, 1-22-07) 
Sec. 13-160. - Variances and exceptions. 
(a)	The mayor or his designated representative shall have the authority, consistent with this article, to grant special variances and/or exceptions. 
(b)	Any person seeking a special variance and/or exception pursuant to this article shall file an application with the mayor or his designated representative. The application shall contain information regarding the date, time and place where the special variance and/or exception is desired or needed. The applicant shall also include in the application a full and detailed explanation as to why such special variance and/or exception is wanted and/or needed. 
(c)	The special variance and/or exception may be granted by the mayor or his designated representative by notice to applicant in writing containing all necessary conditions including a time limit on the permitted activity. The special variance and/or exception shall not become effective until all conditions are agreed to by the applicant. Noncompliance of any condition of the special variance and/or exception shall terminate it and subject the person holding it to those provisions of this article regulating the source of sound or activity for which the special variance and/or exception was granted. 
(Ord. No. 2-07, § 10, 1-22-07) 
Chapter 14 - PARADES AND DEMONSTRATIONS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, Ch. 4; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 10; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 11; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 18. (Back)
State Law reference- Power of local authorities to regulate the use of the highways by processions or assemblages, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5-1. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1-14-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT 

Sec. 14-26. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade within the corporate limits of the city or the police jurisdiction thereof unless a parade permit has been first obtained from the mayor of the city in accordance with the provisions contained in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 11-1) 
Sec. 14-27. - Exceptions. 
    This article shall not apply to funeral processions or to students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, provided such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities, and shall not apply to government agencies acting within the scope of their functions. 
(Code 1979, § 11-6) 
Sec. 14-28. - Application. 
    Prior to forming, holding, conducting or participating in a parade within the city limits or police jurisdiction of the city, the person conducting the parade shall, not more than ten (10) days and not less than five (5) days prior to the commencement of the parade, first file an application for a permit with the mayor of the city. The application, the permit, when issued, shall disclose to the city the following information: 
(1)	The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade;
(2)	If the parade is proposed to be conducted for and on behalf of any person, the name, address and telephone number of the office, home office or headquarters of the organization; 
(3)	The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade marshal or parade chairman and will be responsible for its conduct; 
(4)	The date and time when the parade is to be conducted;
(5)	The route to be traveled, the starting point, and the terminal point;
(6)	The approximate number of persons who will participate in the parade and the type of vehicles to be used in the parade; 
(7)	The location of the assembly area for such parade;
(8)	The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at the assembly area; and 
(9)	Any additional information which the mayor shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued. 
(Code 1979, § 11-2) 
Sec. 14-29. - Granting; denial. 
(a)	The mayor shall issue a permit to the person applying therefor as provided in this article when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(1)	The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; 
(2)	The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city; 
(3)	The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly area; 
(4)	The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property or to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance; and 
(5)	The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route. 
(b)	The mayor shall act upon the application for a parade permit within two (2) days after the filing thereof. If the mayor disapproves the application, he shall mail a statement to the applicant, within two (2) days after the date on which the application was filed, addressed to the address of the applicant, stating the refusal or denial of the permit. 
(Code 1979, §§ 11-3, 11-4) 
Sec. 14-30. - Authority of mayor to act on late applications. 
    The mayor, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application under this article which is filed less than five (5) days before the date such parade is proposed to be conducted and act on the application as if the application was filed within the time specified in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 11-8) 
Sec. 14-31. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- 
Ord. No. 18-96, adopted Nov. 6, 1996, deleted, in effect repealed, § 14-31, which prohibited issuance of parade permits to be held on Saturdays and derived from § 11-5 of the city's 1979 Code. 
Sec. 14-32. - Carrying of permit during parade. 
    The parade chairman, parade marshal, or the person heading the parade shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Code 1979, § 11-7) 
Chapter 15 - PERSONNEL 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- At the request of the city the provisions of Ord. No. 1-96, Arts. I-XII, adopted Jan. 22, 1996, have been added as a new Ch. 15 to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - INTRODUCTION 

Sec. 15-1. - Established of rules. 
    In accordance with the provisions of Ordinance No. 1-96 of the City of Clanton, the following rules, regulations and other administrative provisions for personnel administration (hereinafter called "rules") are established for the information and guidance of all concerned. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 1(I), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-2. - Applicability of rules. 
    The rules herein established shall apply to all appointed paid employees of the City of Clanton. The personnel clerk has the authority to take appropriate action in dealing with cases of violation of the established rules. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 2(I), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-3. - Dissemination of rules. 
    Department heads will be furnished complete copies of all rules and changes thereto, and shall be responsible for maintaining a complete set of rules, and for bringing these rules to the attention of all employees under their supervision. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 3(I), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-4. - Definitions. 
    Where used within these personnel rules, the following words and terms shall have meaning indicated below: 
    Allocation. The assignment of an individual position to appropriate class of positions on the basis of the kind, difficulty, required skill, and responsibility of the work performed. 
    Anniversary date. One year from date of appointment to permanent full time position and annually thereafter. 
    Appointing authority. The mayor having authority under the laws of the State of Alabama to make appointments to positions. 
    Class, or class of positions. A group of positions sufficiently alike in duties to justify the same class title and range of pay. 
    Class description. A written description of a class of positions containing a title, examples of work performed, required knowledge, skills, and abilities, and qualifications for applicants or incumbents to insure satisfactory performance. 
    Classification. The entire process of assigning and reassigning individuals to positions, positions to classes, and classes to grades to the end that employees will be employed and compensated on the basis of merit, fitness, and actual duties performed so that there may exist equal pay for equal work. 
    Demotions. The change of an employee from a position in one class to a position in another class having a lower pay grade and requiring the performance of less responsible duties. 
    Grade or pay grade. The numerical designation of a fixed salary range assigned to a position, class or group of classes. 
    Merit increases. Advancement in pay of an employee to a higher step in pay grade based upon display of merit in performance in duties and/or requiring a change in basic duties. 
    Merit system. A uniform system of personnel administration and employee recognition which has been adopted by the City of Clanton to recruit, employ, retain, and advance the best qualified persons available. 
    Position description. A detailed written description of the specific duties assigned to and performed by a particular employee to serve as a basis for classification. 
    Probationary period. A working test period (three (3) months for general employees and twelve (12) months for policemen), during which an employee is required to demonstrate by actual performance, his fitness for the duties to which he is appointed, and his general fitness and suitability as a public employee. 
    Promotion. The change of an employee from a position in one class to a position in another class having a higher pay grade and requiring the performance of more responsible duties. 
    Reclassification. The reallocation of a position to a different class of positions based upon substantial change in duties and responsibilities. 
    Regrading. The assignment of a new grade to an entire class of positions. 
    Steps or pay steps. The fixed rates of pay within a pay range authorized for a class of positions assigned to a particular grade, through which an employee may advance, while still performing the same duties. 
    Transfer. The reassignment of an employee to a position in the same pay grade without increase or decrease in rate of pay. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 4(I), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-5. - Administration of personnel. 
    The personnel clerk is responsible for personnel administration within the city government. All matters dealing with personnel shall be routed through the personnel clerk, who shall maintain a complete system of personnel files and records. The policy of the municipality is that all employee hiring, termination, classification, assignment, and promotion shall be based on ability and suitability, and without regard to race, creed, color, religion, or sex. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 5(I), 1-22-96) 
Secs. 15-6-15-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - APPOINTMENT AND PROMOTION 

Sec. 15-21. - General. 
    Appointments and promotions to all classified positions shall be solely on the basis of merit, which shall be determined by evaluation of the applicant's (1) training, education, experience, and physical fitness, (2) oral interview and (3) whenever practical, and examination of demonstration performance test. 
    In compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, the City of Clanton does not discriminate against otherwise qualified individuals with disabilities and recognizes our duty to provide reasonable accommodations to otherwise qualified individuals. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 1(II), 1-22-96) 
Sec 15-22. - Tests. 
    The personnel clerk may establish test or examinations which are warranted to determine whether or not an applicant or employee meets established standards. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 2(II), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-23. - Age. 
    The minimum age for employment as a probationary employee shall be eighteen (18) years of age. The minimum age for employment of seasonal employees shall be sixteen (16) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 3(II), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-24. - Promotion. 
    All vacancies occurring in the classified service shall, whenever possible, be filled by promotion of a qualified employee within the public service. However, the personnel clerk may recruit applicants from outside the public service whenever he/she has reason to believe that better qualified applicants are available than within the public service. Promotion within the public service shall be based on the qualifications of the person being appointed. Usually, the first consideration in filling of vacancies will be given to the most qualified applicant in the department in which the vacancy exist. Next, consideration will be given to the most qualified applicant from outside the department. If no applicant is found within the public service, the vacancy will be filled from outside the public service. The criteria used in the selection of the most qualified applicant shall be based upon experience, performance, evaluation, and where feasible, examination. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 4(II), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 10-25. - Re-employment. 
    Prior to initiating any actions to fill a vacancy from outside the public service the personnel clerk will review the re-employment eligibility list to determine if there are individuals on such list who are qualified for the vacancy. The re-employment list consist of former permanent status classified or part-time service employees who were laid off within the past two (2) years and are otherwise eligible for re-employment to a comparable vacant position. Qualified individuals interested in re-employment should stay in contact with the personnel clerk. If no qualified person is available, the personnel clerk will initiate actions to fill the vacancy from the public service. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 5(II), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-26. - Personnel recruitment. 
    The personnel clerk is responsible for recruiting individuals to fill authorized vacancies. Active recruitment from the general public will be accomplished by: 
(1)	Posting vacancy notices on bulletin boards in the City Hall and advertising in the local newspapers. 
(2)	All notices, or advertisements will provide a description of the position, necessary and desired qualifications, deadline for applying, and the name and address of the contact person. All vacancy notices or advertisements will also contain the statement that "The City of Clanton is an Equal Opportunity employer". 
(3)	All applications will be made on application forms furnished by the personnel clerk. Completed applications will be submitted to the personnel clerk in accordance with the vacancy notice instructions. No application will be considered valid unless received by the personnel clerk by the application deadline. 
(4)	Any requirement for examinations and/or performance test to be used in establishing an applicant's qualification for a vacancy will be established by the city council. Required testing will be held in the City Hall, except for special circumstances which are approved by the council. All testing will conform with applicable laws and guidelines that pertain to job relatedness. 
(5)	The council or personnel clerk may refuse to examine or interview, or after examination or interview, refuse to refer the name of anyone who is found to lack any of the established job-related requirements for the position for which he/she in applying, or anyone who has been convicted, within the past five years, of any crime involving moral turpitude, or is under indictment for any crime, or anyone who has been guilty of any infamous or disgraceful conduct, or anyone who has been dismissed from the public service for delinquency material fact or attempted to practice any deception or fraud in his/her application or in his/her examination. 
(6)	The personnel clerk will review each application to insure that it is complete. All complete applications for a vacancy will be reviewed for selection of the best qualified individual. 
(7)	All applications received in response to a vacancy notice that meet the required qualifications for the vacant position will remain active until the selected applicant has completed the required probationary period. If the selected applicant does not complete the required probationary period, the vacancy will be filled from the remaining qualified applicants. If no qualified applications remain on file, the vacancy will be advertised again. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 6(II), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-27. - Selection. 
    Selection for vacancies will be made by the city council. Each selection will be based on the knowledge, skills and abilities determined to be the required and/or desired job related qualifications for the job without regard to age, sex, creed, religion, race, political affiliation, or handicap (except where age, sex, or handicap constitute a bona fide occupational qualification). Reasonable accommodations for handicapped individuals who are otherwise qualified will be made, when practical. 
(1)	The personnel clerk and supervisor of the department may hold interviews with the top applicants. All interview results will be recorded on interview forms provided by the personnel clerk. If an applicant cannot be located to establish an interview time, the applicant will be passed over. 
(2)	Appropriate inquiries of former employers and selected personnel references, when required, shall be made by the personnel clerk only for an applicant who has been designated as being tentatively acceptable. If agreeable to the applicant, inquiries may also be made to the applicant's present employer. 
(3)	After all interviews and/or inquiries have been completed, the personnel clerk will notify the appointing authority in writing of the name of the top applicants to the city council for final selection. The city council will be provided all qualified applications, if requested. The city council will insure that their selection is made on a nondiscriminatory basis and is in keeping with established guidelines for equal treatment of all groups of people and the provisions of these policies and procedures. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 7(II), 1-22-96; Ord. No. 10-01, 11-7-01) 
Sec. 15-28. - Probationary period. 
    Each general employee receiving an appointment of a promotion to a position in the classification service must serve a probationary period of three (3) months before the individual's appointment or promotion shall be considered full-time. Probationary periods for policemen shall be twelve (12) months upon appointment and six (6) months upon promotion. During the employee's probationary period, the employee's work habits, abilities, attitude, promptness and other pertinent characteristics will be observed and evaluated by a supervisor, department head and other appropriate officials. If the probationary employee fails to meet required standards of performance, employment will be terminated, or if the individual is a promoted regular employee, the individual may be restored to the classification and position from which he was promoted or to a comparable position. Termination or demotion will be conditional, subject to review and approval of the appointing authority. 
(1)	Termination. If at any time during the probationary period the supervisor or department head determines that the services of the employee have been unsatisfactory, the employee may be terminated from his/her position, provided such termination is approved by his appointing authority. The appointing authority shall notify the employee in writing at least seven (7) calendar days before the effective date of separation. The appointing authority may, however, issue one week's severance pay in lieu of termination notice. 
(2)	Probationary reports. At least ten (10) days prior to the end of each employee's probationary period, the department head shall complete a probationary report and notify the appointing authority in writing that either (a) the employee has successfully completed his probationary period and shall hence forth be considered a regular employee with all rights and privileges due him; (b) the employee has not progressed as desired but it is recommended that his/her probationary status be extended for an additional ninety (90) days. At the expiration of the ninety (90) day extended probation, action must be taken to grant employee status, terminate the employee or in the case of promotion probation status, return the employee to the classification from which promoted or (c) the employee has not demonstrated ability to perform satisfactory duties of the position and is to be separated from employment, or a similar classification. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 8(II), 1-22-96; Ord. No. 10-01, 11-7-01) 
Sec. 15-29. - Relatives in the local government service. 
    Two (2) or more members of an immediate family shall not be employed under the same supervisor; neither shall two (2) members of an immediate family be employed at the same time, regardless of the administrative department if such employment will result in an employee supervising a member of his immediate family. This policy applies to promotions, demotions, transfers, reinstatement and new appointments. The provisions of this section shall not be retroactive, and no action is taken concerning those members of the same family employed at the adoption of this section. Immediate family is defined as wife, husband, mother, father, brother, sister, son, daughter, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, grandparents, grandchildren, stepmother, stepfather, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, uncle, and aunt. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 9(II), 1-22-96) 
Secs. 15-30-15-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CLASSIFICATION OF POSITIONS 

Sec. 15-41. - Classification plan. 
    A classification plan shall be established and maintained and filed within the office of the personnel clerk. No deviation shall be made from the classification plan. Where circumstances warrant, the plan itself or the classification of a particular position or class of positions may be amended by the municipal governing body. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 1(III), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-42. - Position descriptions. 
    Where a new position is created, departments shall furnish a tentative description of expected duties prior to employment to aid in the recruitment and the initial classification of that employee. The personnel clerk shall furnish within thirty (30) days after employment a position description of any changes in duties performed by new employee, and shall furnish new or supplementary position description whenever these duties change. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 2(III), 1-22-96) 
Secs. 15-43-15-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PAY OF EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 15-61. - Pay plan. 
    The pay of all employees, other than whose pay is fixed by the municipal governing body, is established by the pay plan for the class of position in which they are employed. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 1(IV), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-62. - Pay steps. 
    For each class of positions, a pay grade is assigned, and for each class of positions within that grade a number of pay steps are provided. Initial employment is normally at the first pay step of the range but in exceptional circumstances based upon experience or unusual qualifications of any applicant, and with the prior approval of the municipal governing body, an employee may be hired in a higher step. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 2(IV), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-63. - Promotion. 
    The pay of an employee promoted to a position of higher grade may be adjusted to that step in the new pay grade which is next higher than the former rate of pay. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 3(IV), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-64. - Pay and allowances. 
    Rates of pay established are gross and total compensation for full time service in the various classifications. The hours of work for full time service are established by the pay plan, although the appointing authority shall fix hours of work for employee and offices. Rates of pay establish provide full compensation for whatever hours may be reasonable required in all classes of positions, and no position shall be subject to additional compensation as a result of any reasonable variation in hours worked. The appointing authority may authorize pay for overtime work in emergencies or other unusual occasions beyond reasonable requirements of hours worked. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 4(IV), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-65. - Overtime. 
    The standard work week shall be established by the appointing authority. Department heads should work those hours necessary to assure the satisfactory performance of their department, but not less than forty (40) hours per week. The department head shall assign to each employee regular duties and responsibilities which can normally be accomplished within the established work day and work week. However, occasionally some overtime work may be necessary for proper performance of work duties and responsibilities. When department heads (who are paid hourly wages) or regular classified employee are required to work extra or prolonged shifts, they shall receive overtime pay equal to one and one-half (1/2) normal pay rate. 
(1)	Overtime-Compensatory time. Salaried employees who are required to work on a holiday, or who must participate in special overtime duties not included in their regular work program may be granted compensatory time off in lien of compensation. On occasions where the performance of normal duties require overtime work neither compensation nor compensatory time off may be granted. Any program of overtime work to be compensated by time off must have the prior approval of the appointing authority. 
(2)	Overtime holiday. Eligible employees will be paid holiday pay at their normal daily rate of pay for each authorized paid holiday. However, a paid holiday will not be counted as hours worked during a workweek/work period unless the employee actually works on the holiday. Those eligible employees who actually work the holiday will in addition to receiving their holiday pay, be paid their regular rate of pay for all hours worked on the holiday, or scheduled to take time off for the holiday as determined by their appointing authority. If the time worked causes the employees total hours worked for the workweek/work period to exceed the regular hours of work for the workweek/work period overtime pay or compensatory time off will be provided. 
(3)	[Public safety workers; salaried employees.] In lieu of the foregoing, where necessary, and in replacement thereof, where necessary, employees categorized as full-time public safety workers, i.e., police, fire, EMS, and communication officers, will be compensated overtime one and one-half (1.5) of normal hourly rate, based upon the Fair Labor Standards Act 207k, for one hundred seventy-one (171) hours in a twenty-eight-day pay cycle or after eighty-five and one-half (85.5) hours for police/communications and two hundred twelve (212) hours in a twenty-eight-day cycle for fire/EMS. Those that hold department head status, i.e., police chief, deputy chief, assistant chief, major, captain, and certain lieutenants (that hold straight administrative functions), will be considered salaried employees. Those employees that hold salaried status will work all the hours required to ensure the satisfactory performance of their departments or divisions, but shall not work less that forty (40) hours per week. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 5(IV), 1-22-96; Ord. No. 9-10, 10-11-2010) 
Sec. 15-66. - Pay for part-time employment. 
    Whenever and employee, not on leave with pay, works for less than regularly established number of hours per day, days per week, or weeks per month, suitable entry shall be made on the payroll, and the amount paid shall be proportionate to the time actually worked. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 6(IV), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-67. - Deductions on termination. 
    On termination of employment the municipality shall deduct and withhold from the final paycheck of any employee unreturned equipment, or any other indebtness to the municipality, and the final paycheck shall not be issued until determined and cleared. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 7(IV), 1-22-96) 
Secs. 15-68-15-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EMPLOYEE VACATION AND SICK LEAVE 

Sec. 15-81. - General policy. 
    The following types of leaves are officially established: Holidays, annual leave, sick leave, bereavement leave, civil leave, and leave without pay. All departments are required to maintain records of absences of their employees. No part-time employee shall be eligible for the leaves enumerated herein. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 1(V), 1-22-96; Ord. No. 12-01, 12-20-01) 
Sec. 15-82. - Holidays. 
    The following and such other days as the city council proclaims are holidays for all employees except emergency and part-time employees: New Year's Day, Martin Luther King's Birthday, (3rd Monday in January), July 4th, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Friday following Thanksgiving day, Christmas Eve and Christmas Day, Veterans Day, Memorial Day. 
(1)	Full-time employees: It shall be the policy of the City Council to ensure that all full-time employees enjoy the same number of holidays in a particular year which will be celebrated by full-time employees working [a] forty-hour week, Monday through Friday. For this group, when a holiday falls on a Saturday, it shall be celebrated on the preceding Friday. When a holiday falls on Sunday, the following Monday shall be observed as a holiday. For full-time employees on a work week other than Monday through Friday the city council shall designate the work day that shall be observed as a holiday. 
(2)	Holidays on scheduled work days: Employees who are required to work on the observed holiday shall be granted a work day of leave. 
(3)	Eligibility for holiday pay: In order to receive pay for an observed holiday, an employee must not have been absent without leave either on the work day before or after the holiday. 
(4)	Overtime for holidays: See section 15-65(2). 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 2(V), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-83. - Annual leave. 
    Annual vacation is to be provided as follows: 
(1)	Each employee shall receive annual leave at the rate of one day per month or twelve (12) days per year. Accumulation of annual leave will begin on the first day of employment. 
(2)	The annual vacation leave days are to be accumulated during a calendar year, with a maximum carry-over of ten (10) days each January 1st. Salary in lieu of vacation time will be paid. 
(1)	Separation and reinstatement: Employees dismissed for incompetence or inefficiency not involving personal misconduct will also receive all earned annual leave. All earned annual leave of employees who die while employed shall be paid cash to the spouse or the estate of said employee. Should any employee quit for any reason other than leave of absence and is re-employed, he will be counted as a new employee. 
(4)	Annual leave must be taken at the convenience of the department except in the case of sickness. 
(5)	Emergency employees are not eligible for annual leave. Example: Park summer employees and anyone working less than forty (40) hours per week. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 3(V), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-84. - Sick leave. 
(a)	Sick leave may be accumulated from year to year at the rate of one-half (1/2) day per month worked and may be accumulated not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) days. 
    Sick leave may be used for illness of employee or to attend to ill member of employee's immediate family. Employee applying for sick leave must furnish a doctor's certificate in event of absence in excess of three days. No advance sick leave will be allowed without prior approval of the city council. If an employee is sick beyond the number of days accumulated, he may use his accumulated annual vacation leave; however sick leave cannot be used as a vacation. 
(b)	Employees are expected to notify his/her superior one hour or more before starting time of inability to report to work. If employee retires on social security or city retirement plan, he shall be paid one-half (1/2) of total sick leave days earned or not to exceed seventy-five (75) days on special permission of the governing body. 
    If an employee is separated from the city for reason of personal misconduct or quits his job with the city voluntarily, the employee is not entitled to receive sick leave pay and the same is not transferred to pay. 
(c)	Workmens compensation: For absences for which workmen's compensation benefits are received, the employee may choose between receiving only his workmen's compensation benefits in which case no sick leave will be deducted or receiving his regular salary and turning in his workmen's compensation check to the city clerk and have the difference between his regular salary and the workmen's compensation check deducted from sick leave. 
    The personnel clerk and department heads are authorized to take all necessary steps to prevent abuses, to include dispatching a nurse or physician to verify illness, or to require a medical examination as evidence of physical condition. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 4(V), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-85. - Bereavement leave. 
    The classified employees will be credited with three (3) working days of leave for the death of an immediate family member, provided they occur on a scheduled work day. A work day will calculated at eight (8) hours. The three (3) days are considered to be a day before, the day of, and the day after the funeral. If an employee is notified of the death on a scheduled work day and is released from his duties, a sick leave day will be credited for that day. Any additional time that an employee requests after the bereavement leave has been exhausted will be against the employee annual leave, if available and will be granted as departmental schedules permit. Immediate family members will be considered to be: Wife, husband, daughter, son, brother, sister, mother, father, mother-in-law, son-in-law, father-in-law, grandparents, grandchildren, stepmother, step-father, brother-in-law, sister-in-law. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 5(V), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-86. - Military leave. 
    Military leave means training and service duty performed by an inductee, enlisted or reservists, or any entrant into a temporary component of the armed forces of the United States, to include time spent in reporting and returning from such training in service or, if rejection occurs, from the place of reporting for service. It also includes active duty training as a reservist in the armed forces of the United States or as a member of the National Guard of the United States. 
(1)	Eligibility. Any full-time employee who has completed his probationary period and who leaves the classified service for compulsory military duty shall be placed on military leave without pay; such leave to extend through a date of ninety (90) days after his release from the classified service. Also, a full-time employee who has completed his probationary period shall be granted a leave of absence for the purpose of being inducted or otherwise entering military service. If not accepted for such duty, the employee shall be reinstated in his position without loss of status or reduction pay. 
(2)	Restoration. An employee returning from military leave shall be entitled to restoration to his former position, providing he makes application within ninety (90) days after his release from duty and is physically and mentally capable of performing the duty involved. 
(3)	Disposition of pay and sick leave. A regular employee who leaves the service directly for such military leave without pay may elect to be paid for any accrued vacation as he may be entitled to if he were actually separated from the service. If the employee elects not to be paid for such leave, the accrued leave credit shall be reinstated upon return of the employee. Employees returning to duty under this provision shall have unused sick leave credits restored for their use. 
(4)	Any employee who is a member of the National Guard of Alabama or reserve officer or enlisted man in the Army or Navy or Marine Corps or Air Force reserve shall be granted leave of absence with pay for the purpose of attending an encampment of such organization for training when so ordered by military authority. The maximum military leave with pay shall not exceed twenty-one (21) days in any calendar year. (refer to: title 35, Section 185(13)(a) Code of Alabama 1958, recompiled as amended). 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 6(V), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-87. - Leave without pay. 
    The governing body may grant leaves without pay for a period not to exceed one year when it is in the interest of the local government to do so. At the expiration of the leave without pay, the employee has the right to, and shall be reinstated to, the position he vacated if the position still exists, or, if not, to any other vacant position in the same class. Approved leave without pay shall not constitute a break in service. 
(1)	Unexplained absences. Unexplained absences shall not be compensable nor charged as paid leave time. Leave of any category in excess of that authorized shall be charged as leave without pay and deduction made from pay for that period. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 7(V), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-88. - Educational leave. 
    The appointing authority may grant leave with or without pay, at his discretion for an employee to further his education when it is in the best interest of the City of Clanton. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 8(V), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-89. - Official duty leave. 
    An employee who is absent from work while on official business for the municipality, or while participating in training courses to which he has been assigned by the municipality, or while attending professional conferences and meetings authorized by the appointing authority, shall be granted leave with full pay without charge against annual leave. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 9(V), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-90. - Civil leave. 
    An employee called for service on a jury may be granted leave with full pay for the duration of the period for which called, unless released earlier, without charge against annual leave (not to exceed one week per year). 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 10(V), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-91. - Leave records. 
    All leave records shall be maintained by the personnel clerk and filed in the employee's personnel file. Leave slips to cover sick leave shall be prepared on the day of return. All other leave slips shall be prepared in advance. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 11(V), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-92. - Office hours. 
    Normal office hours are a nine (9) hour day. Where activities of a particular department require some other schedule to meet work load, the appointing authority may authorize a deviation from the normal schedule. A maximum of one hour is permitted for lunch and such time shall be considered noncompensable. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 12(V), 1-22-96) 
Secs. 15-93-15-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS 

Sec. 15-111. - Group health insurance. 
    After ninety (90) days of employment with the City of Clanton, the city will assume a determined amount (which is set by the governing body) of the payment of health insurance. No part-time employee shall be eligible for group health insurance. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 1(VI), 1-22-96; Ord. No. 12-01, 12-20-01) 
Sec. 15-112. - Social security. 
    The City of Clanton will follow routine procedures concerning Social Security on all employees. 
(Ord. No. 1-96, § 2(VI), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-113. - Retirement. 
    Each person employed full-time is required to join the Employee's Retirement System of Alabama. No part-time employee shall be eligible therefor, unless otherwise qualified. 
(Ord. No. 01-96, § 3(VI), 1-22-96; Ord. No. 12-01, 12-20-01) 
Sec. 15-114. - Workmen's compensation. 
    Each person is covered under Workmen's Compensation. 
(Ord. No. 01-96, § 4(VI), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-115. - Supplementary training program. 
    The city recognizes that improved skills and capabilities of its employees can be valuable from the viewpoint of both city and employee. Consequently, it is the city's policy to aid its employees to improve themselves through professional educational programs, seminars, workshops, and conference at the discretion of the governing body. 
(1)	Eligibility. All full-time employees will be eligible to attend programs for professional improvement. 
(2)	Approved courses. A program may be eligible if, in the opinion of the appointing authority it will either: 
a.	Improve the employee's ability to perform his present job, or
b.	Help prepare the employee for a job with the city which will demand a higher level of responsibility and/or skill. 
(3)	Financial consideration. The city may pay the cost of tuition, registration fee, books, and laboratory fees, travel, and meals, and lodging away from home. 
(Ord. No. 01-96, § 5(VI), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-116. - Physical examination for police officers. 
    All police officers now in the employment of the City of Clanton and all police officers hereafter employed by said city and on the anniversary date of said employment submit themselves to a physical examination by a qualified doctor of medicines to determine their physical fitness for the employment in which they are engaged by said city, including, but not limited to, a heart examination (EKG); heart rate; blood pressure; cholesterol count; optical, including sight and color blindness; ear and hearing and weight. 
(1)	The doctor giving the physical examination shall be designated by the city. The officer subject to the examination shall not be required to be examined by the doctor so designated, but may select a doctor of his own choice. 
(2)	In the event that the officer selects the doctor designated by the city, the expense of the examination shall be paid by the city and in the event that the officer selects a doctor of his own choice, the expense of the examination must be paid by the said officer. 
(3)	The doctor making the examination of said officer shall submit his report directly to the Chief of Police of the City of Clanton, together with a certificate to the effect: 
a.	That the officer is physically qualified to perform service as a police officer for the city. 
b.	That the officer is not physically qualified to perform his services as a police officer for the city. 
c.	That the officer is not physically qualified to perform his services as a police officer for the city; but, in the opinion of the doctor, the physical difficulty can be corrected within a period of three (3) months. 
d.	If the officer fails to qualify physically, the examining doctor shall direct a re-examination within period of three months to determine the question whether the officer then is physically fit to perform his duties as an officer for said city. All further examinations, treatments, corrections or other medical related matters following the re-examination be at officer's expense and the officer's responsibility. 
(4)	The height and weight of each officer shall be within ten (10) percent of the normal height-weight-age proportions accepted as normal by the examining doctor. 
(5)	The results of the examination, the re-examination and all subsequent examinations or medical reports, when received, shall be given to the personnel clerk and shall be made a part of the officer's personnel file, together with the certificate of the examining doctor, certifying that the officer is or is not physically capable of performing as a police officer. 
(Ord. No. 01-96, § 6(VI), 1-22-96) 
Secs. 15-117-15-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - IN-SERVICE TRAINING 

Sec. 15-131. - In-service training. 
    Department heads shall be responsible for developing the skills of their employees through in-service training, for investigating training programs outside the city government and referring municipal employees to those programs; and for making recommendations on whether the municipality should pay for such training. 
(Ord. No. 01-96, § 1(VII), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-132. - Working conditions; foremanship. 
    Department heads shall be held responsible for providing suitable and adequate working conditions within their means, and for making recommendations for correction not within their means of any conditions not suitable or adequate. Department heads shall further be held responsible for those matters normally associated with foremanship, such as providing employee safety training, handling employee complaints, explaining employee benefits and personnel systems, and development of employee morale and effectiveness. 
(Ord. No. 01-96, § 2(VII), 1-22-96) 
Secs. 15-133-15-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - RETIREMENT 

Sec. 15-151. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- 
Ord. No. 4-02, adopted April 8, 2002, repealed § 15-151 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to normal retirement age as adopted by Ord. No. 01-96, adopted Jan. 22, 1996. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 156-152. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- 
Ord. No. 4-02, adopted April 8, 2002, repealed § 15-152 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to physical requirements beyond normal retirement age as adopted by Ord. No. 01-96, adopted Jan. 22, 1996. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 15-153. - [Honorable service; twenty years or more.] 
    Any person who, at the time of his or her retirement, is employed by the City of Clanton Police Department and who retires after twenty (20) years or more of honorable service, shall receive, as part of his or her retirement benefits, without cost to said retiring officer, his or her badge and pistol. 
(Ord. No. 04-2001, 5-23-01) 
Sec. 15-154. - [Award of badge for officer killed in the line of duty.] 
    Any police officer of the City of Clanton who is killed in the line of duty shall have provided to the deceased officer's survivor, as determined by the deceased officer's department head, the badge which was assigned to said officer at the time of his or her death. 
(Ord. No. 04-2001, 5-23-01) 
Sec. 15-155. - Disability at retirement. 
    Any police officer of the City of Clanton who is deemed disabled, and eligible for retirement as a result of any injury received by said officer in the line of duty, shall be provided by the City of Clanton at no cost to such officer a retirement badge such as is provided to regularly retired officers with twenty (20) years or more service. 
(Ord. No. 04-2001, 5-23-01) 
Secs. 15-156-15-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - EMPLOYEE COMPLAINT OR GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE 

Sec. 15-171. - Purpose. 
(a)	To insure employees a procedure by which their complaints can be considered rapidly, fairly, and without reprisal. 
(b)	To encourage the employee to express himself about the conditions of work as they affect him as an employee. 
(c)	To promote better understanding of policies, practices, and procedures which affect employees. 
(d)	To instill confidence in employees that personnel actions are taken in accord with established, fair and uniform policies and procedures. 
(e)	To develop in supervisors a greater sense of responsibility in their dealings with employees. 
(Ord. No. 01-96, § 1(IX), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-172. - Definition. 
    A grievance is a complaint, view or feeling that insufficient consideration or unfair treatment has been given to an individual or group within a department pertaining to employment conditions, to relationships between an employee and his supervisor or to relationships of an employee and other employees. 
(Ord. No. 01-96, § 2(IX), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-173. - Grievance policy. 
(a)	Purpose. The most effective accomplishment of the work the of municipality requires prompt consideration and equitable adjustment of the employee grievances. It is the desire of the municipality to adjust the cause of grievances informally, and both supervisors and employees are expected to make every effort to resolve problems as they arise. 
(Ord. No. 01-96, § 3(IX), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-174. - Grievance procedures. 
(a)	Within seven (7) calendar days after an employee knows, or should have known, of an alleged violation or misapplication of a city personnel rule, regulation or procedure, the employee must submit his grievance to his immediate supervisor for initial settlement. 
(1)	The supervisor will provide the employee an answer with in five (5) calendar days of this initial meeting. 
(2)	A record is not required to be made of this discussion. However, if the supervisor does make a written record, a copy of such record will be provided the personnel clerk for inclusion in the employee's personnel file. The employee will also be provided a copy of the record. 
(b)	Upon receipt of the supervisor's decision, or non-response, or when the employee is appealing a disciplinary action taken against him/her, the employee may file a written petition to the city personnel clerk. The employee will address the written petition to the personnel clerk and deliver it to the clerk within five (5) calendar days from the supervisor's decision or non-response. 
(1)	The personnel clerk may confer with the employee, the appointing authority, and any other affected city officer and/or official. 
(2)	A copy of this petition and reply from the personnel clerk will be included in the employee's personnel file. 
(3)	The written petition will contain as a minimum the following information:
a.	A statement of the rules, regulations or procedures that have been violated or misapplied with the dates and description of such violation or misapplication; or, the disciplinary action that is being appealed; 
b.	The specific remedy which is being sought;
c.	Previous supervisory decisions, if any;
(c)	Upon receipt of the personnel clerk's decision, or non-response, the employee may appeal to the City of Clanton Personnel Board. 
(1)	Within five (5) days after the personnel clerk's decision, or none response the employee may file a written appeal to the City of Clanton Personnel Board. The petition will contain the same information as in subsection (b)(3) and should be addressed to the chairman of the personnel board and delivered to the personnel clerk. 
(d)	Upon the hearing of said appeal the board will receive all evidence in support of the action and any evidence of other facts offered by such employee against such action. 
(e)	The hearing will be informally conducted and governed by rules of practice and procedure adopted by the board. The board will not be bound by the technical rules of evidence. The board will hear the employee's appeal, gather pertinent documents, interview witnesses as necessary, and prepare a written statement of facts. The employee and his/her supervisor and/or appointing authority will each have the right to appear before the board with reasonable representation of their choice, it they so desire. The board may continue the hearing from time to time as may be necessary. 
(f)	At the conclusion of the hearing, the board will render a recommendation to the governing body that either: 
(1)	Affirms the action taken, if it is reasonably satisfied that the action taken was lawful, proper, and/or not too severe; 
(2)	Reverses the action taken, if it is reasonably satisfied that the action taken was not lawful or proper; 
(3)	Modifies the action taken and prescribes a lesser penalty or action, if the board is reasonably satisfied that the employee should be subject to some penalty or action, but the penalty or action was too severe. If the board's recommendation reduces the severity of the action taken against the employee, the board may provide in its recommendation that the employee be reinstated with or without pay for his/her lost time. 
(g)	Within ten (10) calendar days of the receipt of the recommendations of the personnel board, the municipal governing body shall make the final determination in the case. The decision of the municipal governing body shall be final. If the municipal governing body fails to take action within ten (10) calendar days or the receipt of the recommendations of the personnel board, the recommendations of the personnel board shall be final. 
(h)	The board may be represented by the city attorney. The attorney will perform such duties as the board may direct and/or require. Any compensation paid said attorney will be paid by the governing body from the general fund. 
(i)	Forms to used in grievance procedures will be made available by the personnel clerk.
(Ord. No. 01-96, § 4(IX), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-175. - Protection. 
    No employee shall be disciplined or discriminated against in any way because of his proper use of the grievance procedure. 
(Ord. No. 01-96, § 5(IX), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-176. - Grievance procedure for complaints prohibited by the Americans With Disabilities Act. 
(a)	A complaint should be filed in writing or verbally, contain the name and address of the person filing it, and briefly describe the alleged violation of the regulations. 
(b)	A complaint should be filed within seven (7) days after the complainant becomes aware of the alleged violation. 
(c)	An investigation, as may be appropriate, will follow a filing of a complaint. The investigation will be conducted by the community development director. These rules contemplate informal but thorough investigations, affording all interested persons and their representatives, if any, an opportunity to submit evidence relevant to a complaint. 
(d)	A written determination as to the validity of the complaint and a description of the resolution, if any, will be issued by the community development director and a copy forwarded to the complainant no later than ten (10) days after filing. 
(e)	The Section 504/ADA coordinator will maintain the files and records of the City of Clanton relating to the complaints filed. 
(f)	The complainant can request a reconsideration of the case in instances where he or she is dissatisfied with the resolution. The request for reconsideration should be made within seven (7) days to the mayor. The mayor and council will hear the employee's grievance, gather pertinent documents, interview witnesses as necessary and prepare a written statement of fact. Within ten (10) working days of the hearing, the mayor and council will make the final determination in the case. 
(g)	The right of a person to a prompt and equitable resolution of the filed complaint will not be impaired by the person's pursuit of other remedies such as the filing of a Section 504 or ADA complaint with the responsible federal department or agency. Using this grievance procedure in [is] not a prerequisite to the pursuit of other remedies. 
(h)	These rules will be construed to protect the substantive rights of interested persons, meet appropriate due process standards and assure that the City of Clanton complies with the ADA, section 5-4 and their implementing regulations. 
    Complaints should be addressed to: 
Community Development Director 
P.O. Box 580 
Clanton, Al. 35046 
Telephone (205) 755-6840 
E-mail: obie@hiwaay.net 
(Ord. No. 5-02, 4-8-02) 
Editor's note- 
Ord. No. 5-02, adopted April 8, 2002, was not specifically amendatory of the Code and has been added as § 15-176 at the editor's discretion. 
Cross reference- Discrimination and Sexual Harassment, Ch. 2, art. V. 
Secs. 15-177-15-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - CONDUCT, WORK HABITS, ATTITUDE 

Sec. 15-191. - General. 
    It shall be the duty of each employee to maintain high standards of conduct, cooperation, efficiency in their work for the local government. When ever work habits, attitude, production or personal conduct of any employee falls below the established standard, supervisors should point out the deficiencies at the time they are observed. Corrections and suggestions should be presented in a constructive and helpful manner in an effort to elicit the cooperation and goodwill of the employee. Whenever possible, oral and/or written warnings with sufficient time for improvement shall precede formal discipline. Copies of all written warnings shall be furnished to the personnel clerk for inclusion in the employee's personnel file. 
(Ord. No. 01-96, § 1(X), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-192. - Discipline policy. 
    It shall be the duty of all public employees to comply with and to assist in carrying into effect the provisions of the personnel rules and regulations. No employee shall be disciplined except for violation of established rules and regulations; and such discipline shall be in accordance with procedures established by the personnel rules and regulations. 
(a)	Employee's and supervisor's responsibilities. 
(1)	It is the duty of every employee to attempt to correct any faults in his performance when called to his attention and to make every effort to avoid conflict with the City of Clanton rules and regulations. 
(2)	It is the duty of every supervisor to discuss improper or inadequate performance with the employee in order to correct the deficiencies and to avoid the need to exercise disciplinary action. Discipline shall be, whenever possible, of an increasingly progressive nature, the step of progression being (a) reprimand (b) suspension, (c) demotion, (d) removal. 
(b)	Grounds for action. The following are declared to be grounds for reprimanding, suspending demoting or removing any full-time employee. Offenses are grouped with a summary of the recommended disciplinary actions, for each group. These offenses and actions, as described, are neither all inclusive nor automatic. Supervisors are permitted, and expected, to treat individuals situations according to the circumstances and facts involved. 
(1)	Group one offenses. 
a.	Such offenses include, but are not limited to, the situations listed below:
1.	Failure to give proper notice of an absence which could be anticipated;
2.	Irregular attendance and/or excessive absenteeism; "Excessive absenteeism is defined as taking time off without accrued or approved leave"; 
3.	Tardiness (not at his/her assigned work station at the beginning of the first hour of the employee's work day). 
4.	Interfering with the work of others to include offensive personal habits which interfere with efficient operations; 
5.	Excessive inefficiency to include waste, loafing leaving the work area without permission, excessive time for break, and defective workmanship; 
6.	Violation of normal safety practices to include failure to report a work related accident or injury and accident proneness; 
7.	Improper use and/or care of City property;
8.	Misconduct to include lack of cooperation, contravention of civil law, and any disgraceful conduct which reflects unfavorably on the City as an employer; 
9.	Willful and/or repeated failure to honor court judgements;
10.	Promiscuous behavior as related to job duties;
11.	Similar violations that meet the intended definition for group one offense.
(2)	Summary of recommended disciplinary actions for group one offenses. 
a.	First offense-Formal counseling.
b.	Second offense-Written warning.
c.	Third offense-Final written warning or suspension without pay or dismissal as appropriate. A suspension without pay dismissal will require a due process hearing be held by the appointing authority prior to the effective date of the action. 
(3)	Group two offenses. 
a.	Such offenses include, but are not limited to, the situations below:
1.	Possession and/or use of alcohol, unprescribed dangerous drugs, or similar intoxicants while on city property or on the job (employees other that law enforcement personnel in the line of duty); 
2.	Operating a city vehicle or city equipment while under the influence of intoxicants such as alcohol, unprescribed dangerous drugs, and/or prescribed drugs which induce an unsafe mental and/or physical state. 
3.	Loss of a driver's license and/or driving privileges by due process of law, when the employee's job requires the operation of a motor vehicle in the performance of his/her duties; 
4.	No employee of the City of Clanton shall be permitted to bring onto any city property or into any city vehicle any pistol, gun, or firearm of any description or any deadly weapon other than law enforcement personnel in the line of duty. 
5.	Falsifications of records and/or personal misrepresentation of statements given to a supervisor, official, the public, or the personnel board; 
6.	Dishonesty as related to an individual's job duties and/or profession;
7.	Fighting, except when the employee is a victim of an unwarranted assault;
8.	Gross insubordination;
9.	Conviction of a serious criminal offense;
10.	Theft destruction, careless or negligent use, or willful damage of city property or property of others; 
11.	Dangerous horseplay on the job;
12.	Flagrant violation of safety practices that might endanger the life or health of the employee or others; 
13.	Serious violation of city administrative regulations, department rules, lawful orders or directions made or given by a supervisor; 
14.	Membership in any organization which advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States by force or violence; 
15.	Acceptance of any consideration of value or gratuity which was given to improperly influence the employee in the performance of his/her duties; 
16.	Refusal to be examined by a city authorized fully licensed physician when so directed for cause by the city; 
17.	Political activities that are gross violation of federal and/or sate laws;
18.	Sexual harassment;
19.	Sleeping on the job;
20.	Incompetency or repeated inefficiency in the performance of duties;
21.	Abusive personal conduct or language toward the public or fellow employees, or abusive public criticism of a superior or other city official; 
22.	Willful violation of any duty adopted city policy, or state/federal law or regulation governing public employment; 
23.	Conduct or actions determined to be a conflict of interest as defined by state law;
24.	Fraudulent misrepresentation in securing an appointment or promotion in the city service;
25.	Repeated violation of group one offense;
26.	Similar violation that meet the intended definition of a group two offense.
(4)	Summary of recommended disciplinary actions for group two offenses. 
a.	The first such offense normally constitutes grounds for dismissal.
1.	This is not automatic, the appointing authority is permitted and expected to treat individual situations according to the circumstances and facts involved. 
2.	Due process procedures as established by federal law will be strictly adhered to whenever any anticipated disciplinary action will result in suspension without pay or dismissal. 
(Ord. No. 01-96, § 2(X), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-193. - Types of discipline. 
(a)	Reprimand. A department head or an authorized designee may, for disciplinary purposes, reprimand an employee in his department for cause. 
(1)	Formal counseling a reprimand may include formal counseling, at the first indication of unacceptable conduct that does not warrant more serious disciplinary action, the supervisor in charge will discuss the situation with the employee so that both may offer suggestions to deal with the problem. A formal counseling report will be prepared to establish a record of this counseling. A copy of the formal counseling report will be forwarded to the personnel clerk for inclusion in the employee's personnel file. 
(2)	Written warning-Repeated or continued employee misconduct that does not warrant more serious disciplinary action, will result in the supervisor issuing the employee a written warning report. Such warning will include the reasons for the warning and inform the employee that further unacceptable conduct will result in more severe disciplinary action such as suspension without pay or separation. A copy of any written warning report issued will be forwarded to the personnel clerk for inclusion in an employee's personnel file. 
(b)	Suspensions. The supervisor in charge, with the concurrence of the appointing authority may, for disciplinary purposes, suspend an employee without pay for a length of time as he considers appropriate, however, that no employee may be suspended for more than thirty (30) working days in any twelve (12) consecutive months. 
(c)	Demotions or reductions in salary. With the prior approval of the appointing authority, a supervisor may reduce the salary of an employee within the range provided in the pay plan or demote the employee for cause to a lower grade. 
(d)	Dismissals. With the prior approval of the appointing authority, a supervisor may dismiss an employee for cause, as long as the appointing authority meets the intent of these policies and procedures. 
(Ord. No. 01-96, § 3(X), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-194. - Operators of city-owned motor vehicles. 
    Purpose. The City of Clanton is committed to insuring that its fleet operations are conducted in a safe and efficient manner. This policy addresses specific responsibilities of those employed whose job duties require that they operate city vehicles or equipment and applies to the City of Clanton employees of all categories. It is the responsibility of these employees to familiarize themselves with this policy and its requirements. 
    Definition of city vehicle. A city vehicle is any vehicle or equipment that is owned, leased, rented or loaned to the City of Clanton. 
    Drivers license requirements. 
(a)	Prospective and current employees whose job duties include the operation of a city vehicle must be in possession of a valid and current driver's license to include the appropriate class of commercial license for the vehicle being operated. Under no circumstance shall a city employee whose license has been cancelled, revoked, suspended, or expired operate a city vehicle. 
(b)	Any employee whose job duties include the operation of a city vehicle, shall, within, twenty-four (24) hours notify his/her department head of any change in the status of their drivers license. Failure to immediately report a change in the status of a license shall result in disciplinary action. 
    Motor Vehicle Record (MVR) requirements. 
(a)	Applicants for positions with the City of Clanton that require driving a city vehicle will have his/her current MVR reviewed prior to employment. If the MVR has greater than eight (8) points in the preceding twenty-four (24) month period listed for traffic violations or a conviction or pending charge for driving under the influence during that period, that applicant will be disqualified for consideration. 
(b)	All employees whose job requires a drivers license shall perform a MVR check every three (3) years during their birth month. This review shall be the responsibility of the employee. Supervisors shall be responsible for verifying that all other employees have a valid driver's license prior to operating a City of Clanton vehicle. 
(c)	Anytime a MVR for a current employee whose job duties include the operation of a city vehicle is found to have received more than eight (8) points in the preceding twenty-four (24) months (according to the points scale for the State of Alabama UTC defense codes); said employee shall be required to attend a city approved defense driving course at said persons expense. The employee will have two (2) weeks to present a certificate of completion to their department head or their driving privileges will be suspended until such certification is presented. 
    Seat belt use. Seat belt use in city vehicles is mandatory for all drivers and passengers in city vehicles. Failure to utilize seat belts shall result in disciplinary action. These offenses shall be treated as "minor offenses" in accordance with the City of Clanton disciplinary action. 
(Ord. No. 01-96, § 4(X), 1-22-96; Ord. No. 2-06, § 4, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 15-195. - Requirements of the Drug Free Work Place Act of 1988. 
    The Drug Free Work Act of 1988 requires the City of Clanton, as a recipient of certain federal grants, to certify to the United States Government that it will maintain a drug free work place. As part of that required certification and consistent with our existing personnel policies, we are hereby notifying each of our employees that the unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession, or use of a controlled substance is prohibited in our work place. "Controlled substance" means a controlled substance as defined in Schedules I through V of section 202 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 USC Section 812) and as further defined in the Federal Regulations at 21 CFR Section 1308.11 through 1308.15 and other federal and state laws. Any employee who violates this policy may be subject to discipline up to and including termination by the appropriate authority. 
    Pursuant to the requirement of the Act, each of our employees is hereby notified that as a condition of employment, the employee will: 
(1)	Abide by our Drug Free Work Place Policy as set forth above and
(2)	Notify the City of Clanton (specifically the personnel administration) of any criminal drug statue conviction for a violation occurring in the work place no later than five (5) days after the conviction. The personnel administration shall notify the council as required by law, of such conviction within ten (10) days of receiving notice thereof. Within the same day period, appropriate remedial steps or sanctions shall be taken against the employee which may include termination of employment by the appropriate authority. 
(Ord. No. 01-96, § 5(X), 1-22-96) 
Secs. 15-196-15-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - POLITICAL ACTIVITY 

Sec. 15-211. - Political limitations. 
    No officer, agent, or employee of the city, other than persons subject to popular election shall: 
(1)	become a candidate for election, or appointment to elective office;
(2)	take an active part in any political campaign, or distribute badges, pamphlets or handbills of any kind favoring or opposing any candidate for nomination or election to municipal office. 
(3)	Except that any person who wished to do or may take a leave of absence.
(4)	Except that no person shall be denied the right to participate in county and state political activities to the same extent as any other citizen of the State of Alabama, except where limited by federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 01-96, § 1(XI), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-212. - Affiliation. 
    Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent any employee from becoming or continuing to be a member of a political party or from attendance at a political party or from attendance at a political meeting, or from enjoying entire freedom from all interference in casting his vote. He officer, agent, or employee of the municipality shall make or solicit contributions or donations to any political campaign. 
(1)	Political pressure. Employees of the City of Clanton shall not be appointed or retained on the basis of their political activity, or affiliation. Employee shall not be coerced to take part in political campaigns, to solicit votes, to levy, contribution or solicit funds or support for the purpose of supporting or opposing the appointment or election of candidates for any elected office. 
(Ord. No. 01-96, § 2(XI), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-213. - Disciplinary action. 
    Any employee in violation of this section of the personnel rules and regulations shall be subject to disciplinary action up to and including dismissal. 
(Ord. No. 01-96, § 3(XI), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-214. - Outside employment. 
    No full-time employee in the classified service shall accept outside employment, whether part-time, temporary or permanent, if such employment conflicts or interferes, or is likely to conflict or interfere, with the employee's public service. No employee shall engage in or accept private employment or render any service for private interest when such employment or service is incompatible or creates a conflict of interest with his official duties. 
(Ord. No. 01-96, § 4(XI), 1-22-96) 
Secs. 15-215-15-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - PERSONNEL BOARD 

Sec. 15-231. - Selection of members. 
    The appointing authority shall, with the approval of the governing body, and within thirty (30) days after the effective date of these rules and regulations, appoint a personnel board of three (3) members. The initial members shall be appointed on the basis as follows: 
The first member shall be appointed for a term of one year. 
The second member shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years. 
The third member shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years. 
Each successor appointment shall be for a full term of three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. 01-96, § 1(XII), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-232. - Qualifications. 
(a)	Persons appointed to the board:
(1)	Shall be in agreement with the basic policies and principal of merit employment.
(2)	Shall be qualified voters of the municipality.
(3)	Shall have resided in the municipality for at least four (4) years immediately prior to their appointment. 
(b)	Persons may not be a member of the board while:
(1)	Residing outside the corporate limits.
(2)	Employed by the municipality.
(3)	Holding an appointive or elective offices.
(4)	Running for an elective public office.
(5)	Serving as an officer of a political party.
(Ord. No. 01-96, § 2(XII), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-233. - Removals and vacancies. 
    If, during the term for which he is appointed to the board, a member is absent from three (3) consecutive meetings without excuse from the appointing authority, his position on the board shall become vacant. 
    A member of the board may be removed from the board for just cause by the appointing authority with the approval of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the governing body. 
    The appointing authority, by appointment approved by the governing body, fills all vacancies on the board. A person appointed to fill such a vacancy shall hold the position on the board for the remainder of the unexpired term of the person who leaves the position vacant. 
(Ord. No. 01-96, § 3(XII), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-234. - Duties and procedures. 
(a)	The board shall elect its own chairman and establish its own rules of procedure.
(b)	The board will meet upon call of the chairman, or upon call of two members, or upon request of the appointing authority or the governing body. In addition the board will meet as required to hold hearing in accordance with its own rules and these policies and procedures. 
(c)	Notice of all board meetings will be given to each member and to other interested parties by the chairman. Two (2) members will constitute to a quorum for the transaction of any business which may properly come before the board. 
(d)	The board shall upon request of the local governing body or upon its on initiative, inquire into the administration of the personnel system and, on the basis of the inquiry make written recommendations regarding the system to the governing body. The board, as a whole, shall have access to any records necessary to its inquiry as long as it does not conflict with the privacy act. 
(Ord. No. 01-96, § 4(XII), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-235. - Clerk of the board. 
    The board shall designate in coordination with the governing body, a clerk to assist the board as necessary in carrying out its duties. The person so designated may be an employee of the city in some other capacity as agreed to between the board and the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 01-96, § 5(XII), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-236. - Expenses of the board. 
    The city council will make necessary appropriations from the general fund to pay reasonable board expenses that are incurred in carrying out it's responsibilities. Each board may be compensated from the general fund as established by the city council. 
    The board may call upon the city attorney to render such legal service to the board as the board deems necessary or advisable. Expense for the attorney's time shall be paid from the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 01-96, § 6(XII), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-237. - Records. 
    The board will maintain adequate records to ensure proper documentation of all its actions. All board records, except those which the rules of the board and/or state law require to be confidential will be open for review upon reasonable request. 
(Ord. No. 01-96, § 7(XII), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-238-15-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - DRUG/ALCOHOL TESTING POLICY 

Sec. 15-251. - Drug/alcohol testing policy. 
(a)	Purpose. The goal of this policy is to establish a drug/alcohol testing program to enforce the city's goal of having all employees free from abuse or illegal use of drugs and alcohol. 
(b)	Conditions allowing for testing. 
(1)	Employment applicants. Applicants for all City of Clanton positions shall be tested for drug usage as part of their pre-employment medical examinations as a condition of employment. Pre-employment drug testing will occur at or near the final stage of the hiring process. Applicants will be notified prior to drug testing. Refusal to take the test, or test results reporting a presence of illegal drugs, or the illegal use of controlled substances, shall be a basis for rejecting an applicant in the selection process. 
(2)	Municipal employees. Only an employee's department head with the advice and approval of the mayor and the personnel administrator may order a drug or alcohol test. Department heads are subject to the same testing procedure and may be ordered to take a drug or alcohol test by the mayor. In the event of the absence incapacity, or unavailability of the official whose consent to a drug or alcohol test is necessary, the person acting in the capacity of such official may order or approve a drug or alcohol test. Any action taken against any employee as a result of this policy shall be determined by the individual circumstances of each case, and disciplinary action up to and including termination is possible by the appropriate authority. 
Any employee may be subjected to drug or alcohol testing only if there exist a reasonable suspicion that the employee is using illegal drugs; 2) using legal drugs illegally, or; 3) under the influence of alcohol during working hours or while operating city vehicles or equipment. (Tests for alcohol shall be given by a certified operator on the intoxllyzer 5000). 
Use of the term "under the influence" does not mean that the employee must be legally intoxicated as defined by State Law. 
Reasonable suspicion shall mean one or more of the following: 
a.	Apparent unusual or bizarre conduct, or physical conditions, appearance or speech, which would indicate that the employee is under the influence of drugs or alcohol; 
b.	Involvement in an accident during working hours or while operating city vehicles or equipment for which no reasonable explanation exists; 
c.	Involvement in a series or pattern of work accidents;
d.	Continued or excessive absenteeism or tardiness after receiving discipline for such conduct; 
e.	Indictment, arrest, or conviction for controlled substances offenses;
f.	The smell of an alcoholic beverage on the breath;
g.	Illegal possession of drugs, or possession of alcohol on work premises or while operating a city vehicle or equipment; 
h.	Any other objective fact or facts, and reasonable inferences drawn therefrom, which would lead a reasonable person to suspect that the employee is using illegal drugs, is using legal drugs illegally, or is under the influence of alcohol during working hours or while operating city vehicles or equipment. 
(3)	Written documentation stating the grounds for reasonable suspicion shall be provided by the department head to the personnel administrator and mayor prior to the ordering of such a test for an employee. 
(4)	Refusal by an employee to take the test shall be deemed insubordination, and shall be the basis of disciplinary action that may be administrated by the appropriate authority. 
(c)	Testing procedure. Detailed testing procedures shall be developed by the city for the following purposes: 
(1)	Positively identify the person to be tested.
(2)	Reasonably accommodate personal privacy and provide security of samples.
(3)	Establish if the person to be tested is taking drugs legally.
(4)	Insure accuracy of results by confirming positive results with gas chromatography or thin layer chromatography. 
(d)	Testing agent. The laboratory selected to conduct the analysis must be certified, experienced and capable of quality control documentation, chain of custody, technical expertise, and demonstrated proficiency. 
(e)	Voluntary rehabilitation. Any employee who voluntarily comes forth and request assistance will be placed in a rehabilitation program. This action on the employee's part will not constitute a violation. 
(f)	Positive results. Employee applicants who test positive for illegal drug use shall be denied employment with the city. Employees who test positive for illegal drug use or being under the influence of alcohol during working hours or while operating city vehicles or equipment shall be subject to discipline up to and including termination by the appropriate authority. Nothing in the city's policy of providing and enforcing a drug-free work place shall be construed as precluding discipline for any act or acts committed by an employee who also tests positive for drugs or alcohol. 
(Ord. No. 01-96, XIII(§ A), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-252. - Medical review officer. 
    The Medical Review Officer for the City of Clanton shall be appointed by the testing agent or his designee who shall be Certified Medical Doctor. The role of the Medical Review Officer is to review and interpret positive test results prior to the transmission or results to the city personnel administrator. 
(Ord. No. 01-96, XIII(§ B), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-253. - Reservation of authority. 
    The city council reserves the authority to amend, modify, or change this policy. 
(Ord. No. 01-96, XIII(§ C), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-254. - Approval and effective date. 
    All requirement to comply with the Drug Free Work Place Act of 1988 shall become effective immediately upon adoption of this policy. 
(Ord. No. 01-96, XIII(§ D), 1-22-96) 
Sec. 15-255. - Drug/alcohol testing procedures. 
(a)	General procedures. 
(1)	Procedures for drugs and alcohol testing shall comply with the provisions of the City of Clanton drug testing policy. 
(2)	All applicants for employment will be drug tested. All positive screens will be confirmed once by methods and procedures as outlined below. Results of drug test on applicants not hired for whatever reason will be kept in the personnel files and shall be confidential. There will be no access to these files except by approval of the appropriate authority. If a positive confirmation is received, the applicant will be deemed conclusively to have not passed the pre-employment physical and will not be eligible, for employment with the city. 
(3)	For employees, only the employee's department head with the advice and approval of the mayor and personnel administrator may order a drug or alcohol test. Department heads may be ordered to take a drug or alcohol test by the mayor. In the event of the absence, incapacity, or unavailability of any official whose consent to a drug or alcohol test is necessary, the person acting in the capacity of such official may order or approve a drug or alcohol test. 
(4)	Collection of the specimen for testing employment applicants will be done as scheduled by the personnel department. Alcohol testing will be performed by the City of Clanton Police Department. For employees to be tested site. Under no circumstances will the employee be allowed to drive or operate any machinery if drug or alcohol uses is suspected. After the specimen is provided, the employee will be driven home and remain off duty on leave with pay until such time as the results of the tests are known. 
(5)	Before testing an employee, written documentation of reasonable suspicion will be provided to the personnel department by the employee's department head. 
(b)	Specific procedures: 
To ensure accurate, valid, legal, specimens. 
Procedures for collecting urine specimens shall allow individual privacy; however, at the same time the procedures shall be such as to reasonably insure the validity of the specimen. In the event the medical review officer of the testing agent as stated above or his designee has reason to believe that a particular individual may alter, substitute or otherwise engage in conduct that would impair the validity of the specimen, then a health-care provider of the same sex as the person being tested will witness the person urinate into the container being careful that sample substitution or tampering does not occur. There shall be only one witness. 
Note: This is the most critical step in the sample collection procedure as patients have been known to substitute another sample, dilute the sample by adding water, or contaminate the sample with other substances. Minimum same size is 30 cc. 
(c)	Counseling. 
(1)	If a positive test result for an employee is received by the personnel department, the mayor and the department head of the employee will be immediately notified. The personnel administrator or his/her designee and the employee's department head may meet to advise the employee as to treatment that is available or may proceed directly to disciplinary action. If the employee cannot be located, disciplinary action may be commenced in the employee's absence. 
(2)	First offense:
a.	The employee will be given an opportunity to provide documentation of any prescription medication taken and amounts prescribed if positive confirmation test is for FDA scheduled medication. The employee will still be subject to disciplinary action if the employee did not disclose to his or her supervisor that the employee was taking such medication and if the medication taken and documented is of such a nature that job duties would normally have been restricted by the personnel department or the supervisor. 
b.	Drug or alcohol rehabilitation. If the employee chooses this option, and the personnel administrator and department head concur attendance and completion of the course of rehabilitation will be mandatory. The employee will be allowed to use available, hospital days or leave as required at the department head and personnel administrator's discretion during this period. The employee must also remain drug free for the remainder of his employment with the city. This is to be determined by quarterly urine screens for a one year period. The employee's continued employment will also be dependent on the employee following through with all the rehabilitation center's recommendations. 
1.	If the employee does not attend or complete rehabilitation to the satisfaction of the rehabilitation specialist, he/she will be placed on leave without pay and subject to termination by the appropriate authority. 
(3)	Second offense employee will be subject to termination by the appropriate authority.
(d)	Confidentiality and records retention. The release of information regarding drug/alcohol testing will be handled in accordance with the City of Clanton's procedures on release of medical information subject to federal and state law regarding the release of drug and alcohol information. A general medical release executed by the employee shall not be sufficient to release results of drug or alcohol test unless the release specifically authorizes the disclosure of such information. Log sheets, specimen labels and test results will not have the employees name but rather will be coded to insure privacy. Tests results will be kept in a sealed envelope in the employee's personnel file. 
(e)	Voluntary drug/alcohol rehabilitation. If, before an incident of suspected drug use, or alcohol abuse during working hours, and employee voluntarily identifies himself to his/her department head, the personnel administrator or the mayor as having a chemical abuse problem and being in need of drug rehabilitation, he/she shall be placed on available, hospital or administrative leave as required at the discretion of the department head and personnel administrator. This incident shall not be counted against the employee; however, the employee should provide proof of completion of the rehabilitation before returning to duty and the employee shall remain drug free for the remaining course of his employment with the city to be determined by quarterly drug screens. These drug screens shall be performed for a one year period. 
(f)	Selling or possessing illegal drugs. Any employee who sells or possesses an illegal substance whole on or off duty, is subject to immediate suspension or termination by the appropriate authority. 
(Ord. No. 01-96, XIII(§ 3), 1-22-96) 
Chapter 16 - POLICE 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 11; police services in police jurisdiction, § 2-5; arrests by members of fire department, § 7-4; levy of tax for sale and storage of gasoline, § 10-110; police chief notified of purchaser of precious metals or precious stones, § 10-358. (Back)
State Law reference- Chief of police authorized, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-5; establishment, organization, etc., of police force, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-55; civil service merit systems, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-180 et seq.; law enforcement officers generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 36-21-1 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 16-1. - Training of police officers. 
    The policy of the city council is to upgrade the police force of the city by requiring that the police officers shall be required to successfully complete the acceptable accredited schooling or academics in order to comply with the basic and minimum requirements provided by law. 
(Code 1979, § 2-8) 
State law reference- Peace officers' standards and training commission, Code of Ala. 1975, § 36-21-40 et seq. 
Sec. 16-2. - Custody of stolen property, contraband pistols. 
    The chief of police of the city is appointed as the custodian of stolen property and the person authorized under Code of Ala. 1975, § 13A-11-84, to receive pistols; and such stolen property or contraband pistols shall be held by him as provided by law. 
(Code 1979, § 2-7) 
Sec. 16-3. - Method for determination of blood alcohol levels. 
    The city hereby adopts the Intoxilyzer 5000 as its means for analyzing the blood alcohol levels for those arrested by the city police department. 
(Ord. No. 2-86, § 1, 1-13-86) 
State law reference- Alabama Chemical Test for Intoxication Act, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5-190 et seq.; chemical tests, Code of Ala. 1975, § 32-5A-194. 
Sec. 16-4. - Police Department Directives Manual adopted. 
(a)	The City of Clanton Police Department Directives Manual submitted to city council in October of 2009 is hereby adopted, by reference, for application within the City of Clanton Police Department effective at the beginning of the City of Clanton's fiscal year on October 1, 2010. 
    The aforedescribed Police Department Directives Manual shall not replace the existing City of Clanton rules and regulations regarding employees and city operations, but shall rather be adopted in addition thereto as required for law enforcement employees and officials of the City of Clanton, Alabama. 
    A copy of said Police Department Directives Manual shall be placed in the office of the city clerk and the office of the police chief of the city, and shall be available for inspection and review by the public and/or related parties, during office hours, at any time upon request. 
(b)	An addition to the Police Department Directives Manual regarding immigration enforcement policy and procedures number D-8.0, submitted to city council in October 2011, is hereby adopted, by reference, for application within the City of Clanton Police Department effective immediately upon publication. 
(c)	An addition to the Police Department Directives Manual regarding reserve/auxiliary police officers and procedures number D-1.1, submitted to city council in March 2013, is hereby adopted, by reference, for application within the City of Clanton Police Department effective immediately upon publication. 
(Ord. No. 7-10, 7-26-2010; Ord. No. 5-11, 10-24-2011; Ord. No. 1-13, 3-11-2013) 
Chapter 17 - SOLID WASTE 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; utilities, Ch. 20; burning of garbage, § 7-51 et seq. (Back)
State Law reference- Municipal powers as to health and sanitation, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-130 et seq.; municipal incinerators, hauling and disposal of garbage and trash, fees, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-135; solid waste generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-27-1 et seq.; methods of local waste collection and disposal, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-27-3; mutual agreements or contracts for solid waste disposal, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-27-5; hazardous wastes management, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-30-1 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 17-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Construction waste means all solid waste of every kind, nature and description connected with residential or commercial construction, including building materials and related solid waste in connection with such a construction project. 
    Garbage means all waste accumulations of animal, fruit or vegetable matter that attend the preparation, use, dealing in or storage of meat, fowl, fish or vegetables, including tin cans, paper, all refuse commonly referred to as household garbage, and all household and cafe refuse, including industrial waste and also leaves, shrubbery cuttings, limbs and the like. 
    Garbage cart means the lightweight plastic container furnished by the city to certain householders, apartments, trailer parks and businesses, equipped with wheels, having a capacity of eighty-five (85) gallons and equipped with a lid or cover. 
    Premises means any dwelling, rooming house, apartment building, hospital, school, hotel, club, restaurant, boarding house, cafè, shop, church, place of business, manufacturing establishment, store or public building. 
    Residence means a single- or multiple-family dwelling, duplex or apartment building, or a mobile home or trailer. 
    Rubbish means all solid waste, such as wood, wood by-products, and masonry materials. 
    Recyclables means all recyclables such as paper, cardboard, glass, aluminum, metal and similar materials. 
    Sanitary landfill means a place of dumping of garbage and rubbish or such place designated by the city or county. 
(Ord. No. 8-81, § 1, 7-27-81; Ord. No. 9-81, § 1, 9-14-81; Ord. No. 7-94, § 1, 4-11-94; Ord. No. 3-2001, 5-14-01) 
Sec. 17-2. - Collection and disposal service-Established; schedule. 
    The city hereby establishes a garbage, rubbish collection, and hauling service, to be operated by the city, with the disposal of such being contracted. The collection and hauling of garbage and rubbish shall be made by the city on a regular schedule of weekdays, not to include Saturday and Sunday in the residential areas and the business district of the city. All collection schedules are subject to change due to legal holidays and weather conditions. 
(Ord. No. 9-81, § 2, 9-14-81; Ord. No. 7-94, § 2, 4-11-94) 
Sec. 17-3. - Same-Service area; certificate of exception. 
(a)	The area to be served under this chapter shall include all areas located within the corporate limits of the city. In addition thereto, if a public road or street is situated in the perimeter line of the city limits, then the garbage or rubbish may be picked up from customers on both sides of the road or street, and garbage or rubbish may be picked up from customers at the end of dead-end streets when the dead-end street is adjacent to the existing corporate limits. 
(b)	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section or other provisions of this chapter, a person may store, haul and dispose of his own solid wastes on his land or otherwise, provided such storage, haulage or disposal is accomplished pursuant to a certificate of exception as provided in Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-27-3(g). 
(Ord. No. 9-84, 11-13-84; Ord. No. 7-94, § 14, 4-11-94) 
Sec. 17-4. - Garbage cart or dumpster required. 
    Each dwelling, apartment, place of business, mobile home, hospital, school, restaurant, eating establishment, shop, church, and public building within the corporate limits of the city is required to have available a garbage cart or dumpster. Each person engaged in maintaining any such premises is hereby required to pay to the city the charge prescribed in this chapter. The city is hereby obligated to render each month a statement for the services performed by the city, which statement is due and payable according to the terms contained thereon. The statement for services performed by the city for the pickup and disposing of garbage, rubbish, trash and the like may be combined with the utility bill rendered by the city for other utilities furnished to the customer. Statements for services rendered may be mailed by the city to the customer and payment of the statement shall be made to the city. 
(Ord. No. 9-81, § 5, 9-14-81; Ord. No. 7-94, § 5, 4-11-94) 
Sec. 17-5. - Responsibility for pickup; unlawful dumping. 
(a)	It shall be the responsibility of the city to pick up garbage, trash and rubbish, as provided in this chapter. No garbage or rubbish will be picked up that is not deposited in a garbage cart or dumpster provided by the city. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or cause to be dumped any garbage, rubbish or trash upon any property not his own or under his control other than a sanitary landfill. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful to bring onto the property of the residence or the business any garbage as defined in this chapter for the purpose of placing the garbage into the garbage cart or the dumpster of the owner of such property, and it shall be unlawful to place in any garbage cart or dumpster any garbage brought onto the property of the residence or business being billed for the same. 
(Ord. No. 9-81, § 6, 9-14-81; Ord. No. 7-94, §§ 6, 16, 4-11-94) 
Sec. 17-6. - Placement of waste in receptacles. 
    All garbage, including rubbish and recyclables, must be placed in garbage carts or dumpsters in such a manner that all lids shall be fastened to prevent damage from vandalism, water or rodents. 
(Ord. No. 9-81, § 13, 9-14-81; Ord. No. 7-94, § 7, 4-11-94) 
Sec. 17-7. - Offensive or unsanitary accumulations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in possession, charge or control of any premises in the corporate limits of the city to keep, cause to be kept, or allow the keeping of any garbage, rubbish, trash or refuse in such a manner that it will become offensive to health or likely to cause disease. 
(Ord. No. 9-81, § 7, 9-14-81; Ord. No. 7-94, § 7, 4-11-94) 
Sec. 17-8. - Garbage carts-Generally. 
(a)	The city will provide each residence a lightweight trash and garbage container, equipped with lid and wheels, capable of being rolled from the residence to the curb of the street. The city will be responsible for repair or replacement of the container damaged through no fault of the resident. The resident will be responsible for cleaning of the container. 
(b)	The city assumes the responsibility to collect garbage and trash from the carts placed near the curb of the street according to the schedule adopted by the city, subject to change provided in this chapter. 
(c)	Upon proof of disability due to health, age or other reason, the city will continue to collect garbage from the carts placed near the back entrance of such residence. No collection personnel shall enter houses or buildings. 
(Ord. No. 9-81, § 3, 9-14-81; Ord. No. 7-94, § 3, 4-11-94) 
Sec. 17-9. - Same-Care. 
(a)	Each person subject to the provisions of this chapter will be responsible for the garbage cart assigned and must not abuse, remove or destroy the cart. If the service is discontinued for any reason, the garbage cart must be left on the premises vacated, and if the garbage cart is not left on the vacated premises the cost of the cart may be charged to the utility deposit refund. 
(b)	If any person shall deliberately abuse or destroy any garbage cart, the city may make a reasonable charge therefor. 
(Ord. No. 9-81, §§ 8, 10, 9-14-81; Ord. No. 7-94, §§ 8, 10, 4-11-94) 
Sec. 17-10. - Same-Placement of cart at curb. 
    It shall be the responsibility of each person desiring garbage to be picked up by the city to roll the garbage cart to a place near the curb of the street by 7:00 a.m. on the route day and to remove the cart from the curb no later than 7:00 p.m. on the route day. It shall be the responsibility of each person to determine the route day, and no garbage will be picked up by the city unless the cart is rolled to the curb, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 9-81, § 9, 9-14-81; Ord. No. 7-94, § 9, 4-11-94) 
Sec. 17-11. - Dumpsters. 
(a)	The city will make available dumpsters of sufficient size to meet the need of the customer. If a dumpster is required, the dumpster may be purchased from the city for cash or the customer may pay for the purchase of the dumpster in twelve (12) equal monthly payments to be billed separately from the utility bill. The dumpster shall remain the property of the city until the charges are fully paid. 
(b)	Garbage carts will be delivered to trailer parks only if the owner or manager thereof shall, in writing, be responsible for all carts, and garbage carts will be delivered only to apartment buildings having twenty (20) or less apartments therein. 
(Ord. No. 9-81, § 12, 9-14-81; Ord. No. 7-94, § 12, 4-11-94) 
Sec. 17-12. - Removal of tree limbs, yard waste, etc. 
    It shall be the obligation of each person contracting for the cutting of trees, bushes, shrubs or other growth from private property to arrange for the removal thereof, and nothing in this chapter shall be construed as obligating the city to remove such materials. In addition, it shall be the obligation of each person contracting for construction projects on private property to arrange for the removal of construction waste therefrom and nothing in this chapter shall be construed as obligating the city to remove such materials. 
(Ord. No. 9-81, § 11, 9-14-81; Ord. No. 7-94, § 11, 4-11-94; Ord. No. 3-2001, 5-14-01) 
Sec. 17-13. - Amount of charges. 
    On and after the adoption of this section [October 10, 2011] and continuing monthly thereafter, the following charges will be paid to the City of Clanton for hauling and disposing of garbage and rubbish. 
(1)	For each cart furnished to a single-family dwelling unit, public establishment, place of business, apartment, mobile home, restaurant, eating establishment, shop, church, or public building, the city hereby levies for each cart the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per month in the event that not more than one (1) pickup per week is required. 
(2)	In the event that two (2) carts are required, [the charge shall be] thirty dollars ($30.00) per month for one (1) pickup. In the event three (3) carts are required, [the charge shall be] forty-five dollars ($45.00) per month for one (1) pickup. 
(3)	For each business, person, firm, or corporation requiring a dumpster, the monthly charge [shall be] sixty dollars ($60.00) per month where not more than one (1) pickup [per week] is required. There shall be charged an additional sixty dollars ($60.00) per month for each additional pickup per week required. 
(4)	In the event that a pickup of trash is required and where the same is not placed in a cart or dumpster, the first load of the same will be removed by City of Clanton with no charge being made. In the event that additional loads are required, the City of Clanton hereby assesses a charge for each load of fifty dollars ($50.00) after the first load per week. The trash under this provision in this section shall be brought out to a point at or near the curb and not placed under a power line, trees, or overhanging obstruction so as to hinder the removal thereof by heavy equipment. 
(Ord. No. 9-81, § 4, 9-14-81; Ord. No. 7-94, § 4, 4-11-94; Ord. No. 3-2001, 5-14-01; Ord. No. 4-11, 10-10-2011) 
Sec. 17-14. - Payment of charges; delinquency. 
(a)	All bills for service under this chapter shall be due and payable monthly. The charges shall be designated on the water and gas bill mailed out by the city for each month and such fees shall be paid when the bill is paid. The city shall not accept the payment of any utility bill unless the fee for garbage and trash service under this chapter is also paid. All fees collected under this chapter shall be net and all accounts shall be considered delinquent if not paid within the time limit specified in the utility bill so rendered by the city. All delinquent accounts for garbage pickup and disposal are subject to the same penalties as are in effect for the several departments of the city pertaining to delinquent accounts for utility services rendered by the city; provided, however, that failure to pay the garbage collection fee within thirty (30) days after the fee shall become due and payable shall subject the delinquent party to the penalty of the suspension of solid waste collection and disposal services, or the city may proceed to recover the amount of any such delinquency with interest in a civil action, or both. 
(b)	The water works and sewer board of the city is designated as the agent for collection of the garbage fees for services provided for in this chapter and shall remit the fees to the city clerk as they are collected. However, if the occupant or person in possession of a dwelling or store building has no water service furnished to him by the city or by the water works and sewer board of the city, the garbage fee provided in this chapter shall be paid at the city office of the city clerk once each month in accordance with the rates provided in this chapter and at the time designated as the due date of the payment. The payment shall become delinquent after ten (10) days. Any person paying the charge after the delinquent date shall pay a penalty of one dollar ($1.00) in addition to the garbage fee designated by this chapter. 
(c)	Any person who has not been issued a certificate of exception under Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-27-3(g) and who utilizes the solid waste disposal system of the city, and who fails to pay the fee, rate or charge established by the city council therefor, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and if the violation or failure or refusal to make such payment is a continuing one, each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Code 1979, § 7-4) 
State law reference- Nonpayment of fees, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 22-27-5(e), 22-27-7. 
Sec. 17-15. - Private haulers. 
(a)	It shall be the duty and responsibility of the city and within its discretion to collect, remove and dispose of garbage as defined in this chapter in such manner and under such terms and conditions as may be determined expedient and as may now or hereafter be determined or fixed by ordinance. 
(b)	No person shall, for a fee, charge or commission, gather, haul or remove garbage from within the corporate limits of the city to any dump site, dumping area or garbage disposal area located outside of the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 8-81, § 2, 7-27-81; Ord. No. 7-94, § 15, 4-11-94) 
Sec. 17-16. - Littering. 
    No person shall place or cause to be placed upon the public streets, sidewalks or alleys of the city any garbage, trash, refuse or like matter, except as provided in this chapter, and no person shall throw, place or dispose of any trash, litter, garbage, refuse or like matter upon the property of another. 
(Code 1979, § 7-7) 
Sec. 17-17. - Sweeping or throwing waste on street; allowing waste to be exposed to insects. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep or throw trash, waste matter or other garbage or rubbish into the streets or alleys or on the sidewalks of the city or upon property not his own or under his control, and it shall be unlawful for any person to allow garbage, refuse or other waste matter to remain exposed to flies or other insects on his premises. 
(Code 1979, § 7-8) 
Sec. 17-18. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any person doing any act or thing declared by this chapter to be unlawful or any person failing to comply with the terms of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense against the city and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than two dollars ($2.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or by imprisonment or jail or by hard labor for no longer than six (6) months or by both fine and imprisonment, at the discretion of the court hearing the case. Each day any violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 7-94, § 18, 4-11-94) 
Chapter 18 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings, Ch. 5; housing, Ch. 9; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 11; parades and demonstrations, Ch. 14; utilities, Ch. 20; subdivisions, App. B; soliciting on streets, § 10-391; loading or unloading of goods in street, § 11-5; throwing harmful material on streets, § 13-6; cutting or disturbing streets for purpose of installing sewer line, § 20-36; future street lines under zoning ordinance, App. A, § 9(11); street plan under subdivision regulations, App. B, art. V, § 2; general improvements in subdivisions, App. B, art. VI, § 1. (Back)
State constitution reference- Maximum term of certain franchises, § 228. 
State Law reference- Power of city to provide for lighting, sprinkling and cleaning of streets, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-18; public improvements and assessments generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-48-1 et seq.; municipal powers as to streets, highways, railroad bridges, ferries, etc., Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-49-1 et seq.; highways, roads, bridges and ferries generally, Code of Ala. 1975, Title 23; public works, Code of Ala. 1975, Title 39; regulation of use of streets for telephone, telegraph, etc., lines, sale or lease of franchises and disposition of moneys therefrom, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-43-62. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-1. - Adoption of standards for accommodating utilities. 
    The city council hereby formally adopts the state highway department standards for accommodating utilities on highway rights-of-way, and future amendments thereto, as standards for use by the city for accommodating utilities on roads and streets under the jurisdiction of the city on those roads and streets which involve the expenditure of state or federal highway funds. 
(Code 1979, § 13-1) 
Cross reference- Utilities, Ch. 20. 
Sec. 18-2. - Obstructing passage. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to stand, assemble, gather or loiter upon any street or sidewalk in the city so as to impede or obstruct the safe, convenient and free passage of persons or vehicles along the streets or sidewalks. It shall also be unlawful for any person to obstruct or encumber any street or sidewalk in the city so as to prevent or impede the safe, convenient and free passage of persons or vehicles along the streets or sidewalks. 
(Code 1979, § 13-2) 
Sec. 18-3. - Advertising from vehicle; use of loudspeakers or other noise-producing devices. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise from any motor vehicle or other conveyance upon any street or avenue of the city, or to engage in any public speaking or preaching upon any avenue, street or sidewalk of the city by means of any loudspeaker, amplifier, radio, phonograph, phonograph record, bell, drum, horn or other instrument, or by any other loud noise. 
(Code 1979, § 13-3) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 11. 
Sec. 18-4. - Exception to sections 18-2 and 18-3. 
(a)	The mayor may, by written permit, give to any person the right to advertise upon any street, avenue or sidewalk of the city or the right to engage in any public speaking or preaching on any of the avenues or streets or sidewalks of the city, and the right to stand, assemble, gather, encumber or impede any of the streets, avenues or sidewalks of the city. 
(b)	Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to events described in Chapter 14 
(Code 1979, § 13-4) 
Secs. 18-5-18-12. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DISPLAY OF STREET NUMBERS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3-07, § 2, adopted February 12, 2007, did not specifically amend the Code, hence, inclusion as §§ 18-13-18-19 have been included at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 18-13. - Uniform system of numbering established. 
(a)	There is hereby established a uniform system of numbering buildings fronting on all streets, avenues and public ways in the city, and all houses and other buildings shall be numbered in accordance with the provisions of this article. Street names presently in use and street names now and hereafter designated on approved subdivision plats, all as shown by such uniform system, shall constitute official street names unless changed or re-designated by ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3-07, § 1, 2-12-07) 
Sec. 18-14. - Street address numbers and addressing standards. 
(a)	Addressing standards and guidelines as promulgated by the enhanced 911 system of the county and by the county addressing department, as the same may be amended or modified from time to time, subject to agreements with the City of Clanton, are hereby adopted by reference. 
(b)	All buildings, residences, mobile homes, or other fixed structures, within the corporate limits of the City of Clanton shall have address numerals/characters permanently and visibly displayed on the premises, on the mailbox post when said mailbox is located on the subject property, or on a free-standing post located at the driveway leading to the structure, so as to identify the location, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)	For the purposes of this section, an address for display is defined as the numerals and/or characters assigned in compliance with enhanced 911 and the county addressing department to a specific location. 
(2)	All numerals shall be Arabic numerals a minimum of three (3) inches high, made of durable and clearly visible material, of a contrasting color to the surface of the structure on which they are attached, or of durable reflective material. 
(3)	Address numerals shall be displayed where readily visible from the primary street or road on which the structure is addressed. Whenever any building is situated more than fifty (50) feet from the front property line, the number of such building shall be conspicuously displayed on the owner's property at the property line, near the walkway, driveway or entrance to such building, upon a gatepost, fence post or other appropriate place so as to be easily viewed from the street. 
(Ord. No. 3-07, § 2, 2-12-07) 
Sec. 18-15. - Compliance standards. 
(a)	New construction. Upon commencement of initial construction of a new structure, a clearly visible free-standing sign or post shall be erected and maintained in place until the permanent address numerals are attached or otherwise displayed upon the premises at completion. 
(b)	New structures. Permanent address numerals must be in place prior to receipt of a certificate of occupancy as issued by the appropriate authorities, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)	Single family residential structures and mobile homes must have the address displayed on the premises, on the mailbox post when said mailbox is located on the subject property, or on a free-standing post located at the driveway leading to the structure. 
(2)	Duplex structures must have the numeric address displayed as well as the suite or unit number. This may be displayed on the premises, on the mailbox post assigned to that unit when said mailbox is located on the subject property, or on a free-standing post located at the driveway leading to the unit so as to identify the location. 
(3)	Multi-family structures must have the numeric address of the site or of the individual building displayed on the premise and the apartment number shall be displayed on the door or near the entrance to each unit. 
(4)	Business structures must have the address displayed either on the building face or upon a post or free-standing sign situated at the driveway or entrance to the property when numbering on the structure is not readily visible from the street. A mailbox post may be used if the mailbox is situated near the street. In a business complex, each building shall have the numeric address displayed upon the building and suite or unit numbers displayed on the door or near the entrance to each unit. 
(c)	Existing structures. The resident or current occupant of any dwelling, the owner, manager, or occupant of any business structure, or the owner of any structure that is not occupied, is responsible for compliance with this section, and permanent addresses numerals shall be attached or otherwise displayed upon the structure or premises within ninety (90) days of the adoption of this article as described in the applicable section (b) (1), (2), (3), or (4) above. 
(Ord. No. 3-07, § 3, 2-12-07) 
Sec. 18-16. - Removal of numbers. 
    Numbers shall not be moved from one house to another and shall remain on the structure or location to which assigned unless changed by the authority of the county addressing department of the Enhanced 911 System of the county. 
(Ord. No. 3-07, § 4, 2-12-07) 
Sec. 18-17. - Compliance. 
    It shall be a violation of this article to fail to display the address as prescribed herein, or to display any address not officially assigned. 
(Ord. No. 3-07, § 5, 2-12-07) 
Sec. 18-18. - Notice of violation. 
    If the owner of any building required to be numbered by this article shall neglect for a period of twenty (20) days to duly attach and maintain the proper number of such building, the city shall serve upon him a notice requiring such owner to properly number the same and if he neglects to do so for ten (10) days after the service of such notice, he shall be deemed to have violated this article. 
(Ord. No. 3-07, § 6, 2-12-07) 
Sec. 18-19. - Enforcement. 
    Failure to comply with this article shall constitute a violation and may be prosecuted in the City of Clanton Municipal Court punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months. 
(Ord. No. 3-07, § 7, 2-12-07) 
Secs. 18-20-18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIDEWALKS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 18-31-18-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUSINESS DISTRICT 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, Ch. 10. (Back)
Sec. 18-41. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business district means that part or area within the corporate limits of the city generally used for retail or wholesale business establishments. 
    Sidewalk means that areaway or walkway which is set apart for use of pedestrians or foot traffic or that space left on the side of and adjacent to the street and inside of the curbing for foot passengers. 
(Code 1979, § 13-6; Ord. No. 6-81, § 1, 6-8-81) 
Sec. 18-42. - Storage or display of merchandise. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person within the business district of the city to use the area of the sidewalks in the business district for the storing, displaying or sale of goods, wares or merchandise except at designated times as provided for in subsection (b) of this section, between sunset and sunrise. 
(b)	It shall be lawful for retail or wholesale merchants operating with a business license within the city to display and offer for sale goods, wares or merchandise within the areas of the sidewalk adjacent to the retail or wholesale place of business of the merchant on four (4) Saturdays of each calendar year, with the Saturdays to be designated by the Downtown Merchants Association of the city. 
(Code 1979, §§ 13-7, 13-8; Ord. No. 6-85, 9-23-85) 
Sec. 18-43. - Obstruction of pedestrians prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful at all times for any person to so obstruct the sidewalk or to display any goods, wares or merchandise within the sidewalk area of the city so as to obstruct, hinder or prevent foot traffic having adequate space on the sidewalk or to prevent the use of the sidewalk by pedestrians. 
(Code 1979, § 13-9; Ord. No. 6-81, § 4, 6-8-81) 
Chapter 19 - TAXATION 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; animals, Ch. 4; buildings, Ch. 5; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 10; transient occupancy tax, § 10-331 et seq. (Back)
State Law reference- Municipal taxation, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-1 et seq.; revenue and taxation generally, Code of Ala. 1975, Title 40; municipal tax year, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-51-1, 11-51-40. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 19-1-19-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAX 

Sec. 19-26. - Assessment by county tax assessor. 
    The tax assessor of the county is hereby appointed to make the assessment of ad valorem taxes and the compensation provided in this article shall be for the performance of such services. 
(Code 1979, § 8-61) 
State law reference- Assessments by county tax assessor, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-45. 
Sec. 19-27. - Compensation for county tax assessor. 
    There is hereby fixed as compensation for the tax assessor of the county a sum equal to two (2) percent of the ad valorem taxes collected in each taxable year for compensation for levying ad valorem taxes for the city. 
(Code 1979, § 8-62) 
Sec. 19-28. - Collection by county tax collector. 
    The tax collector of the county is hereby appointed to make the collection of ad valorem taxes and the compensation as provided in this article shall be for the performance of such services. 
(Code 1979, § 8-63) 
State law reference- Collections by county tax collector, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-51-43, 11-51-50. 
Sec. 19-29. - Compensation for county tax collector. 
    There is hereby fixed as compensation for the tax collector of the county a sum equal to two (2) percent of the ad valorem taxes collected in each taxable year for compensation for collecting ad valorem taxes for the city. 
(Code 1979, § 8-64) 
Sec. 19-30. - Statutory authority for compensation. 
    The compensation provided in sections 19-27 and 19-29 is fixed under the authority provided in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-51-74. 
(Code 1979, § 8-65) 
Sec. 19-31. - Tax millage. 
    The tax millage for ad valorem taxes shall be seven (7) mills. 
(Code 1979, § 8-66) 
Chapter 20 - UTILITIES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings, Ch. 5; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; housing, Ch. 9; solid waste, Ch. 17; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 18; subdivisions, App. B; standards for accommodating utilities, § 18-1; general improvements in subdivisions, App. B, art. VI, § 1. (Back)
State Law reference- Contracts and indebtedness for waterworks systems, consolidation with lighting systems, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-3; public improvements and assessments generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-48-1 et seq.; public utilities in municipalities, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-50-1 et seq.; water pollution control, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-22-1 et seq.; environmental management, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-22A-1 et seq.; waterworks and water supplies generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 22-23-30 et seq.; public utilities generally, Code of Ala. 1975, Title 37; board of directors to govern public corporation operating utility system, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-50-313. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Board means the water works and sewer board, a public corporation existing under Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-50-310 et seq. 
    Sewer charge means that charge due to be paid by each person who discharges or utilizes the sanitary sewer system of the city. 
    Water customer means any person, either private or commercial, who subscribes to or purchases filtered water through a meter, or otherwise, from the city. 
(Code 1979, § 4-19; Ord. No. 10-81, § 1, 9-28-81) 
Sec. 20-2. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any person in violation of this chapter, shall have the water utility service terminated until in full compliance with this chapter. Any person in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 1979, §§ 4-42, 4-54) 
Sec. 20-3. - Deposit for water service. 
(a)	A deposit of thirty dollars ($30.00) shall be paid by each new water customer prior to the turning on of the service to the customer. 
(b)	Upon the termination of the water service provided for in subsection (a) of this section, the deposit made by the customer shall be refunded, provided that the customer is not indebted to the city for any delinquent service charge or bill rendered. The final bill rendered may be deducted from the deposit if the bill has not been paid otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 5-80, §§ 1, 3, 7-28-80) 
Sec. 20-4. - Bills for water and sewer service-Generally. 
    The water customers and sewer customers of the city shall be rendered a statement or bill for the services rendered to the customers. The statements of account shall be rendered at the time and in the manner directed by the city council. 
(Code 1979, § 4-49) 
Sec. 20-5. - Same-Failure to pay. 
(a)	Authority to discontinue service. The city, acting through its servants, agents or employees, is hereby authorized, empowered and vested with the authority to discontinue the water service or sewer service from any residence, home, apartment, business establishment or any other place where the water service or sewer service is used after the statement, account or bill has not been paid within ten (10) days from the date of rendering of the statement, account or bill. 
(b)	Removal of water meter. The city, acting through its servants, agents or employees, is hereby authorized, empowered and vested with the authority to remove the water meter from any residence, home, apartment or business establishment where the payment for the services so rendered has not been paid within ten (10) days from the date of rendering of the statement, account or bill, or after the failure or refusal of the water or sewer customer to pay the statement, account or bill within ten (10) days from the date of the rendering of the bill. The city, acting by and through its servants, agents or employees, is hereby authorized, empowered and vested with authority to refuse water or sewer service to the delinquent customer by the removal from any residence, home, apartment or business establishment of any water meter. 
(Code 1979, §§ 4-50, 4-51) 
Sec. 20-6. - Charge for reconnection of water meter. 
    The city does hereby declare a service charge of five dollars ($5.00) for each water meter, for the installation or reconnection of the meter after its removal for nonpayment as provided for in this chapter. 
(Code 1979, § 4-52) 
Sec. 20-7. - Tampering with water meter, use of water service after service has been discontinued. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, change or tamper with or otherwise interfere with any water meter in the city or the police jurisdiction thereof by turning on or availing himself of the water service of the city after the service has been interrupted or discontinued by the city for the nonpayment of the charges for services rendered or of other charges made. 
(Code 1979, § 4-53) 
Sec. 20-8. - Furnishing water to another. 
    No person who is a water customer or to whom water is sold by the city through a water meter shall furnish water to any other person on the same lot or parcel of land or a lot or parcel of land adjacent thereto, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. 
(Code 1979, § 4-38) 
Sec. 20-9. - Furnishing water to mobile home or trailer. 
    No water customer of the city shall furnish water to any mobile home or trailer where the mobile home or trailer is illegally parked or maintained in the city limits or the police jurisdiction, or to any mobile home or trailer located outside the city limits, without being properly metered by the city. 
(Code 1979, § 4-41) 
Sec. 20-10. - Exceptions. 
    Nothing in sections 20-8 and 20-9 is intended to apply to a multifamily residence where more than one (1) family is housed or lodged in one (1) building or building complex where payment of the utility bill is made by the owner of the building. Also excepted from the provisions of sections 20-8 and 20-9 are all apartment buildings, hotels and motels designed or constructed for multifamily use. 
(Code 1979, § 4-40) 
Sec. 20-11. - Fluoridation policy. 
    The city adopts the policy that fluoride not be added to the water supply systems and the city council recommends to the water works and sewer board of the city that the board also adopt the policy of not adding fluoride to the water supply system. 
(Code 1979, § 4-48) 
Secs. 20-12-20-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Exercise of police jurisdiction over lands acquired or used for sanitary or stormwater sewers, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-47-22; municipal sewers and sewer systems generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-50-50 et seq.; local sewer regulations and charges, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-50-108. (Back)
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-36. - Cutting or disturbing streets for purpose of installing sewer line. 
    No person shall cut into or disturb the city streets for the purpose of laying any sewer line. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1979, § 4-44) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 18. 
Secs. 20-37-20-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SANITARY REGULATIONS 

Sec. 20-51. - Authority of county board of health; adoption of state regulations. 
    The county board of health or its authorized representative is hereby empowered by the city to make inspections and investigations at any reasonable time on any place or premises within the city or its police jurisdiction and to take necessary legal action through the city to regulate and control the disposal of human excreta and other sewage wastes in accordance with the regulations, specifications and requirements, uniform and general, set forth and approved by the state board of health, and these regulations shall herewith become a part of this division. 
(Code 1979, § 2-12.2) 
Sec. 20-52. - Compliance with division prerequisite to issuance of building permit. 
    All departments, agencies and offices of the city and their representatives, agents and officers are hereby prohibited from issuing building permits or licenses to construct or build any building, dwelling, shelter, premises or other place in which there is or is likely to be a need for the sanitary and proper disposal of human excreta or other sewage waste unless the applicant for such building permit or license shows evidence of his compliance with all sections of this division. 
(Code 1979, § 2-12.4) 
Cross reference- Buildings, Ch. 5. 
Sec. 20-53. - Proper disposal of waste required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or his agent to construct, maintain, use or permit the use of any building, dwelling, shelter, premises or other place where human beings congregate, reside, work or rest within the city or its police jurisdiction, in which adequate facilities are not provided for the disposal, in a sanitary and proper manner, of all human excreta and other sewage wastes resulting from the control or use, for whatever purpose, of the place. 
(Code 1979, § 2-12.1) 
Sec. 20-54. - Method of sewage disposal; permit for construction of private systems. 
    At places located within the city or its police jurisdiction where adequate public sanitary sewers are available, the disposal of human excreta or other sewage wastes shall be to the sanitary sewers. At places located where sanitary sewers are not available, disposal of human excreta or other sewage wastes shall be to a septic tank and disposal field as permitted by the county health officer. No septic tank, disposal field or other means of disposal shall be constructed within the city or its police jurisdiction prior to the issuance of a permit by the county health officer to the owner of the place or premises to construct and use a private individual disposal system. 
(Code 1979, § 2-12.3) 
Sec. 20-55. - Applicability of sewer connection requirement. 
    The provisions of this division relating to sewer connections shall be deemed to apply where a public sanitary sewer is or becomes reasonably accessible. A public sewer shall be deemed reasonably accessible when the sewer is located within a distance of two hundred (200) feet of any outside line of the lot upon which such dwelling or other building is located, provided such sewer may be reached without having to cross the property of another. After such public sanitary sewer becomes available, connection to the sanitary sewer shall be required within a period of one hundred twenty (120) days. 
(Code 1979, § 2-12.5) 
Sec. 20-56. - Installation of improvements by city. 
    In case of failure of any person or his agent to comply with the provisions of this division within fifteen (15) days after being served with a written notice, the city may order and execute the necessary improvements, the costs of the improvements to be assessed against and to become a lien upon the entire property or premises upon which such installation or improvements are made, in accordance with Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-50-55. 
(Code 1979, § 2-12.6) 
Secs. 20-57-20-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GREASE MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 20-100. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Clanton Grease Management Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1-12, 1-23-2012) 
Sec. 20-101. - Purpose. 
    This article establishes uniform maintenance and monitoring requirements for controlling the discharge of grease from food service facilities discharging into the city's treatment works. 
(1)	To prevent the introduction of excessive amounts of grease into the city's sewer systems and treatment works. 
(2)	To prevent clogging or blocking of the city's sewer lines due to grease build-up causing sanitary sewer overflows onto streets, into stormwater systems or waterways and into residences and commercial buildings, resulting in potential liability to the city. 
(3)	To prevent maintenance and odor problems at wastewater pumping stations due to grease build-up. 
(4)	To implement a process to recover costs for any liability incurred by the city for damage caused by grease blockages resulting in sanitary sewer overflows. 
(5)	To establish fees for the recovery of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(6)	To establish enforcement procedures for violations of this article.
(Ord. No. 1-12, 1-23-2012) 
Sec. 20-102. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to all food service facilities discharging into the city's treatment works and to all grease haulers doing business within the City of Clanton. 
    The board reserves the right to make determinations of grease control equipment adequacy and need, based on review of all relevant information regarding grease control equipment performance, maintenance, and facility site and building plan review to require repair to, modification, or replacement of such interceptors or traps. 
(Ord. No. 1-12, 1-23-2012) 
Sec. 20-103. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, certain abbreviations, terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the following meanings: 
    25% rule means grease and solids accumulation is determined to be greater than twenty-five (25) percent of the total depth from grease interceptor's interior floor to the static or working water level, at any point within the grease interceptor. 
    Alternative grease removal technology means an automatically operated mechanical device specifically designed to remove grease from the waste stream. 
    Best management practices means any program, process, operating method, or measure that controls, prevents, removes, or reduces discharge of FOG. 
    Board means the Water and Sewer Board of the City of Clanton. 
    City means the City of Clanton. 
    Code means the Municipal Code of the City of Clanton. 
    FOG means fats, oils, and grease. 
    Food means any raw, cooked, or processed edible substance, ice, beverage, or ingredient intended for human consumption. 
    Food service establishment (or facility) means any facility engaged in the preparation of food for human consumption and/or serving of meals, lunches, short orders, sandwiches, frozen desserts, or other edible products. The term includes restaurants, coffee shops, cafeterias, short order cafes, luncheonettes, taverns, lunchrooms, places which manufacture retail sandwiches, soda fountains, institutional cafeterias, catering establishments, and similar facilities by whatever name called. This does not apply to private residences. 
    Food service establishment (or facility) owner or owner means in the case of individual food service facilities, the owner or proprietor of the food service facility. Where the facility is a franchise operation, the owner of the franchise is the responsible person or entity. Where the facility is owned by a partnership, corporation, or other type of business entity, the individual who is authorized to legally act on behalf of the business entity under Alabama state law shall be the responsible person. 
    Fryer oil means oil that is used and/or reused in fryers for the preparation of foods such as fried chicken and fries. Discharge of fryer oil into the treatment works is prohibited. 
    GMP means City of Clanton Grease Management Program. 
    Gray water means all liquid contained in a grease interceptor that lies below the floating grease layer and above the food solids layer. 
    Grease means fats, oils, and grease used for the purpose of preparing food, or resulting from food preparation and includes all elements of FOG. The terms grease and FOG may be used interchangeably. 
    Grease control equipment (GCE) means a grease interceptor, grease trap, control valves, piping, etc. 
    Grease hauler means a person or business that collects the contents of a grease interceptor or trap and transports it to an approved recycling or disposal facility. 
    Grease interceptor (grease trap per health department regulations) means an interceptor having a minimum storage capacity of one thousand (1,000) gallons or more and is a device located underground and outside of a facility. It is designed to collect, contain or remove food wastes or grease from the wastewater while allowing the balance of the liquid waste to discharge to the treatment works system by gravity. 
    Grease trap (grease interceptor per health department regulations) means a point of use interceptor whose rated flow is 50gpm or less and is a device located inside a facility normally placed under or in close proximity to a sink designed to collect, contain, or remove food wastes and grease from the wastewater while allowing the balance of the liquid waste to discharge to the treatment works system by gravity. Grease interceptors shall be equipped with a device to control the rate of flow so that the device's rated flow is not exceeded. 
    Inspector or GMP inspector means a member of the staff of the City of Clanton Water and Sewer Board or person or organization designated by the board to conduct inspections or investigations and to enforce the City of Clanton Grease Management Program. 
    Maintenance means the complete removal of all grease interceptor or trap contents including floatable materials, wastewater, sludges, and solids. 
    Mobile food unit means a self propelled or vehicle mounted unit intended to be used as a food service facility. Mobile food units are not regulated by this program. 
    Notice of violation (NOV) means a written notice informing a food service facility owner or grease hauler that a violation of the City of Clanton Grease Management Ordinance has occurred. 
    Registered hauler means a grease hauler registered with the City of Clanton in accordance with this article who is authorized to perform inspection, cleaning, and grease disposal for food service facilities. 
    Sampling vault means the last point downstream of a grease trap that is specially constructed to allow inspection and sampling prior to discharge of effluent into the city's sanitary sewer collection system. 
    Sanitary facilities means bathrooms, bathroom fixtures, bathroom groups, hand sinks or other similar fixtures or facilities. 
    Temporary food service facility means a food service facility that has no permanent sewer connection and operates at the same location for a period of time not to exceed fourteen (14) days in conjunction with a single event, such as a fair, carnival, circus, exhibition, or similar temporary gathering. Temporary food service facilities are not regulated by this program. 
    Treatment works means any part of the City of Clanton's wastewater system. 
    User means the owner or operator of a food service facility that discharges wastewater into the treatment works. 
(Ord. No. 1-12, 1-23-2012) 
Sec. 20-104. - Grease management. 
(a)	General requirements. 
(1)	Food service establishments shall discharge all waste from sinks, dishwashers, drains and any other fixtures through which fats, oils and grease may be discharged into a properly maintained and functioning grease interceptor. All food service facilities shall have grease control equipment approved by the board. Establishments whose grease control equipment or methods are not adequately maintained to prevent floatable oils, fat or grease from entering the treatment works shall be notified in writing of any noncompliance and whereby corrections can be made. 
(2)	All food service facilities grease control equipment shall be subject to review, evaluation, and inspection by the board's representatives during normal working hours. Results of inspections will be made available to facility owner, leaseholder or operator. 
(3)	If grease is responsible for a sewer blockage, all food service establishments upstream from the blockage will be inspected. 
(4)	Repeated violations by food service facilities of the oil and grease removal ordinance requirements may be considered grounds for discontinuance of water and sewer service. 
(5)	Food service facilities whose operations cause or allow excessive grease to discharge or accumulate in the treatment works may be liable to the city for costs related to public utilities department service calls for line blockages, line cleanings, and line and pump repairs, etc. including all labor, materials, and equipment. Failure to pay all service-related charges may also be grounds for water and sewer service discontinuance. 
(6)	Regularly scheduled maintenance of grease control equipment is required to ensure adequate operations. In the maintaining of the grease control equipment, the owner, lease-holder or operator shall be responsible for the approved removal and disposal of grease by the City of Clanton Grease Management Ordinance guidelines, and shall maintain on-site records. 
(7)	The owner shall be responsible for ensuring that no waste or wastewater pumped from the grease interceptor/grease trap is reintroduced into the city treatment works. This is a violation of the City of Clanton sewer use ordinance and can result in enforcement action. 
(8)	Any food service facility whose effluent discharge to the treatment works and is determined by the city to cause interference in the conveyance or operation of the treatment works, may be required to sample its grease trap discharge and have it analyzed for oil and grease at the expense of the owner, lease-holder or operator. Results of such analyses shall be reported to the board. This would include any discharge of water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred forty (140) mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(9)	All grease traps/interceptors shall be designed to have a minimum twenty-four-minute detention time and installed to allow for complete access for inspection and maintenance of the inner chamber(s) and viewing and sampling of effluent wastewater discharged to the treatment works. 
(10)	Food service facilities shall adopt best management practices and procedures for handling sources of floatable oils, fat, or grease originating within their facility. Employees shall be trained on these procedures. A notice shall be permanently posted at prominent locations in the facility advising and reminding employees of the procedures to be followed. 
(11)	The use of enzymes or biological additives as a grease degradation agent is not considered acceptable grease interceptor maintenance practice. Any user who uses these additives must apply for a variance from the board. 
(12)	Waste grease from fryers is considered recyclable oil and grease. All users shall have waste grease containers to store recyclable oil and grease. Users are encouraged to contract with a licensed renderer to remove the collection waste oil and grease to be taken to the renderers processing plant. 
(13)	The following fixtures shall discharge into the interceptor:
a.	Three (3) compartment or larger sinks;
b.	Mop sink;
c.	Floor drains;
d.	Dishwasher;
e.	Hub drains (condensate discharge lines from ice makers, freezers, and walk-in coolers may be connected to the interceptor at the plumbers discretion); 
f.	Any additional fixtures that may be discharging grease or oil laden water.
(b)	Permit required. Any food service facility that intends to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any grease trap or interceptor is required to make application to the building official and obtain the required permit. The facility shall submit with its permit application the appropriate design criteria. 
(c)	Requirements. All food service facilities are required to have a grease interceptor or trap properly installed in accordance with any and all applicable requirements of the City of Clanton Municipal Code. 
(1)	New food service facilities. On or after the effective date of the City of Clanton Grease Management Ordinance, food service facilities which are newly proposed or constructed shall be required to install an in-ground grease interceptor. All new buildings or strip centers containing sections that may later be used for a commercial food enterprise are encouraged to provide a stub-out for a separate waste line for future grease interceptor installation. The owner of a new strip center shall consider suitable physical property space and sewer gradient that will be conducive for the installation of an exterior, in-ground grease interceptor(s) for any flex space contained within the strip center. Physical property restrictions and insufficient sewer gradient shall not be a defense for failure to install an exterior, in-ground grease interceptor. 
(2)	Existing food service facilities. Food service facilities existing prior to the date of the City of Clanton Grease Management Ordinance shall be permitted to operate and maintain existing grease interceptors or traps provided their grease interceptors or traps are in good operating condition. 
(3)	Existing buildings and structures. New food service facilities locating in existing buildings are required to comply with the grease interceptor standards applicable to new buildings. Any building or structure existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance, before being utilized as a food service facility, must be equipped with an in-ground grease interceptor. This shall include existing structures that upon construction were not intended to be a food service facility or any existing building or structure being renovated for this purpose. The use of an indoor grease trap may be utilized upon the acceptance and approval of the board. The user shall apply for a variance prior to any installation. 
The board shall require an existing facility to install a new grease interceptor or trap that complies with the requirements of the code or to modify or repair any noncompliant plumbing or existing grease interceptor or trap when any one (1) or more of the following conditions exist: 
a.	The facility is found to be contributing grease in quantities sufficient to cause line stoppages or necessitate increased maintenance on the treatment works. 
b.	The facility does not have a grease interceptor or trap.
c.	The facility has an irreparable or defective grease interceptor or trap.
d.	Remodeling of the food preparation or kitchen waste plumbing system is performed which requires a plumbing permit to be issued by the City of Clanton. 
e.	The facility is sold or undergoes a change of ownership.
f.	The facility does not have plumbing connections to a grease interceptor or trap in compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(d)	Plumbing connections. Grease interceptors or traps shall be installed in accordance with City of Clanton Building Code - Plumbing, as amended (current edition). Wastewater from sanitary facilities shall not be introduced into the grease interceptor or trap under any circumstances. 
(e)	Records maintenance. Each food service facility shall maintain a record of all interceptor maintenance is entered. Maintenance information shall include, but not be limited to, date and time of the maintenance, estimated gallonage removed from interceptor or trap, any defects in the grease interceptor or trap, details of any repairs required and dates of repair completion, changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics, receipts from grease haulers, plumbers, parts suppliers, etc., and any other records pertaining to the interceptor. This logbook shall be made available for review upon request. Records shall be maintained for a period of three (3) years. Each facility shall provide, upon request of the GMP inspector within ten (10) days, drawings of sufficient detail to depict the plumbing layout of the facility. 
(f)	Quarterly reports. Quarterly pumping reports will be submitted on forms provided by the board. A copy of the receipt from the maintenance contractor will be attached to each quarterly report. Reports not received by the board within the appropriate reporting period will be subject to fines. Quarterly reports will be submitted in accordance with the following schedule and may be submitted at any time on or between the dates for the applicable quarter: 
1st quarter-January 1 through March 31 
2nd quarter-April 1 through June 30 
3rd quarter-July 1 through September 30 
4th quarter-October 1 through December 31 
(g)	Grease interceptors. Grease interceptors shall be designed and installed in accordance with the code (falls under the State of Alabama Department of Public Health definition) and shall be operated and maintained as follows: 
    All new food service establishments shall be required to install a grease interceptor. Grease interceptors shall be adequately sized, with no interceptor less than one thousand (1,000) gallons total capacity unless otherwise approved by the board. 
    Grease interceptors shall conform to the following criteria when being designed and constructed: 
(1)	A twenty-four (24) minute retention time under actual peak flow.
(2)	New in-ground grease interceptors shall be no less than one thousand (1,000) gallons total capacity unless otherwise approved by the board. 
(3)	Minimum 2:1 length to width ratio.
(4)	Baffle wall to be located a distance from inlet wall of two-thirds (2/3) to three-quarters (3/4) of the total length of the interceptor; no baffle wall in grease trap if connected to field lines. 
(5)	Nine (9) inches of freeboard at grease interceptor top.
(6)	Each grease interceptor shall have inlet and outlet tees. The outlet tee shall extend fifty (50) percent into the liquid depth. The inlet tee shall extend twenty-five (25) percent into the liquid depth. Inlet and outlet tee must be vented at the top of the sanitary tee and be a minimum of three (3) inches in diameter. 
(7)	Access openings over the inlet, outlet, and each compartment within the grease interceptor. Each opening shall be twenty-four (24) inches in diameter and contain pick holes. All covers shall be constructed of cast iron or equivalent traffic bearing material. Manholes/covers must extend to the finished grade and shall be installed to exclude the entrance of surface or storm water into the interceptor. 
(8)	Full size cleanouts shall be installed on the inlet and outlet sides of the interceptor and extended to grade. 
    Except for under the sink grease traps, each interceptor shall be located outside of a building or structure in an area accessible for service, and so installed and connected that it shall be at all times easily accessible for inspection and for cleaning and removal of the intercepted waste. Inlet flow control inspection ports, interceptor inspection ports and effluent monitoring ports shall be in areas where vehicles may not temporarily block access for inspection. Interceptors shall be deemed to be inaccessible if the use of ladders or the removal of bulky equipment or stored materials as required to inspect inlet flow control devices, inspect or service interceptors, or sample interceptor effluent. Inspection ports and monitoring ports shall be located so is to allow inspectors quick and easy access to the inlet flow control device, each compartment of the interceptor, and the effluent from the interceptor. An interceptor shall not be installed in any part of a building where food is handled. The location of all interceptors, inspection ports, and monitoring ports must be approved by the board. 
a.	Pumping and maintenance. Each food service facility shall be responsible for the costs of pumping, cleaning, and maintaining its grease interceptor. All food service facilities that have grease interceptors shall utilize a registered grease hauler. Pumping services shall include the complete removal of all contents, including floating materials, gray water, bottom sludge, and solids from the interceptor. Grease interceptor cleaning shall include scraping excessive solids from the walls, floors, baffles, and all piping. After the interceptor or trap is thoroughly cleaned interceptor or trap must be filled with cold potable water to complete maintenance operation. 
It shall be the responsibility of the grease hauler to inspect an interceptor during, or immediately after the pumping procedure to ensure that the interceptor is clean and that all fittings and fixtures inside the interceptor are in working condition and functioning properly. If the interceptor is not functioning properly, the grease hauler shall notify the owner and the board in writing. The notice shall include a sufficient description of the malfunction. 
b.	Interceptor pumping frequency. Each food service facility shall have its grease interceptor pumped according to the following criteria (same for the State of Alabama Department of Public Health definition): 
1.	When the settled solids layer exceeds the invert of the outlet pipe (typically eight (8) inches in depth), or; 
2.	When the total volume of captured grease and solid material displaces more than twenty-five (25) percent of the capacity of the interceptor, or; 
3.	When the interceptor is not retaining or capturing oils and greases.
4.	Interceptors shall be cleaned a minimum of once every three (3) months (same for State of Alabama Department of Public Health definition). 
c.	Inspection. Grease interceptors shall be inspected by a GMP inspector. All grease interceptors, whether singular or two (2) tanks in series must have each chamber directly accessible from the surface to provide means for the servicing and maintaining the interceptor in working and operating condition. 
d.	Solids. A basket, screen or other intercepting device shall prevent passage into the drainage system of solids, one-half (1/2) inch or larger in size. 
If a food service establishment chooses to install or has a food-waste grinder installed, the waste from these units shall pass through a grease interceptor. The food service establishment shall service and maintain the unit as often as necessary to meet the conditions of this ordinance. 
e.	Disposal. Wastes removed from each grease interceptor shall be disposed of at a facility permitted to receive such wastes. Grease, solid materials, or gray water removed from interceptors shall not be returned to any grease interceptor, private sewer line or to any portion of the city's treatment works. 
(h)	Grease traps. Grease traps shall be installed in accordance with the code (same for State of Alabama Department of Public Health definition) and shall meet the following criteria: 
    Under the sink grease trap requirements. 
(1)	Under the sink grease traps shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of the wastewater source and as close to the wastewater source as is reasonably possible. 
(2)	Baffle systems and all other internal pieces shall be removable to facilitate cleaning and replacement, but must be in place at all other times. 
(3)	The lid shall cover the deep seal interceptor. The deep seal interceptor shall be constructed so as to eliminate the possibility of sewer gas entering the kitchen area. 
(4)	The interceptors shall be constructed with bottom supports so that the body of the interceptor does not corrode by coming into contact with the floor. 
(5)	The trap shall be equipped with a flow control fitting.
(6)	Grease trap shall be properly sized to handle the discharge rate of the fixtures and/or appliances. 
(7)	Each food service facility shall be solely responsible for the cost of grease trap cleaning and maintenance. Each facility may contract with a registered grease hauler or it may develop a written protocol and perform its own grease trap cleaning and maintenance procedures. Cleaning and maintenance must be performed when the total volume of captured grease and solid material displaces more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total volume of the grease trap. Each facility shall determine the frequency at which their grease trap shall be cleaned, but all grease traps shall be opened, inspected, cleaned, and maintained at a minimum of once per week. Grease and solid materials removed from a grease trap shall be mixed with an oil absorbent in an enclosed bag or container and disposed of in a solid waste container. 
(8)	Grease traps shall be inspected by a GMP inspector as necessary to assure compliance with this article and to assure proper cleaning and maintenance is being performed. 
(i)	(1)	Grease trap installation requirements. 
a.	The trap may be set on the floor, partially recessed in the floor with top flush with the floor, or fully recessed below the floor to suit piping and structural conditions, as acceptable to the board. 
b.	There shall be sufficient clearance for the removal of the trap cover for cleaning.
c.	Unless specifically approved by the board, runs of pipe exceeding twenty-five (25) feet between fixture and trap shall not be permitted. 
d.	The trap shall not be installed in a waste line from a garbage grinder. Any garbage grinder waste shall bypass the interceptor. A basket, screen or other intercepting device shall prevent passage into the drainage system of solids, one-half (1/2) inch or larger in size. 
e.	A suitable flow control fitting shall be installed ahead of the trap in the waste line beyond the fixture and as close as possible to the underside of the lowest fixture. When wastes of two (2) or more sinks or fixtures are combined to be used by one (1) trap, a single flow control fitting shall be used. 
f.	Air intake for flow control either shall terminate under the sink drain board as high as possible to prevent overflow, or shall terminate in a return bend at the same height and on the outside of the building. 
g.	To retain water and prevent siphoning, all interceptors must be a vented and sized in accordance with the applicable plumbing codes. 
h.	With the approval of GMP inspector, one (1) interceptor may be used to serve multiple fixtures if the fixtures are located close together and the interceptor is sized to meet the combined flow of all the fixtures. 
(2)	Flow control device. Grease traps shall be equipped with a device to control the rate of flow through the unit. The rate of flow shall not exceed the manufacturers rated capacity recommended in gallons per minute for the unit. Each food service facility is responsible for maintaining appropriate flow control devices. 
(3)	Venting. The flow-control device and the grease trap shall be vented in accordance with the code. The vent shall terminate in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Each food service facility is responsible for maintaining appropriate venting of the grease trap. 
(4)	Influent water temperature. The influent to grease traps shall not exceed one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(5)	Alternative grease removal devices or technologies. Alternative devices and technologies such as automatic grease removal systems shall be subject to written permission by the board prior to installation. Permission to use the device shall be based on demonstrated and proven removal efficiencies and reliability of operation. The board may permit these types of devices depending on manufacturer's specifications on a case-by-case basis. The food service facility may be required to furnish analytical data demonstrating grease removal effectiveness, or perform effluent monitoring. Permission to use alternative devices and technologies may be withdrawn by the board at any time. 
(Ord. No. 1-12, 1-23-2012) 
Sec. 20-105. - Facility inspections. 
(a)	Entry. Each facility shall allow the board or his or her designee's the right of entry upon real property for the purpose of inspection, observation, records examination, measurement, and sampling in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
    The board has the right to enter and inspect the food service facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this ordinance is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created, discharged or suspected to be discharged, shall allow board personnel ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying or the performance of any of their duties. The board shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Denial of the board's access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this ordinance. 
(b)	Inspections. The GMP inspector shall inspect food service facilities on either an unannounced or scheduled basis to verify continued compliance with the requirements of this article. The GMP inspector shall inspect all grease traps or interceptors, plumbing connections, the logbook and file, other pertinent data or take samples as necessary. The GMP inspector shall record all observations in a written report. Any deficiencies shall be noted, including but not limited to: 
(1)	Failure to properly maintain the grease interceptor or trap in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(2)	Failure to report changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics.
(3)	Failure to maintain logs, files, records or access for inspection or monitoring activities.
(4)	Inability of existing grease interceptor or trap to prevent discharge of grease into the city's treatment works. 
(5)	Any other inconsistency with or violation of this article.
(c)	Re-inspections. The GMP inspector shall inspect any repairs, replacements or other deficiencies and shall provide written notice of compliance or noncompliance. In the event of continuing noncompliance, re-inspections will be performed. 
    Whenever the GMP inspector determines that a grease interceptor or trap is in need of pumping, repairs, maintenance, or replacement, enforcement shall be as follows: 
(1)	Notice of violation. The GMP inspector conducting the inspection shall immediately notify the food service facility owner that a violation exists and issue the owner a notice stating the nature of the violation. 
(2)	Inspection and re-inspection. If a grease interceptor or trap has to be re-inspected because of deficiencies found during a previous inspection, and all of the deficiencies have been corrected, there shall be no charge for the re-inspection. If all of the deficiencies have not been corrected, a re-inspection fee shall be charged to the food service facility. 
(3)	Sampling fees. Fees for any sampling and analysis of wastewater discharges deemed necessary for the protection of the treatment works shall be charged to the food service facility owner. 
(4)	Pump-out and cleaning. A violation involving the lack of proper cleaning and maintenance of a grease trap shall require the food service facility owner to clean out the trap(s) within twenty-four (24) hours of the notice of violation. 
(5)	Repairs and replacement. The food service facility owner shall be responsible for the cost and scheduling of all repairs to or replacement of its grease interceptor(s) or trap(s). Repairs and replacements required by a GMP inspector shall be completed within a reasonable time as established by the GMP inspector. 
(6)	Noncompliance. If the food service facility owner continues to violate the provisions set forth in this article, or fails to initiate or complete corrective action in response to a notice of violation, the board may pursue one (1) or more of the following options at the board's sole discretion: 
a.	Pump out the grease interceptor and require reimbursement of the costs from the food service facility owner. 
b.	Assess further inspection fees as provided.
c.	Terminate water and sanitary sewer service. (Any interruption of services due to noncompliance of the grease management program will require inspection and recertification by the local health department prior to resuming activities.) 
(Ord. No. 1-12, 1-23-2012) 
Sec. 20-106. - Fines. 
    Food service establishments committing one (1) of the offenses listed herein will be assessed the corresponding amounts on a calendar year basis. These fines will be added to the monthly water bill and are payable upon receipt. The fines provided for in this section are not exclusive and do not prohibit the board from using any other remedy provided by law. 
    Grease interceptors and traps shall be inspected a minimum of once a year. Frequency of inspection may be increased in order to protect the treatment works against the accumulation of grease. If a grease interceptor or trap fails an inspection, the inspector shall notify the User that maintenance must be performed on the grease interceptor or trap within seven (7) calendar days. The inspector will return within fourteen (14) calendar days to re-inspect the grease interceptor or trap. The fee for the re-inspection shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per grease interceptor or trap. 
    If the grease interceptor or trap fails the re-inspection, a notice of non-compliance shall be issued and maintenance must be performed on the grease interceptor or trap immediately. A second re-inspection will be scheduled within forty-eight (48) hours. The user shall be assessed a fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each re-inspections until a passing inspection is received. Any grease interceptor or trap which receives four (4) notices of non-compliance within a twenty-four (24) month period shall be deemed a nuisance by the board and shall require corrective actions as determined by the board to remedy the nuisance, including, if deemed necessary, termination of City of Clanton utilities (water and sewer service). Any alternative technology grease removal device found in non-compliance shall be deemed a nuisance by the board. If the user is unable to cure the nuisance, installation of a conventional passive grease trap shall be required. 
_____
    Fines shall be assessed as follows: 
A. Minor Violation 1st Offense: Failure to submit quarterly report$50.00Inspection hindrance (equipment related)$50.00Failure to maintain on site records$50.00Failure to pump grease and submit record$150.002nd Offense: Failure to submit quarterly report$100.00Inspection hindrance (equipment related)$100.00Failure to maintain on site records$100.00Failure to pump grease and submit report$300.003rd Offense: Failure to submit quarterly report$150.00Inspection hindrance (equipment related)$150.00Failure to maintain on site records$150.00Failure to pump grease and submit report$450.004th Offense and Up: Failure to submit quarterly report$300.00Inspection hindrance (equipment related)$300.00Failure to maintain on site records$300.00Failure to pump grease and submit report$1,000.00B. Intermediate Violation Guideline compliance failure.Failure to maintain necessary equipment.Exceeding the 25% rule.1st Offense$150.002nd Offense$300.003rd Offense$500.004th Offense and Up$1,000.00C. Major Violation Source of sewer blockage (minimum), plus remediation costs$500.00Source of sanitary sewer overflow (minimum), plus remediation costs$1,000.00Falsification of maintenance records$1,000.00Failure to install grease management equipment within the specified time frame, per month $200.00 
(Ord. No. 1-12, 1-23-2012) 
Sec. 20-107. - Effective date. 
(a)	Operators of existing food service establishments which are not equipped with grease control equipment which is in compliance with the requirements of this article shall install a grease interceptor within six (6) months of the effective date of this article. 
(b)	New food service establishments shall be equipped with a grease interceptor prior to commencement of discharge to the treatment works. 
(c)	Any requests for extensions of time for installing a grease interceptor must be made in writing to the board at least thirty (30) days in advance of the compliance date. The written request shall include the reasons for the operator's failure or inability to comply with the applicable compliance date, the amount of additional time needed to complete the remaining work, and the steps to be taken to avoid future delays. The board shall determine whether to grant an extension and the date for compliance. 
(Ord. No. 1-12, 1-23-2012) 
Chapter 21 - WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 21-1-21-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS 

Sec. 21-25. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of these guidelines is to establish minimum considerations and criteria for the review of communication towers. It is the city's express intent that the construction of new towers be an option of last resort; to the extent feasible, location of antennae on existing towers, building rooftops, and other suitable structures should first be sought. These guidelines are designed to ensure the compatibility of towers with and avoid adverse impacts to nearby properties and in order to accommodate the communication needs of residents and businesses while protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community, the city council finds that these regulations are necessary in order to (1) facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunications services to the residents and businesses of the city, (2) minimize adverse visual effects of towers through careful design and siting standards; (3) avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through structural standards and setback requirements; and (4) encourage and maximize the use of existing and approved towers, buildings and other structures to accommodate new wireless telecommunications antennas in order to reduce the number of towers needed to serve the community. 
(Ord. No. 21-99, 12-13-99) 
Sec. 21-26. - Definitions. 
    Antenna: An electromagnetic device which conducts radio signals, through an attached cable or waveguide, to or from a radio transmitter or receiver. Typically this includes "whips", "panels", and parabolic "dishes". 
    Antenna support structure: Any structure on which radio antennas and cabling can be attached. Typically this includes steel towers with guy-wires (guy towers); wooden, steel, or concrete single poles (monopoles); self supporting steel towers with three or four "legs" (towers); rooftops of existing buildings or structures such as elevated water storage tanks. 
    Cellular site: A parcel of land or building or structure (leased or purchased) on which is located one or more transmitter/receiver stations for wireless communication systems, including accessory facilities for equipment storage and operations. In cases involving vacant land, or low lying existing structures, a support structure for transmitter/receiver antennas are usually required. 
    Mini-cellular site: To accommodate the use of existing structures such as buildings, billboards and water towers, a mini cellular site is defined as: a parcel of land or building (leased or purchased) on which is located one or more transmitter/receiver stations for wireless communication systems, such that towers and/or antennae do not exceed 20 feet in height above the existing structure ad "whips", "panels", and parabolic "dishes" do not exceed 100 square feet. 
    Alternative tower structure: means man made trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles, water towers and similar alternative design mounting structures that have the capacity to camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
    Ancillary telecommunications facilities: means all telecommunications facilities as defined in definition Telecommunication Facilities, except for towers, antennas or alternative tower structures. 
    City: means the City of Clanton, Alabama. 
    FAA: means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
    FCC: means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Height: means when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from the ground level to the highest point on the tower or other structure, even if said highest point is an antenna. 
    Telecommunication facility: means a facility that transmits and/or received electromagnetic signals. It includes antennas, microwave dishes, horns and other types of equipment for the transmission or receipt of such signals, telecommunications towers or similar structures supporting said equipment, equipment buildings, parking area, and other accessory development. 
    Tower: means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antenna, including self supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The terms includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures and other similar structures. 
(Ord. No. 21-99, 12-13-99) 
Sec. 21-27. - Applicability. 
    All communication towers are subject to these guidelines. 
    Amateur radio and receive-only antenna. This article shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under 70 feet in height and is owed and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive-only antennas. 
    Pre-existing towers and antennas. Any tower or antenna for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. No. 21-99, 12-13-99) 
Sec. 21-28. - Objectives. 
    The proposed locations and design of all communication towers shall duly consider the following public health, safety and general welfare objectives. 
(1)	Structural safety: The proposed tower will comply with wind loading and other structural standards contained in applicable building and technical codes (including Sec. 1205) of the Standard Building Code and the Electronic Industries Associations RS 222 Code) so as not to endanger the health and safety of residents, employees or travelers in the event of structural failure of the tower due to extreme weather conditions or other acts of God. 
(2)	View protection: The proposed tower facility will be designed to minimize adverse visual impacts to surrounding properties and the public right-of-way, given the topography of the proposed site and surrounding area. 
(3)	Land use compatibility: The proposed tower facility shall be compatible with the surrounding land uses, given the character of use and development of the location. 
(4)	Design harmony: The proposed tower facility will be designed in harmony with the natural setting and the surrounding development pattern as well as to the highest industry standards. 
(5)	Existing communications services: The proposed tower facility will comply with FCC and other applicable agency standards so as not to interfere with existing communications services to the area. 
(6)	Health effects: The proposed tower will comply with all applicable agency standards so as not to interfere with existing communications services to the area. 
(Ord. No. 21-99, 12-13-99) 
Sec. 21-29. - Development criteria. 
    The building official shall review all communications towers requesting permits for compliance with the applicable criteria listed below. All communications towers and telecommunication facilities are subject to site review by the planning commission if the circumstances of a particular case so warrant. In any event, these criteria are considered the minimum necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare; the city may impose higher standards if it deems them necessary to further the objectives of these guidelines. 
(1)	Setbacks. 
a.	All towers, including guys, and accessory facilities shall meet minimum district yard and setback requirements for the zone in which they are located. 
b.	When located within or adjacent to a residential district or dwelling, under separate ownership, the minimum standard setback from all adjoining residential property boundaries shall be fifty (50) feet plus the height of the tower. 
c.	The planning commission may reduce the standard setbacks in this guideline (but not those required by zoning ordinances) in exceptional cases where a hardship would result due to unusual conditions on the site or other impracticalities. However, the result due to unusual conditions on the site or other impracticalities. However, the commission shall not reduce the setbacks to the detriment of affected residential properties. 
(2)	Appearance. 
a.	Towers shall maintain a galvanized steel or concrete finish so as to reduce the visibility of the structure, unless other standards are required by the FAA. Towers must be properly maintained. Estimated life of structure must be included in submittal information. 
b.	The design of the tower shall be of a type that has the least visual impact on the surrounding area. 
c.	The design of the tower compound shall, to the extent possible, maximize use of the building materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that effectively blend the tower facilities within the surrounding natural setting and built environment. 
d.	Where communications towers are deemed appropriate for a given location, the type of tower shall be restricted to monopoles 100 feet or less in height, in or within 1,000 feet of residential areas and areas of special aesthetic concerns such as commercial revitalization areas, historic districts and scenic corridors. 
e.	No signage or advertisements may be attached to the pole, tower, or antennae.
(3)	Lighting: Towers shall not be artificially lighted unless required by the FAA or other authority for safety purposes. Where required, the Planning Commission shall review the available lighting alternatives and approve that design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. "Dual lighting" (red at night/strobe during day) shall be preferred unless restricted by the FAA. Security lighting may be permitted in accordance with section (5) (security services) below. 
(4)	Landscaping. 
a.	A landscaped buffer shall effectively screen the view of the tower compound from adjacent public ways and residential properties. 
b.	The standard buffer, which may exist within the setback, shall consist of a minimum eight foot wide landscaped strip outside a dark vinyl coated steel security fencing of the perimeter of the compound. The buffer strip shall be planted with an attractive combination of trees, shrubs, vines and/or ground covers that can achieve the full height of the fence at maturity and enhances the outward appearance of the security concerns such as commercial revitalization areas, historic districts and scenic corridors, the Planning Commission may impose increased buffer standards to include: a decay resistant, solid wood fence, earth berms and brick or masonry walls in addition to the security fencing. All fencing and landscaping shall be maintained by the lessor/owner. 
c.	In isolated non-residential areas, alternative landscaping methods may be accepted, such as the use of earth toned, vinyl coated steel security fencing in combination with a four foot height of evergreen shrubs, trees, vines, and/or other plantings. 
d.	In certain locations where the impact of the tower would be minimal, such as remote, agricultural or rural locations or developed heavy industrial areas, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived. If, however, the location is leased from a governmental body, such as the state, county, or a city or town, then the landscaping requirements in subsections a. and b., above, may be required at a later date when the adjoining areas are developed. 
e.	Existing mature tree growth and natural landforms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers sited on large wooded lots. Preservation of substantial natural growth around the property perimeter may be considered by the planning commission a sufficient buffer. 
f.	Cellular facilities utilizing underground vaults in lieu of above ground switching gear buildings shall be exempt from any buffer requirements. 
(5)	Security devices. The facility shall be fully secured. A minimum eight-foot high dark colored vinyl coated steel; chain link fence shall be installed around the perimeter of the compound (measured to the top of the fence or barbed wire, if applicable). Security fencing shall require screening in accordance with subsection (4) above. Other security measures shall include locks and alarms. Approved barbed or razor wire and lighting of the compound shall be permitted, if deemed necessary to fully secure the lower compound. Lighting of the compound shall not glare onto or be objectionable to adjoining properties. Areas of special aesthetic concerns shall comply with subsection (4)b. above. 
(6)	Access. Driveways and parking (consisting of all-weather surface) shall be provided to assure the operator access to the facility for maintenance or emergency services. In some cases, parking/access may be from an adjoining alley, public street, or off street parking area. Provisions shall be made to provide access clearances for emergency vehicles. 
(7)	Co-location. No new tower shall be established if space is structurally, technically and economically available on an existing tower which would serve the area that the new tower would serve. Documentation that reasonable efforts have been made to achieve co-location shall be submitted in accordance with subsection 20-30(4) below. Towers shall be designed to provide and maximize shared use to the extent possible, given the structural and technical limitations of the type of lower proposed, in any event, co-location shall be encouraged and preferred to new installation alternatives. 
(8)	Removal of obsolete towers. Any tower that is no longer in use for it's permitted communication purposes shall be removed at the owner's expense. The owner shall provide the building official with a copy of the notice to the FCC of intent to cease operations and shall be given ninety (90) days from the date of casing operations to remove the obsolete tower and accessory structures. 
(Ord. No. 21-99, 12-13-99) 
Sec. 21-30. - Application. 
    Any application submitted for approval shall include the following items, in addition to any other required items, to show compliance with these review guidelines. 
(1)	Statement of impact on health, safety and welfare. A brief written statement shall address conformance with the health, safety and welfare objective of these guidelines. 
(2)	Site plan. A scaled site plan shall show the location and dimensions of all improvements, including setbacks, drives, paring, fencing, landscaping, and other information necessary to access compliance with the development criteria of these guidelines. If site is leased, its location with respect to the property ownership lines shall be shown. Present zoning classification of site shall be indicated. 
(3)	Elevation view. A silhouette or elevation view of the tower, accessory facilities, and compound shall show colors, materials and treatment. If lighting or other FAA requirement for tower color is proposed, evidence of such requirement shall be submitted. The configuration of future co-location arrays or panels. 
(4)	Location. Application shall state latitude and longitude. Section, Township and Range, Tax Parcel I.D. number, street address, and users identification of the proposed site. 
(5)	Frequency and wattage information. Application shall state frequency band and wattage of proposed facility. 
(6)	Justification for new tower. A proposal for a new tower shall be documented by the applicant that the planned equipment for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing tower within the proposed service area. The applicant shall submit a written affidavit showing that attempts have been made to share an existing tower or that no such tower exists. 
(7)	Certificate of shared use design. A qualified professional engineer, registered in the State of Alabama, shall certify that the proposed tower's structural design can accommodate multiple shared users, in accordance with subsection 20-29(7) (development criteria) above. 
(8)	As-built certification. A qualified professional engineer, registered in the State of Alabama, shall certify that the completed cellular site was built in accordance with the submitted site plan including the installation of any required buffer strip. 
(9)	Compliance. The applicable requirements within the permitted districts shall meet the requirement of City of Clanton Zoning Ordinance. All sites and uses shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission before any permit, zoning change or variance application is applied for. 
(Ord. No. 21-99, 12-13-99) 
Sec. 21-31. - Allowable cellular zoning districts. 
    The planning commission shall review all requests for cellular sites. 
(1)	B-1, Commercial Districts, B-2, Commercial Districts.
a.	Mini cellular sites only: Approval of the planning commission.
b.	Monopole cellular sites in accordance with "Review Guidelines for Communications Towers" and sites within one thousand (1,000) feet of a residence with poles less than one hundred (100) feet in height are subject to meeting guidelines and obtaining site plan approval by the planning commission. 
c.	Existing self-supporting cellular sites/additional collocation with approval of the planning commission. 
(2)	O-1 Office Building District.
a.	Mini cellular sites only: Approval of the Planning Commission.
(3)	AG District.
a.	Mini cellular sites only: Approval of the planning commission.
b.	Monopole cellular sites in accordance with "Review Guidelines for Communications Towers" and sites within one thousand (1,000) feet of a residence, with poles less than one hundred (100) feet in height are subject to meeting guidelines and obtaining site plan approval by the planning commission. 
c.	Existing self-supporting cellular sites/additional collocation with approval of the planning commission. 
(4)	M-1 Light Industrial District, M-2 Heavy Industrial District.
a.	Mini cellular sites only: Approval of the planning commission.
b.	Monopole cellular sites in accordance with "Review Guidelines for Communications Towers" and sites within one thousand (1,000) feet of a residence, with poles less than one hundred (100) feet in height are subject to meeting guidelines and obtaining site plan approval by the planning commission. 
c.	Existing self-supporting cellular sites/additional collocation with approval of the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 21-99, 12-13-99) 
APPENDIX A - ZONING 
ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF
CLANTON, ALABAMA 
ORDINANCE NO. 6-70 
An Ordinance Establishing Comprehensive Zoning Regulations for the City of Clanton Alabama, and Providing for the Administration, Enforcement and Amendment Thereof, in Accordance with the Provisions of Title 37, Chapter 16, Articles 1 and 2, Sections 772 to 785, Inclusive, Code of Alabama, 1940, (Recompiled Code of Alabama 1958), and for the Repeal of all Ordinances in Conflict Herewith. 
Editor's note- 
The zoning law is now found in Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-70 et seq.
Whereas the city council, pursuant to the provisions of Title 37, Chapter 16 of the Code of Alabama, has appointed a planning commission to recommend the boundaries of the various original districts and appropriate regulations to be enforced therein, and 
Whereas, the planning commission has divided the city into districts and has prepared regulations pertaining to such districts in accordance with a comprehensive plan and designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements, and 
Whereas the planning commission has given reasonable consideration, among other things, to the character of the districts and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the municipality, and 
Whereas Title 37, Chapter 16, of the Code of Alabama, empowers the City to enact a zoning ordinance and to provide for its administration, enforcement, and amendment, and 
Whereas the city council deems it necessary, for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the city to enact such an ordinance, and 
Whereas the planning commission has made a preliminary report and held public hearings thereon, and submitted its final report to the city council, and 
Whereas the city council has given due public notice of hearings relating to zoning districts, regulations, and restrictions, and has held such public hearings, and 
Whereas all requirements of Title 37, Chapter 16, of the Code of Alabama, with regard to the preparation of the report of the planning commission and subsequent action of the city council have been met; 
Now therefore be it ordained by the city council of the City of Clanton, Alabama, that the zoning ordinance of the City of Clanton, Alabama, adopted on June 12, 1961, is hereby amended to read as follows: 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- This appendix contains the zoning ordinance of the city as revised on August 29, 1977. Amendatory ordinances are identified in parentheses following the amended section; where no history note appears the section remains as enacted by the basic zoning ordinance. Any provisions in brackets [] were added by the editors for purposes of clarity. A uniform system of capitalization has been used. 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; animals, Ch. 4; buildings, Ch. 5; flood damage prevention, Ch. 8; housing, Ch. 9; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 10; subdivisions, App. B; planning commission, § 2-3; appeals and variances under flood damage prevention ordinance, § 8-64; location of businesses, § 10-36; specific definitions for subdivision regulations, App. B, art. III, § 2; proposed subdivisions to conform to zoning regulations, App. B, art. V, § 1; blocks under subdivision regulations, App. B, art. V, ;s ; 3; lots under subdivision regulations, App. B, art. V, § 4; nonresidential subdivisions, App. B, art. V, § 7. (Back)
State Law reference- Zoning, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-70 et seq. (Back)
Section 1. - Establishment of districts; provisions for official zoning map. 
    The city is hereby divided into zones, or districts, as shown on the official zoning map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance. 
    The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor attested by the city clerk, and bearing the seal of the city under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Section 1 of the Ordinance Number 6-70 of the City of Clanton, Alabama," together with the date of the adoption of this ordinance. 
    No changes of any nature shall be made in the official zoning map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this ordinance. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of this ordinance and punishable as provided under section 7. 
    Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning map which may from time to time be made or published, the official zoning map which shall be located in the office of the city clerk shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings, and other structures in the city. 
Editor's note- 
The above section was based on Ord. No. 4-72, 4-24-72.
Section 2. - Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
1.	Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines; 
2.	Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines; 
3.	Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following such city limits; 
4.	Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks; 
5.	Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines; 
6.	Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections 1 through 5 above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map; 
7.	Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections 1 through 6 above, the board of adjustment shall interpret the district boundaries; 
8.	Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of passage of this ordinance, the board of adjustment may permit, as a special exception, the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed fifty (50) feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot. 
Section 3. - Application of district regulations. 
    The regulations set by this ordinance within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, and particularly, except as hereinafter provided: 
1.	No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
2.	No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or altered:
a.	To exceed the height;
b.	To accommodate or house a greater number of families;
c.	To occupy a greater percentage of lot area;
d.	To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open spaces than herein required; or in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this ordinance. 
3.	No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this ordinance, shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building. 
4.	No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this ordinance. 
Section 4. - Regulation of nonconformities. 
1.	Intent. Within the districts established by this ordinance or amendments that may later be adopted there exist: 
a.	Lots,
b.	Structures,
c.	Uses of land and structures, and
d.	Characteristics of use
which were lawful before this ordinance was passed or amended, but which should be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this ordinance or future amendment. It is the intent of this ordinance to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this ordinance that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
    Nonconforming uses are declared by this ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of structure and land in combination shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this ordinance by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by the addition of other uses, of a nature which would be prohibited generally in the district involved. 
    To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance and upon which actual building construction has been carried on diligently. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where excavation or demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such excavation or demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be carried on diligently. 
2.	Nonconforming lots of record. In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this ordinance. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions and requirements other than these applying to area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the board of adjustment. 
    If two (2) or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this ordinance, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this ordinance, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this ordinance, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this ordinance. 
3.	Nonconforming uses of land (or land with minor structures only). Where at the time of passage of this ordinance lawful use of land exists which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this ordinance, and where such use involves no individual structure with a replacement cost exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided: 
a.	No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance; 
b.	No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance; 
c.	If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than thirty (30) days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this ordinance for the district in which such land is located; 
d.	No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this ordinance shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land. 
4.	Nonconforming structures. Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance that could not be built under the terms of this ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
a.	No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity. 
b.	Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its replacement cost at time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
c.	Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
Editor's note- 
The zoning ordinance was revised on August 29, 1977.
5.	Nonconforming uses of structures or of structures and premises in combination. If lawful use involving individual structures with a replacement cost of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, or of structure and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this ordinance, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
a.	No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this ordinance in the district in which it is located shall [be] enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located; 
b.	Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building; 
c.	Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed; 
d.	When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six (6) consecutive months or for eighteen (18) months during any three-year period (except when government action impedes access to the premises), the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located; 
e.	Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. Destruction for the purpose of this subsection is defined as damage to an extent of more than fifty (50) percent of the replacement cost at time of destruction. 
Editor's note- 
The zoning ordinance was revised on August 29, 1977.
6.	Repairs and maintenance. On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding ten (10) percent of the current replacement cost of the nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of the structure as the case may be, provided that the cubic content existing when it became nonconforming shall not be increased. If a nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs and maintenance, and is declared by any duly authorized official to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be restored, repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
7.	Uses under special exception provisions not nonconforming uses. Any use which is permitted as a special exception in a district under the terms of this ordinance shall not be deemed a nonconforming use in such district, but shall without further action be considered a conforming use. 
Section 5. - District use regulations. 
1.	Establishment of districts. For the purpose of this ordinance, the City of Clanton is hereby divided into the types of districts designated as follows: 
R-1-AResidential District (single-family)R-1-BResidential District (single-family)R-1Residential District (single-family)R-2Residential District (two-family)R-3Residential District (multifamily)RGResidential District (garden home)RTResidential District (townhouse)MH-1Mobile Home District (mobile home parks)B-1Business District (central business district)B-2Business District (general business)B-3Business District (neighborhood business)M-1Manufacturing District (light industry)M-2Manufacturing District (heavy industry)F-1Flood Plain District (agriculture, open space) 
2.	Schedule of district regulations. 
a.	R-1-A residential district. This district exists for the development of large lot, low-density residential areas. The use of land and buildings within such areas is therefore limited to single-family detached dwellings and such nonresidential uses as generally support and harmonize with such low-density districts. Within these areas, home occupations and the maintenance of professional offices within homes are not supporting and harmonizing and therefore, are prohibited. 
Use regulations. 
Uses permitted: Single-family dwellings; accessory structures; gardens; public buildings, including public schools and libraries. 
Uses permitted on appeal: Public parks and playgrounds; public utilities. 
Uses prohibited: Mobile homes; mobile home parks; commercial or industrial uses, including parking lots or parking areas in connection with these uses. 
Space and height regulations. 
Minimum lot size: Minimum required lot area-22,500 square feet, unless a greater area is required by the public health authority. Minimum required lot width at building line-150 feet. Accessory structures-10 feet side yard; 10 feet rear yard. 
Minimum yard size: Front, 50 feet; rear, 40 feet; side, 20 feet; except any structure used for the housing of household pets of any kind shall not be located closer than 25 feet to any property line or line of a district other than an agricultural district. 
Maximum height: 35 feet or 21/2 stories. 
Minimum building size: 2,000 square feet of which 1,800 shall be heated area. 
Off-street parking: 2 spaces for each dwelling. 
Maximum building area: 20 percent. 
a.	1.
R-1-B residential district. This district exists for the development of low-density residential areas. The use of land and buildings within such areas is therefore limited to single-family detached dwellings and such nonresidential uses as generally support and harmonize with such low-density districts. Within these areas, home occupations and the maintenance of professional offices within homes are not supporting and harmonizing and therefore, are prohibited. 
Use regulations. 
Uses permitted: Single-family dwellings; accessory structures; gardens; public buildings, including public schools and libraries. 
Uses permitted on appeal: Public parks and playgrounds; public utilities. 
Uses prohibited: Mobile homes; mobile home parks; commercial or industrial uses, including parking lots or parking areas in connection with these uses. 
Space and height regulations. 
Minimum lot size: Minimum required lot area-15,000 square feet, unless a greater area is required by the public health authority. Minimum required lot width at building line-100 feet. Accessory structures-100 feet side yard; 10 feet rear yard. 
Minimum yard size: Front, 35 feet; rear, 40 feet; side, 10 feet; except any structure used for the housing of household pets of any kind shall not be located closer than 25 feet to any property line or line of a district other than an agricultural district. 
Maximum height: 35 feet or 21/2 stories. 
Minimum building size: 1,400 square feet shall be heated area. 
Off-street parking: 2 spaces for each dwelling. 
Maximum building area: 25 percent. 
b.	R-1 residential district. This district exists for the protection of areas that have been and are being developed predominantly for low-density single-family dwellings. Accordingly, the use of land and buildings within such areas is limited to single-family detached dwellings and to such nonresidential uses as generally support and harmonize with these low-density residential districts. Within these areas, home occupations and the maintenance of professional offices within homes are not supporting and harmonizing and therefore, are prohibited. 
Use regulations. 
Uses permitted: Single-family dwellings; accessory structures (carports and utility rooms and structures used for residential storage)*; gardens; playgrounds; parks; public buildings; including public schools and libraries.** 
  *In all residential districts, all accessory structures shall have: rear yard-10 feet; side yard-10 feet. 
 **In an R-1-A residential district, public and semipublic structures shall have a front yard of 50 feet. In all other residential districts, public and semipublic structures shall have a front yard of 35 feet. In all residential districts, public and semipublic structures shall have: rear yard-35 feet; side yard-35 feet; maximum height-45 feet or 3 stories; maximum building area on the lot shall be 50 percent. 
Uses permitted on appeal: Public utilities; semipublic buildings; golf courses; municipal, county, or federal use. 
Uses prohibited: House trailers, trailer courts or camps, commercial and industrial uses, including parking lots or parking areas in connection with these uses, not specifically permitted. 
Space and height regulations. 
Minimum lot size: Minimum required lot area-15,000 square feet, unless a greater area is required by the public health authority. Minimum required lot width at building line-100 feet. Accessory structures-10 feet side; 10 feet rear yard. 
Minimum yard size: Front, 35 feet; rear, 40 feet; side, 10 feet; except any structure used for the housing of household pets of any kind shall not be located closer than 25 feet to any property line or line of a district other than an agricultural district. 
Maximum height: 35 feet, or 21/2 stories. 
Off-street parking: 2 spaces per dwelling. 
Maximum building area: 25 percent. 
c.	R-2 residential district. This district exists for the protection of areas that have been and are being developed predominantly for medium-density single-family dwellings but in which two-family dwellings are occasionally found. Accordingly, the use of land and buildings within such areas is limited to single-family detached dwellings and medium-density two-family dwellings, and to such nonresidential uses as generally support and harmonize with a medium-density residential area. 
Use regulations. 
Uses permitted: Single-family dwellings; two-family dwellings; accessory structures; gardens; playgrounds; parks; public buildings; including public schools and libraries. 
Uses permitted on appeal: Customary home occupations; public utilities; semipublic buildings; golf courses; municipal, county, or federal uses; private institutions such as: kindergartens and day nurseries. 
Uses prohibited: Mobile homes, mobile home parks, commercial and industrial uses, including parking lots or parking areas in connection with these uses, not specifically permitted. 
Space and height regulations. 
Minimum lot size: Minimum required lot area-10,000 square feet unless a greater area is required by the public health authority. Minimum required lot width at building line-80 feet. Accessory structures-10 feet rear; 10 feet side yard. 
Minimum yard size: Front, 30 feet; rear, 40 feet; sides, 10 feet; except any structure used for the housing of household pets of any kind shall not be located closer than 25 feet to any property line or line of a district other than an agricultural district. 
Maximum height: 35 feet or 21/2 stories. 
Off-street parking: 2 spaces per dwelling unit. 
Maximum building area: 35 percent. 
d.	R-3 residential district. This district exists to provide areas for medium-density development and that have been and are being developed primarily for single-family dwellings but which include duplexes and apartments. The use of land and buildings is limited to such nonresidential uses as generally support and harmonize with sound residential development. 
Use regulations. 
Uses permitted: Single-family dwellings; duplexes; apartments; accessory structures; gardens; playgrounds; parks; public buildings; including public schools and libraries. 
Uses permitted on appeal: Customary home occupations; public utilities; semipublic buildings; golf courses; municipal, county, or federal use; private institutions such as: kindergartens and day nurseries. 
Uses prohibited: Mobile homes, mobile home parks, commercial and industrial uses, including parking lots or parking areas in connection with these uses, not specifically permitted. 
Space and height regulations. 
Minimum lot size: Minimum required lot area-6,000 square feet, for a single-family dwelling; a minimum of 4,000 square feet for each dwelling unit if more than 1 is built. Minimum required lot width at building line-50 feet. Accessory structures-10 feet rear; 10 feet side yard. 
Minimum yard size: Front, 25 feet; rear, 30 feet; side, 10 feet; except any structure used for the housing of household pets of any kind shall not be located closer than 25 feet to any property line or line of a district other than an agricultural district. 
Maximum height: 35 feet or 21/2 stories. 
Off-street parking: 2 spaces per dwelling unit. 
Maximum building area: 30 percent. 
d.1.	RG garden home residential district. [This district exists] to provide areas suitable for the exclusive development of residential garden homes, free from other uses which are incompatible with the character and intent of this district. 
Uses permitted. Detached single-family residences and public utility service (garden homes). 
Special exception uses. Public utility facility and day care home. Home occupation. 
Area and dimensional regulations. 
Minimum lot size: Minimum required lot area-4,000 square feet. Minimum required lot width at building line-40 feet. 
Minimum yard size: Front, 20 feet; rear, 25 feet; side, 0 feet, however, side yards are subject to the following building separation provisions: (1) Garden homes shall be located so as to permit a minimum of 10 feet between homes measured from closest outside wall to closest outside wall, (2) no building in an RG district shall be located less than 25 feet from any portion of any abutting single-family residential zoning district. 
Minimum floor area: One story-1,000 square feet; two story-850 square feet on first floor. 
Buffer requirements. Shall be the same as required in the RT townhouse residential district. 
Additional regulations. 
A.	No accessory buildings/structures are allowed in the RG garden home district.
B.	No fence shall be permitted forward of the front corner of the house and fences shall not exceed seven (7) feet in height. 
C.	Because of the zero (0) lot line, easements or comparable access rights shall be included in the deed so as to permit maintenance on each home. 
D.	All utilities shall be under existing public street rights-of-way and shall include a five-foot wide buffer between the street and the improved area of the development. Buffer areas are subject to approval of the planning commission. 
Editor's note- 
Subsection d.1 above was added by Ord. No. 8-90, § III, adopted Nov. 26, 1990, and included as such subsection at the discretion of the editor. 
d.2.	RT townhouse residential district. [This district exists] to provide areas suitable for the development of residential townhouses. 
Uses permitted. Townhouse dwellings, as defined in this ordinance, along with designated storage facilities. 
Special exception uses. Because of the unique character of the townhouse development and small lot sizes, no use other than townhouse dwellings, designated storage facilities, public utility service, and home occupations are permitted. 
Area and dimensional regulations. 
A.	Density. There shall not be less than 5,445 square feet of land area (8 units per acre) including common areas, roads, tennis courts, etc., for each townhouse dwelling in the townhouse development. 
B.	Minimum floor area. One story-1,000 square feet; two story-first floor, 600 square feet; minimum for dwelling-1,200 square feet. 
C.	Minimum yard requirements. Front-35 feet; rear-35 feet; side-0 feet. 
D.	Minimum lot size. Area-2,400 square feet; width-24 feet. 
Buffer requirements. When a townhouse development is located wholly or partially adjacent to a single-family or two-family residential zone or an agricultural zone, said development shall contain a buffer strip at least fifteen (15) feet wide (which shall be in addition to minimum yard requirements, notwithstanding any other provisions of this ordinance), which shall serve as a buffer between the improved area of the development and adjacent residential or agricultural zones. When an alley of at least twenty (20) feet exists, the buffer strip requirement is reduced to a width of five (5) feet. Maintenance of the buffer strip area shall be provided for by written covenant, the adequacy of which shall be determined and approved by the planning commission. RT property adjoining existing public street rights-of-way shall include a five-foot wide buffer strip between the street and the improved area of the development. Buffer areas are subject to approval of the planning commission. 
Additional regulations. 
1.	There shall be two (2) paved parking spaces per unit, the depth of which shall be measured from back of curb. Unit parking spaces are not permitted along existing exterior streets. 
2.	No building shall be located less than thirty-five (35) feet from any boundary of the townhouse development. 
3.	The maximum number of units per cluster structure shall be two (2).
4.	No townhouse structure located in an RT townhouse district shall be located closer to the nearest exterior street right-of-way than thirty-five (35) feet. No townhouse structure shall be located closer to the nearest dedicated interior street right-of-way than twenty-five (25) feet, or nearer a private drive than ten (10) feet. Townhouse structures shall be separated by not less than fifteen (15) feet side to side. 
5.	A storage facility shall be required for each townhouse unit with a maximum ceiling height of eight (8) feet, consisting of not more than forty-eight (48) square feet of floor area, designed to complement the structural integrity of the townhouse. 
6.	The developer shall provide the city planning commission with a copy of any subdivision restrictive covenants and, in addition thereto, any articles, agreements, or provisions relating to: 
(a)	Governing body of property owners, if any.
(b)	Power conferred to governing body, if applicable.
(c)	Any other covenants required by the planning and zoning district.
Editor's note- 
Subsection d.2 above was added by Ord. No. 8-90, § IV, adopted Nov. 26, 1990, and included as such subsection at the discretion of the editor. 
e.	MH-1 mobile home district. This district exists for the purpose of providing for the establishment of mobile home developments in areas not presently zoned for such uses and to minimize any detrimental effects of such developments on existing land uses. 
Use regulations. 
Uses permitted: Mobile home park facilities, accessory structures necessary to the operation of the park to provide for the permanent or temporary parking of mobile homes. 
Uses prohibited: All uses not specifically permitted. 
Space and height regulations. 
Minimum site size: The minimum site shall be 5 acres with a minimum width of 100 feet along a major street. 
Minimum lot size: Each mobile home lot shall have a minimum of 5,000 square feet and have a minimum width of 50 feet at the front lot line. 
Minimum yard size: Mobile homes shall be located with a minimum setback of 25 feet from any park property boundary line and 10 feet from any other lot line. No mobile home shall be closer to any other mobile home than 20 feet. 
Maximum number: The maximum number of mobile homes per acre shall not exceed 8. 
Off-street parking: 2 off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each mobile home lot. 
Design requirements. The proposed development of a mobile home park shall be considered in accordance with an overall plan. 
Landscaping. The proposed development shall be designed as a single architectural scheme with appropriate common landscaping. 
Screening. A 15-foot planted buffer strip shall be provided wherever the district adjoins the boundary or property line of a residential district. 
Traffic circulation. The locations of driveways, parking spaces and interior streets shall be designated on said plan, and approved by the planning board. 
Drainage and sewage disposal. Drainage and sewage disposal plans shall be submitted to and approved by the Chilton County sanitarian. 
Application for amendment. Application for the amendment of the zoning map of the City of Clanton to create a MH-1 mobile home zone shall be accompanied by a plan or plans for the overall development of the tract of land to be rezoned, which plan or plans shall be in the form and contain the information required below. 
1.	The scale of the map shall not be less than 1 inch to 50 feet with contours at 5-foot vertical intervals showing pertinent topographical features. 
2.	The location, use, plan, and dimension of each building or structure to be constructed and the location of each mobile home to be parked. 
3.	The location, dimension, and arrangement of all open spaces, yards, accessways, entrances, exits, off-street parking facilities, pedestrian ways, location and width of roads, streets, and sidewalks. 
4.	Location, dimensions, and arrangement of all areas devoted to planting, lawns, trees or similar purposes, with a description including the height and density of all trees or planting to be used for screening. 
5.	Location and description of all facilities to be used for sewage disposal, water supply, and storm drainage. 
6.	All minimum requirements of the Alabama state public health department pertaining to mobile home parks must be met. 
f.	B-1 central business district. This district serves several functions, including the central concentration of goods and services needed to serve the region. In addition, it is intended to provide for the orderly expansion of regional commercial and service uses, to encourage the discontinuance of nonconforming uses and to encourage the development of the district with such uses and in such a manner as to minimize traffic and parking congestion. 
Use regulations. 
Uses permitted: Any retail use, service, or wholesale business, not specifically restricted or prohibited; provided, however, that not over 50 percent of the establishment's floor area is used for warehousing purposes. Parking lots, hotels, offices, and banks, public buildings, major auto repair, business signs, printing plants, clubs and fraternal organizations, mortuary or funeral home, places of amusement and assembly. 
Uses permitted on appeal: Drycleaners and laundries. Manufacturing incidental to a retail business where articles are sold at retail on the premises, not specifically prohibited herein. 
Uses prohibited: Stockyard; live animal or poultry sales; mobile homes; mobile home parks; ice plant; coal yard; lumber yard or mill; auto wrecking; gasoline; oil or alcohol storage above the ground in excess of 500 gallons; grist or flour mill; junk, scrap paper; rag storage or baling; stone or monument works. Any use prohibited in a M-1 industrial district. Residential uses. 
Space and height regulations. 
Minimum lot size: None specified. 
Minimum yard size: None specified, except 20 feet shall be provided when contiguous to R-1-A, R-1, R-2, R-3 and MH-1 district. Ten feet of this required yard shall be planted with an evergreen material to provide a screen or another type of suitable buffer shall be provided. 
Maximum height: 65 feet or 5 stories. 
Off-street parking: (See section 9, article 2.) 
Off-street loading and unloading: Shall provide space for loading and unloading for structures hereafter erected or altered when same is on lot adjoining a public or private alley. 
g.	B-2 general business district. This district serves several functions. It provides comparison shopper's goods, convenience goods and services, specialty goods, amusements and numerous services for less than a city-wide market. It also provides locations for small businessmen with a city-wide market who cannot operate in the downtown area. The predominant purpose of all these functions is retail trade. 
Use regulations. 
Uses permitted: Any use permitted in a B-1 central business district. Automobile sales and service, bus terminals and taxicab stands, storage plants, laundries, wholesale business, warehousing, form [farm] equipment sales and service, gasoline service stations, storage yards (excluding automobile junkyards), veterinarian hospitals and kennels, outdoor advertising signs, churches or similar places of worship, restaurants and similar types of businesses. 
Uses prohibited: Any use prohibited in a B-1 central business district. 
Space and height regulations. 
Minimum lot size: It is the intent of the ordinance that lots of sufficient size be used for any business or service use to provide adequate parking and loading space in addition to the space required for the other normal operations of the business or service. 
Minimum yard size: Front, 25 feet; rear, 25 feet; side, not specified except on a lot adjoining along its side lot line, a lot which is in a R-1-A, R-1, R-2, R-3, or a MH-1 district, there shall be a side yard not less than 20 feet wide. Ten feet of this required yard shall be planted with an evergreen material to provide a screen or another type of suitable buffer shall be provided. 
Maximum height: 45 feet or 3 stories. 
Off-street parking: (See section 9, article 2.) 
Off-street loading and unloading: Shall use required rear of side yard for loading and unloading. 
h.	B-3 neighborhood business district. This district is intended primarily to serve the needs of the surrounding residential neighborhoods, providing goods and services that are day-to-day needs, generally classed by merchants as "convenience goods and services." Businesses which might tend to be a nuisance to the immediately surrounding residential developments are excluded, even though the goods or services offered might be in the convenience category or classification. 
Use regulations. 
Uses permitted: Neighborhood retail stores and markets, including the following types of stores: food; general merchandise; apparel; furniture; household and hardware; radio and television; drug and sundries; jewelry and gifts; florists; sporting goods; pet shops and similar types. Neighborhood services including the following types: drycleaning and laundry pickup stations; barber and beauty shops; shoe repair; offices; banks; post offices; theatres and similar services. Filling stations where no auto repairs are made. Outdoor advertising signs and sign structures, as regulated under section 9, article 14. 
Uses permitted on appeal: Filling station where no major repair work is done; restaurants. 
Uses prohibited: Auto repair; laundry and drycleaning plants; manufacturing; cabarets; nightclubs, whether or not operated by nonprofit organizations; motels or motor courts; open-lot sales for used cars or trailers, used or new; drive-in cafes or restaurants; roller skating rinks; bowling alleys; curb markets and fruit stands; mobile homes; mobile home parks, any use prohibited in a B-2 business district. 
Space and height regulations. 
Minimum lot size: It is the intent of the ordinance that lots of sufficient size be used for any business or service use to provide adequate parking and loading space in addition to the space required for the other normal operations of the business or service. 
Minimum yard size: Front, 25 feet; rear, 25 feet; side, not specified except on a lot adjoining along its side lot line, a lot which is in a R-1-A, R-1, R-2, R-3 or a MH-1 district, there shall be a side yard not less than 20 feet wide. Ten feet of this required yard shall be planted with an evergreen material to provide a screen or another type of suitable buffer shall be provided. 
Maximum height: 45 feet or 3 stories. 
Off-street parking: (See section 9, article 2.) 
Off-street loading and unloading: Shall use required rear or side yard for loading and unloading. 
i.	M-1 industrial district (light industry). This district is intended for industrial uses, which are not offensive to nearby commercial or residential uses, and for business uses which generally support and are integrated with these industrial uses. Further development of residences is prohibited from these districts to prevent residences from being established under strongly adverse conditions and to conserve the supply of industrial land. 
Use regulations. 
Uses permitted: Light industrial operations not obnoxious, offensive or detrimental to neighboring property by reason of dust, smoke, vibration, noise, odor, or effluents, and including the following types of business or industry: ice cream plants and creameries; cold storage plants, textile mills; ice plants; bottling and central distribution plants; baking plants; dyeing plants; drycleaners and laundries; mortuary or funeral homes; and similar types of industries. 
Uses permitted on appeal: Any manufacturing use not specifically prohibited herein, including quarters for night watchmen and caretakers for a specific industry. 
Uses prohibited: Abattoir; slaughterhouse; stockyard; bag cleaning; bailer and tank works; central mixing plant for cement, mortar, plaster, or paving materials; curing, tanning or storage of hides; distillation of bones, coal, tar or wood; fat rendering; forge plant; manufacturing of acetylene, acid, alcohol, ammonia bleaching power, brick, pottery, terra-cotta or tile, concrete blocks, candles, disinfectants, dyestuffs, fertilizers, illuminating or heating gas including storage, paint, turpentine, varnish, soap, and tar products; wood pulling or scouring; junkyards; cotton waste reclaiming; and similar types of plants or operations. 
Space and height regulations. 
Minimum lot size: It is the intent of the ordinance that lots of sufficient size be used for any industrial, service, or business use to provide adequate parking and loading space in addition to the space required for the other normal operations of the enterprise. 
Minimum yard size: 
Front yard: None specified, except where existing establishments (other than residential) are set back, the board of adjustment will determine setbacks for new structures. 
Side yard: None specified, excepting a lot, adjoining its side lot line another lot which is in a R-1-A, R-1, R-2, R-3 or a MH-1 district, there shall be a side yard not less than 25 feet. Fifteen feet of this required yard shall be planted in an evergreen material to provide a screen or another type of suitable buffer shall be provided. 
Rear yard: 20 feet exclusive of utilities. 
Maximum height: 50 feet or 4 stories. 
Off-street parking: (See section 9, subsection 2.) 
Off-street loading and unloading: Shall provide adequate space for loading all vehicles or trucks incidental to the operation of the industry or use. 
j.	M-2 industrial district (general industry). This district is for heavy industrial activities which may be offensive, or incompatible, if located near commercial or residential uses and for limited business uses which support or are compatible with, these heavy industrial activities. 
Use regulations. 
Uses permitted: Any industrial use, except those which in the opinion of the building inspector would cause noise, smoke, gas, vibration, fumes, dust, or other objectionable conditions which would affect a considerable portion of the city. 
Uses permitted on appeal: Any industrial use, subject to such conditions and safeguards as the board of adjustment may require to preserve and protect any portions of the city which otherwise could be adversely affected. 
Uses prohibited: Residences and apartments, excepting quarters for a watchman or custodian and his family. 
Space and height regulations. 
Minimum lot size: Same as for M-1 industrial district. 
Minimum yard size: Same as for M-1 industrial district. 
Maximum height: 50 feet or 4 stories. 
Off-street parking: (See section 9, subsection 2.) 
Off-street loading and unloading: Same as for M-1 industrial district. 
k.	F-1 flood plain district. This district exists for the purpose of providing for the practical development of land subject to flooding. Residential, commercial and industrial development are prohibited from this district to avoid blocking the flood basin and to protect such development from the adverse effects of floods. 
Use regulations. 
Uses permitted: Agricultural uses; incidental accessory uses to an agricultural operation including barns and related uses; outdoor recreation uses including parks and picnic areas, golf courses, camps and campgrounds; airstrips. 
Uses prohibited: All residential, business and industrial uses. 
Space and height regulations. 
Maximum height: 35 feet. 
[l.]	Agriculture district regulations. 
Intent. This district exists to accommodate rural residential development and agriculture uses. Because rural areas are characterized by sparse development where land uses are separated by greater distances, these regulations are less restrictive than the other residential districts of the city. Nonresidential uses in support of agriculture, which are compatible with the rural residential environment, are permitted with restrictions. It is the intent of this ordinance that the agriculture districts be limited to rural areas and not be applied to an area which has developed in a manner consistent with other zoning districts of this ordinance. 
Use regulations. 
Uses permitted: 
Single-family dwelling and accessory structures. 
Mobile home and accessory structures, subject to the following regulations: The mobile home shall be placed and anchored in accord with the Southern Standard Building Code. Permanent underpinning shall be erected between the ground and the lower edge of the mobile home on all sides, with adequate access to utility hookups installed in the rear. All mobile homes shall bear the seal of compliance with the federal Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards, or comply with the Southern Standard Building Code as determined by the city building official. There shall be no exposed wheels, towing mechanisms, undercarriage or chassis, once the mobile home is placed. All mobile homes shall have a minimum livable floor area of 540 square feet. 
Agriculture uses including: storage of farm equipment and machinery, feed, fertilizer, crops and supplies, apiary, cultivation, pasture, orchards, forestry, greenhouse and plant nursery. 
The following uses are permitted if not located within 500 feet of a dwelling located on a separate parcel: structure, corral, pen or other enclosed area for the feeding or keeping of livestock or more than 20 fowl, sale of farm products grown on the premises and repairing and maintenance of farm equipment used on the premises. 
Off-site outdoor advertising signs where the message is intended to be viewed from the main traveled way of Interstate Highway 65, defined as the through traffic lanes exclusive of frontage roads, auxiliary lanes and ramps. Maximum height of an off-site outdoor advertising sign shall be 40 feet above the centerline elevation of Interstate Highway 65, provided however, that the total height of the sign shall not exceed 65 feet. The maximum sign face area for each sign face shall not exceed 800 square feet. Off-site outdoor advertising signs may not be stacked vertically on a sign structure. Each sign structure may contain 2 sign faces, provided that 1 sign face is directed toward the northbound lanes of Interstate Highway 65 and the other sign face is directed toward the southbound lanes. Each sign face may contain a maximum of 2 messages of [or] copy areas. An off-site outdoor advertising sign shall not be located closer than 1,000 feet to any other off-site outdoor advertising sign, single-family residential district, school or church. 
Uses permitted on appeal: 
Public building, public and private school, public park or playground, home occupation, cemetery, church, country club, golf course and public utility structure. 
The following uses, if located within 500 feet of a dwelling located on a separate parcel: structure, corral, pen or other enclosed area for the feeding or keeping of livestock or more than 20 fowl, sale of farm products grown on the premises and repairing and maintenance of farm equipment used on the premises. 
Uses prohibited: Retail uses other than those specifically permitted, wholesale and industrial uses, apartments, duplexes and townhouses. 
Space and height regulations. 
Minimum lot size: 
1 acre for a single-family residential dwelling except mobile home, unless a greater area is required by the public health authority. Minimum required lot width at building line-100 feet. 
3 acres for a mobile home unless a greater area is required by the public health authority. No more than 5 mobile homes may be located on a parcel. A mobile home may not be erected closer than 300 feet to a dwelling located on a separate parcel. Minimum required lot width at building line-200 feet. 
Minimum yard size: Front 35 feet, rear 35 feet and side 10 feet. 
Off-street parking: 2 spaces for each dwelling, see section 9, article 2 for parking requirements for nonresidential uses. 
(Ord. No. 6-87, § 2, 3-26-87; Ord. No. 8-90, §§ III, IV, 11-26-90) 
  
SUMMARY OF DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
Minimum Lot SizeMinimum Yard RequirementDistrictMinimum
District
Size
In AcresArea In
Square
FeetSquare
Feet Per
Dwelling UnitLot
Width In FeetFront
Yard
Setback
In FeetSide
Yard
In FeetRear
Yard
In FeetMaximum
HeightR-1-A-22,50022,5001505020 4035R-1-15,00015,00010035104035R-2-10,000 5,0008030104035R-3- 6,000 4,0005025103035RG- 4,000 1,0004020 (c)25-RT- 2,400 5,4452435035-MH-15 5,000 5,0005020 1020 35B-1-----(a)(a)65B-2----25(a)2545B-32---25(a)2545M-1-----(b)20 50M-2-----(b)20 50F-1-------35 
(a)	Twenty (20) feet shall be provided when contiguous to a residential district.
(b)	Twenty-five (25) feet shall be provided when contiguous to a residential district.
(c)	Side yards are subject to the following building separation provisions: (1) Garden homes shall be located so as to permit a minimum of 10 feet between homes measured from closest outside wall to closest outside wall, (2) no building in an RG district shall be located less than 25 feet from any portion of any abutting single-family residential zoning district. 
Section 6. - Supplementary district regulations. 
1.	Visibility at intersections in residential districts. On a corner lot in any residential district, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to impede vision between a height of two and one-half (21/2) and ten (10) feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the street lines of such corner lots and a line joining points along said street lines fifty (50) feet from the point of the intersection. 
2.	Fences, walls, and hedges. Notwithstanding other provisions of this ordinance, fences, walls, and hedges may be permitted in any required yard, or along the edge of any yard, provided that no fence, wall, or hedge along the sides or front edge of any front yard shall be over two and one-half (21/2) feet in height. 
3.	Accessory buildings and structures. No accessory building or structure, including separate carports and garages, utility buildings, parabolic antennas, swimming pools and similar uses, shall be erected in any required front yard, nor erected within ten (10) feet of a property line. In the single-family residential districts, a maximum height of twenty (20) feet shall apply to parabolic antennas having a diameter greater than three (3) feet, and no such antenna shall be placed on the roof of a building. 
4.	Erection of more than one principal structure on a lot. In any district, more than one (1) structure housing a permitted or permissible principal use may be erected on a single lot, provided that yard and other requirements of this ordinance shall be met for each structure as though it were on an individual lot. 
5.	Exceptions to height regulations. The height limitations contained in the schedule of district regulations do not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, antennas, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys, or other appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy. 
6.	Structures to have access. Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street, or with access to an approved private street, and all structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection, and required off-street parking. 
7.	Parking, storage, or use of major recreational equipment. For purposes of these regulations, major recreational equipment is defined as including boats and boat trailers, travel trailers, pickup campers or coaches (designed to be mounted on automotive vehicles), motorized dwellings, tent trailers, and the like, and cases or boxes used for transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied by such equipment or not. No major recreational equipment shall be parked or stored on any lot in a residential district except in a carport or enclosed building or behind the nearest portion of a building to a street, provided however that such equipment may be parked anywhere on residential premises for a time not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours during loading or unloading. No such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot, or in any location not approved for such use. 
8.	Parking and storage of certain vehicles. Automotive vehicles or trailers of any kind or type without current license plates shall not be parked or stored on any residentially zoned property other than in completely enclosed buildings. 
(Ord. No. 13-86, § 1, 10-27-86) 
Section 7. - Administration; enforcement; penalties. 
    The legislative function of enactment and amendment of the zoning ordinance is performed by the city council. Thereafter, administration of the ordinance is carried out by three (3) separate city agencies, each with its own specialized duties. 
First, the municipal building inspector is charged with enforcing the ordinance, through examining plans, inspections, keeping records, and ordering compliance. 
Second, the board of adjustment hears and decides cases in which it is claimed either that some ruling of the zoning enforcement officer was in error, that special circumstances require a variance from the strict terms of the ordinance, or special exceptions to the terms of this ordinance upon which the board of adjustment is required to pass judgment. 
Third, the city planning commission is responsible for a continuous review of the effectiveness of the ordinance, advice to the city council on proposed changes in the ordinance, advice to the board of adjustment and other agencies, advice to the municipal building inspector. 
The functions of each of these agencies are necessary to the smooth and purposeful administration of the zoning program. 
1.	Zoning enforcement officer. The building inspector is hereby authorized, and it shall be his duty to enforce and administer the provisions of this ordinance. He shall give information upon request as to the provisions of this ordinance and shall interpret the meaning of the ordinance in the course of enforcement. 
2.	Building permit required. No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, extended or enlarged, or structurally altered, nor shall any excavation or filling of any lot for the construction of any building be commenced (except repairs, not changing the character of the structure and not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) in cost, or painting or wallpapering) until the building official has issued a building permit for such work. 
3.	Application for building permit. Each application to the building inspector for a building permit shall be accompanied by plot plans in duplicate showing: 
a.	A statement of the intended use;
b.	The actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon;
c.	The size of the building to be erected;
d.	The location of the building on the lot;
e.	The location of existing structures on the lot, if any;
f.	The number of dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate;
g.	The approximate setback lines of buildings on adjoining lots; and
h.	Such other information as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this ordinance are being observed. 
Any building permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have been commenced within six (6) months of its date of issue or if the work authorized by it is suspended or abandoned for a period of one (1) year. 
4.	Certificate of occupancy required. A certificate of occupancy issued by the building inspector is required in advance of: 
a.	Occupancy or use of a building hereafter erected, altered, or moved;
b.	A change of use of any building or land; and
c.	In addition, a certificate of occupancy shall be required for each nonconforming use created by the passage of and subsequent amendments to this ordinance. The owner of such nonconforming use shall obtain a certificate of occupancy within thirty (30) days of the date of said passage of and subsequent amendments to this ordinance. The owner of such nonconforming use shall obtain a certificate of occupancy within thirty (30) days of the date of said passage or amendments. 
A certificate of occupancy, either for the whole or part of a building shall be applied for coincident with the application for a building permit and shall be issued within ten (10) days after the erection or structural alterations of such building, or part, shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of this ordinance. If the certificate of occupancy is denied, the building inspector shall state in writing the reasons for refusal and the applicant shall be notified of the refusal. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the building inspector and copies shall be furnished on request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land involved. 
5.	Remedies and penalties for violation. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the building inspector shall within ten (10) days of notification, institute appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use, or restrain correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure of land or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises. Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance shall, upon conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished for each offense by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days, or both. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall be considered a separate offense. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings, Ch. 5. 
Section 8. - Board of adjustment. 
1.	Establishment and membership of the board of adjustment. A board of adjustment is hereby established. The board shall consist of five (5) members, each to be appointed for a term of three (3) years by the city council. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. Each member may be removed for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after a public hearing. 
2.	Meetings, procedure, and records. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. Such chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. 
    The board shall adopt and publish its own rules of procedure and keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and of other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. 
3.	Appeals. An appeal may be taken to the board by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the municipality affected by any decision of the administrative officer. 
    Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the board of adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. 
    The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall transmit forthwith to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of adjustment after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of record on application on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
4.	Hearing. The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
5.	Powers and duties. The board of adjustment shall have the following powers and duties: 
a.	To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this article [ordinance] or of any ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
b.	To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of the ordinance upon which such board is required to pass under such ordinance. 
c.	To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of the ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done. 
In exercising the above-mentioned powers, such board may, in conformance with the provisions of this article [section], reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under any such [this] ordinance, or to effect any variation in such [this] ordinance. 
6.	Appeals from action of the board of adjustment. Any party aggrieved by any final judgment or decision of the board of adjustment may, within fifteen (15) days thereafter appeal therefrom to the circuit court or court of like jurisdiction, by filing with the board a written notice of appeal specifying the judgment or decision from which [the] appeal is taken. In case of such appeal, the board shall cause a transcript of the proceedings in the cause to be certified to the court to which the appeal is taken and the cause in such court be tried de novo. 
State law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-52-80, 11-52-81. 
Section 9. - General provisions applicable to all districts. 
1.	Uses permitted. 
a.	Temporary field office or workshed to be used while a commercial or industrial building is being repaired, remodeled, or initially constructed. All such temporary structures shall be removed within fifteen (15) days after the contract completion date. 
b.	The following uses are permitted subject to the approval of the zoning board of adjustment: electrical transformer stations, gas regulator stations, sewage and water treatment plants and pumping stations, and standpipes for public water supply, provided, however, the location of the facility in any residential zone shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.	The facility is essential to the immediate area or for the proper functioning of the total utility system of which the above element is a part. 
2.	All buildings, or structures, except enclosing fences, shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from all property lines. 
3.	The facility is enclosed by a protective fence of adequate height.
4.	All open spaces on the premises are suitably landscaped and maintained.
5.	Storage of vehicles and equipment on the premises shall be prohibited.
6.	The surrounding area shall not be adversely affected, but shall be protected from noise, odor, glare, dust, fumes, gas, smoke, and vibration by such suitable means and conditions as the zoning board of adjustment may specify. 
2.	Off-street automobile storage. In each zoning district each structure shall be provided with off-street vehicle storage and parking facilities in accordance with the following: 
a.	In determining the number of parking spaces required, if such spaces result in fractional parts thereof, the number of spaces required shall be construed to be the next highest whole number. 
b.	Whenever a use is increased in floor area or units of service or whatever least [means] used, additional parking spaces shall be provided in amounts hereafter specified for the use, if the existing parking space is inadequate to serve the increased activity. 
c.	Off-street parking facilities for one- and two-family dwellings shall be located on the same lot or plot of ground as the building served. 
d.	Off-street parking facilities for multifamily dwellings containing up to and including eight (8) dwelling units shall be provided on the same lot or plot of ground as the building served. 
e.	Off-street parking facilities for multifamily dwellings containing more than eight (8) dwelling units may be located within three hundred (300) feet of the building intended to be served. 
f.	Off-street parking facilities for an industry or commercial establishment which employs two hundred fifty (250) or more employees may be located within three hundred (300) feet of the building or buildings to be served, and a distance greater than three hundred (300) feet upon recommendation of the planning commission and approval of the mayor and city council. 
g.	Collective off-street parking facilities may be provided; however, such facilities shall be no less than the sum as such facilities as would otherwise be individually required [to have]. 
h.	The off-street parking requirements of one (1) or a number of establishments, can also be met through the provision of the total number of required spaces in an off-street parking lot or structure located not more than five hundred (500) feet from any of the establishments it is designed to serve. Also, the distance requirement shall be measured along sidewalks and pedestrian walks, not across country. 
i.	Off-street parking requirements for uses not specifically mentioned herein shall be the same as those required for uses of a similar or related nature. 
j.	Parking lots or areas adjacent to public streets shall have driveways or curb cuts not to exceed twenty-five (25) feet in width at the curb line. All such lots or areas shall have a protective wall or bumper block at least five (5) feet from any sidewalk line, and said lots shall be so designed that all vehicles leaving the facility will be traveling forward when entering a street, alley, or public thoroughfare. 
k.	Driveway entrances and exits of a parking area shall not be computed as a part of the required parking area. 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 11. 
3.	Required number of spaces. Parking facilities or spaces shall be determined according to the following requirements, and the amount of parking facilities needed shall be designated for such use. 
Required Parking
SpacesResidential: One- and two-family dwelling units2 parking spaces for each dwelling unit.Multifamily dwelling units2 parking spaces for each dwelling unit.Nonresidential. Tourist homes, cabins, or motels1 parking space for each sleeping room or suite, and 1 parking space for each 2 employees.Hospitals, sanitoriums, convalescent homes and homes for the aged or other similar uses 1 parking space for each 3 beds, plus 1 space for each 2 employees.Hotels1 parking space for each 2 guest sleeping rooms, plus 1 space for each 2 employees.Private clubs, fraternities, and boarding and lodging houses1 parking space for each 2 guest sleeping rooms, or in the case where no sleeping rooms are provided, 1 parking space for each 100 square feet of floor space. Community center, libraries, museums, post offices, civic clubs, and other similar uses 2 parking spaces for each 100 square feet of floor space, plus 1 space for each employee.Theatres, and auditoriums (other than facilities incidental to schools)1 parking space for each 4 seats (based on 18-inch seat width), plus 1 additional space for each 2 employees. Churches and schools1 parking space for each 4 seats in the principal auditorium, or 1 space for each 17 classroom seats (whichever is greater), plus 1 space for each employee or teacher. Also, 1 space 800 square feet in area for each school bus. Dance halls, recreation halls, and exhibition halls without fixed seats2 parking spaces for each 80 square feet of floor space used for dancing or assembly, plus 1 space for each employee. Stadiums and sports arenas1 parking space for each 3 seats, plus 1 space for each 2 employees.Bowling establishments5 parking spaces for each lane, plus 1 space each 3 spectator seats; also, 1 space for each 2 employees. Mortuaries or funeral homes1 parking space for each 50 square feet of floor area in slumber rooms, parlors, and individual funeral service rooms, plus 1 space for each 2 employees. Establishments for the sale and consumption on the premises of food, beverages, or refreshments 1 parking space for each 3 seats and 1 space for each 2 employees, or 1 parking space for each 50 square feet of floor space, whichever is greater. Professional offices and office buildings1 parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor space.Beauty parlors and barber shops2 parking spaces for each barber or beauty shop operator, plus 1 space for each 2 employees. All retail stores, except as otherwise specified hereinNeighborhood commercial, central business district, and general commercial uses shall provide 1 parking space for each 200 square feet of gross retail floor space, and 1 parking space for each 2 employees. Industrial establishments, including manufacturing, research, and testing laboratories1 parking space for each 11/2 employees on the maximum shift.Warehouses and storage buildings1 parking space for each 600 square feet of floor area, 1 space for each employee, and 1 800 square-foot loading space for every 4,000 square feet of floor space.  
4.	Measurement of area. For the purpose of this section, "floor area" shall mean the gross floor area of all floors of a building or an addition to an existing building. The total parking area includes access drives within the actual parking area. 
5.	Existing parking. Any building which meets the parking requirements of this ordinance on the effective date hereof or at a subsequent time, shall continue to comply fully with all requirements thereof. Any existing building which partially meets the requirements of this ordinance on the effective date thereof or any subsequent time shall thereafter continue to comply as nearly with these requirements as the highest degree of compliance reached. 
6.	General. No off-street parking required for a building or structure shall during its life be occupied by or counted as off-street parking for another building or structure but may be counted as yard space. 
7.	Design. No parking space shall be so designed as to require the vehicle parked therein to back onto a public street, with the exception of single-family and two-family residences. 
8.	Surfacing. All parking areas shall be surfaced according to City of Clanton specifications. 
9.	Special regulations for commercial, industrial, mobile home, and multifamily districts. 
a.	Any vehicle parking space shall be used for parking purposes only. Any other use of such space, including repair work or servicing of any kind, or the requirement of any payment for the use of such space, shall be deemed to constitute a separate commercial use, and to be in violation of this ordinance. 
b.	No building or accessory structure shall be erected in any off-street parking area, except a parking garage containing parking spaces equal to the requirements set forth by this ordinance. 
c.	The parking areas designated in this ordinance shall be considered as required open space on the lot, and shall not be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
d.	In all zoning districts, a minimum area of four hundred (400) square feet shall be used in computing the area required for each vehicle parking space. 
10.	Loading space requirements. On the same premises with every building, structure, or part thereof erected and occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehousing, goods display, department store, wholesale store, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, drycleaning, grocery, or other uses similarly involving the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot or premises adequate space for standing, loading and unloading facilities in order to avoid undue interference with public use of streets or alleys. Such space, unless otherwise adequately provided for, shall include a ten- by fifty-foot loading space, with a minimum height clearance of fourteen (14) feet for every ten thousand (10,000) square feet or fraction thereof in excess of three thousand (3,000) square feet of building floor space. 
11.	Future street lines. On any lot which, at the time of adoption of this ordinance is changed by amendment hereafter, may be reduced in area by widening a public street to a future street line as indicated on the duly adopted "Thoroughfare Plan," or as same may be hereafter amended, the minimum required yards, the minimum required lot area, the minimum required lot width, and the maximum building area shall be measured by considering the future street lines as the lot line of such lot. 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 18; subdivisions, App. B. 
12.	Abatement of noise, smoke, gas, vibration, fumes, dust, fire and explosion hazard or nuisance. The zoning board of adjustment may require the conduct of any use, conforming or nonconforming, which results in unreasonable noise, smoke, gas, vibration, fumes, dust, fire, or explosion hazard or nuisance to surrounding property to be modified or changed to abate such hazard to health, comfort and convenience. The board of adjustment may direct the building inspector to issue an abatement order, but such order may be directed only after a public hearing by said board, notice of which shall be sent by registered mail to the owners and/or operators of the property on which the use is conducted in addition to due notice of advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation. A hearing to consider issuance of an abatement order shall be held by the board of adjustment either upon petition by any persons affected by the hazard or nuisance, or upon the initiative of the board. An abatement order shall be directed only upon reasonable evidence of hazard or nuisance and such order shall specify the date by which such hazard or nuisance shall be abated. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; public nuisances, § 13-61 et seq. 
13.	Front yard setbacks. Where a new structure is to be built between two (2) existing structures not conforming to required front yard setbacks, the board of adjustment shall rule. 
14.	Advertising signs and structures. In all districts other than residential districts, where front yard or setback requirements are required, outdoor advertising structures may be placed within such front yard or setback area of a place of business subject to the following terms and conditions: 
a.	Said structure must be used primarily for the purposes of identifying the place of business at that location. 
b.	No such structure shall be placed between four (4) feet and ten (10) feet above street level. 
c.	No such structure shall be placed at an intersection or locations which would obstruct the view of intersecting traffic. 
d.	No such structure exceeding in size, fifty (50) square feet, exclusive of necessary structural support, shall be placed within ten (10) feet of the front lot line or street right-of-way. 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, Ch. 10. 
15.	Group housing projects. In case of a housing project consisting of a group of two (2) or more buildings to be constructed on a plot of ground of at least four (4) acres not subdivided into the customary streets and lots and not to be so subdivided or where existing or contemplated street and lot layout make it impracticable to apply the requirements of this ordinance to the individual buildings in such housing projects, the application of such requirements to such housing projects shall be done by the board of zoning adjustment with the advice of the planning commission, in a manner that will be in harmony with the character of occupancy, a density of land use no higher and a standard of open space at least as high as required by this ordinance in the district in which the proposed project is to be located, and will provide layout design and public utilities in harmony with the general requirements and minimum standards of design of the subdivision regulations of the municipality. 
    In no case shall the board of zoning adjustment authorize a use or a building height or building area prohibited in the district in which the housing project is to be located. 
Cross reference- Housing, Ch. 9. 
16.	Airport hazard areas. Any area within the city limits of Clanton and also within one-fourth mile of the property line of the Chilton County Airport shall be designated an airport hazard area. For the purpose of this ordinance, airport hazard areas are divided into the same number and type of districts and with the same designations and names as listed in section 5 of the zoning ordinance, except as specified below, and the boundaries of the said districts are hereby established as shown on the zoning map of Clanton: 
a.	No building shall exceed one (1) story or twenty (20) feet in height except with the written approval of the board of adjustment. 
b.	District height regulations shall apply to trees as well as to structures, except as hereinafter modified. 
c.	Within the glide approach, no structure or trees shall exceed the forty to one (40 to 1) glide approach. 
d.	Height regulations concerning trees shall be enforced only when a failure to do so would allow an obstruction to air navigation to occur or exist. 
    Within an airport hazard area, the board of adjustment shall act as the "administrative agency" provided for in Sections 71 and 72 of Act No. 730 of the 1953 session of the Alabama legislature, and shall have all responsibilities and powers conferred by said sections. 
    The provisions of this ordinance within an airport hazard area shall be administered and enforced by the building inspector. 
State law reference- Administrative agency, Code of Ala. 1975, § 4-6-9 et seq. 
17.	Off-site outdoor advertising signs. On interstate highways and freeway primary highways, no sign structure is permitted adjacent to or within two hundred (200) feet of an interchange. Such distance shall be measured along the highway to the nearest point of beginning or ending of pavement widening at the exit from or entrance to the main-traveled way. 
(Ord. No. 5-88, 3-14-88) 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, Ch. 10. 
Section 10. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this ordinance, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: 
    The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation as well as an individual. 
    The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular. 
    The word "shall" is mandatory, the word "may" is permissive. 
    The words "used or occupied" include the words "intended, designed, or arranged to be used or occupied." 
    The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel." 
    Accessory use or structure. A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure. 
    Buildable area. The portion of a lot remaining after required yards have been provided. 
    Dwelling, mobile home. A detached residential dwelling unit designed for transportation after fabrication on streets or highways on its own wheels or on flatbed or other trailers, and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on jacks or other temporary or permanent foundations, connections to utilities, and the like. A travel trailer is not to be considered as a mobile home. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family. A residential building designed for or occupied by three (3) or more families, with the number of families in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided. 
    Dwelling, single-family. A detached residential dwelling unit other than a mobile home, designed for and occupied by one (1) family only. 
    Dwelling, two-family. A detached residential building containing two (2) dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than two (2) families. 
    Dwelling unit. One (1) room, or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, or rental or lease on a weekly, monthly, or longer basis, and physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure, and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities. 
    Family. One (1) or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit, provided that unless all members are related by blood or marriage, no such family shall contain over five (5) persons, but further provided that domestic servants employed on the premises may be housed on the premises without being counted as a family or families. 
    Home occupation. An occupation conducted in a dwelling unit, provided that: 
a.	No person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in such occupation; 
b.	The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation; 
c.	There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation other than one (1) sign, not exceeding one (1) square foot in area, nonilluminated, and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building; 
d.	No home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory building;
e.	There shall be no sales in connection with such home occupation;
f.	No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard; 
g.	No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in a single-family residence, or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in other than a single-family residence. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises. 
    Loading space, off-street. Space logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used, and accessible to such vehicles when required off-street parking spaces are filled. Required off-street loading space is not to be included as off-street parking space in computation of required off-street parking space. 
    Lot. For purposes of this ordinance, a lot is a parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage, and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on an improved public street, or on an approved private street, and may consist of: 
a.	A single lot of record.
b.	A portion of a lot of record.
c.	A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record. 
d.	A parcel of land described by metes and bounds; provided that in no case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created which does not meet the requirements of this ordinance. 
    Lot frontage. The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest the street. For the purposes of determining yard requirements on corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated under "Yards" in this section. 
    Lot measurements. 
a.	Depth of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear. 
b.	Width of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured across the rear of the required front yard, provided however that width between side lot lines at their foremost points (where they intersect with the street line) shall not be less than eighty (80) percent of the required lot width except in the case of lots on the turning circle of culs-de-sac, where the eighty (80) percent requirement shall not apply. 
    Lot of record. A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the judge of probate of Chilton County or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded. 
    Lot types. The diagram (figure 1) which follows illustrates terminology used in this ordinance with reference to corner lots, interior lots, reversed frontage lots and through lots: 

In the diagram: 
A = corner lot, defined as a lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot lines to the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. See lots marked A(1) in the diagram. 
B = interior lot, defined as a lot other than a corner lot with only one (1) frontage on a street. 
C = through lot, defined as a lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one (1) street. Through lots abutting two (2) streets may be referred to as double frontage lots. 
D = reversed frontage lots, defined as a lot on which the frontage is at right angles or approximately right angles (interior angle less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees) to the general pattern in the area. A reversed frontage lot may also be a corner lot (A-D in the diagram), an interior lot (B-D) or a through lot (C-D). 
    Outdoor advertising business. Provision of outdoor displays or display space on a lease or rental basis only. 
    Parking space, off-street. For the purposes of this ordinance, an off-street parking space shall consist of a space adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening doors on both sides, together with properly related access to a public street or alley and maneuvering room. Required off-street parking areas for three (3) or more automobiles shall have individual spaces marked, and shall be so designed, maintained, and regulated that no parking or maneuvering incidental to parking shall be on any public street, walk, or alley, and so that any automobile may be parked and unparked without moving another. For purposes of rough computation, an off-street parking space and necessary access and maneuvering room may be estimated at three hundred (300) square feet, but off-street parking requirements will be considered to be met only when actual spaces meeting the requirements above are provided and maintained, improved in a manner appropriate to the circumstances of the case, and in accordance with all ordinances and regulations of the city. 
    Sign. Any device designated to inform or attract the attention of persons not on the premises on which the sign is located, provided however that the following shall not be included in the application of the regulations herein: 
a.	Signs not exceeding one (1) square foot in area and bearing only property number, post box number, names of occupants of premises, or other identification of premises not having commercial connotations; 
b.	Flags and insignia of any government except when displayed in connection with commercial promotion; 
c.	Legal notices; identification, informational, or directional signs erected or required by governmental bodies; 
d.	Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except letters, trademarks, moving parts or moving lights; 
e.	Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private property, but bearing no advertising matter. 
    Signs, number and surface area. For the purpose of determining number of signs, a sign shall be considered to be a single display surface or display device containing elements organized, related, and composed to form a unit. Where matter is displayed in a random manner without organized relationship of elements, or where there is reasonable doubt about the relationship of elements, each element shall be considered to be a single sign. The surface area of a sign shall be computed as including the entire area within a regular geometric form or combinations of regular geometric forms comprising all of the display area of the sign and including all of the elements of the matter displayed. Frames and structural members not bearing advertising matter shall not be included in computation of surface area. 
    Sign, off-site. A sign other than an on-site sign. 
    Sign, on-site. A sign relating in its subject matter to the premises on which it is located, or to products, accommodations, services, or activities on the premises. On-site signs do not include signs erected by the outdoor advertising industry in the conduct of the outdoor advertising business. 
    Special exception. A special exception is a use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout the zoning division or district but which, if controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to the neighborhood, would promote the public health, safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort, convenience, appearance, prosperity, or general welfare. Such uses may be permitted in such zoning division or district as special exceptions, if specific provision for such special exceptions is made in this zoning ordinance. 
    Street line. The right-of-way line of a street. 
    Structure. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, mobile homes, walls, fences, billboards, and poster panels. 
    Travel trailer. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreational purposes, having a body width not exceeding eight (8) feet. 
    Variance. A variance is a relaxation of the terms of the zoning ordinance where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. As used in this ordinance, a variance is authorized only for height, area, and size of structure or size of yards and open spaces, establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of nonconformities in the zoning district or uses in an adjoining zoning district. 
    Yard. A required open space other than a court unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure from thirty (30) inches above the general ground level of the graded lot upward, provided however, that fences, walls, poles, posts, and other customary yard accessories, ornaments, and furniture may be permitted in any yard subject to height limitations and requirements limiting obstruction of visibility. 
    Yard, front. A yard extending between side lot lines across the front of a lot adjoining a public street. 
In any required front yard, no fence or wall shall be permitted which materially impedes vision across such yard above the height of thirty (30) inches, and [no] hedge or other vegetation shall be permitted which materially impedes vision across such yard between the heights of thirty (30) inches and ten (10) feet. 
In the case of through lots, unless the prevailing front yard pattern on adjoining lots indicates otherwise, front yards shall be provided on all frontages. Where one (1) of the front yards that would normally be required on a through lot is not in keeping with the prevailing yard pattern, the administrative official may waive the requirement for the normal front yard and substitute therefor a special yard requirement which shall not exceed the average of the yards provided on adjacent lots. 
In the case of corner lots which do not have reversed frontage, a front yard of the required depth shall be provided in accordance with the prevailing yard pattern and a second front yard of half the depth required generally for front yards in the district shall be provided on the other frontage. 
In the case of reversed frontage corner lots, a front yard of the required depth shall be provided on either frontage, and a second front yard of half the depth required generally for front yards in the district shall be provided on the other frontage. 
In the case of corner lots with more than two (2) frontages, the administrative official shall determine the front yard requirements, subject to the following limitations: (1) At least one (1) front yard shall be provided having the full depth required generally in the district; (2) No other front yard on such lot shall have less than half the full depth required generally. 
Depth of required front yards shall be measured at right angles to a straight line joining the foremost points of the side lot lines. The foremost point of the side lot line, in the case of rounded property corners at street intersections, shall be assumed to be the point at which the side and front lot lines would have met without such rounding. Front and rear front yard lines shall be parallel. 

    Yard, side. A yard extending from the rear line of the required front yard to the rear lot line, or in the absence of any clearly defined rear lot line to the point on the lot farthest from the intersection of the lot line involved with the public street. In the case of through lots, side yards shall extend from the rear lines of front yards required. In the case of corner lots, yards remaining after full- and half-depth front yards have been established shall be considered side yards. 
Width of a required side yard shall be measured in such a manner that the yard established is a strip of the minimum width required by district regulations with its inner edge parallel with the side lot line. 
    Yard, rear. A yard extending across the rear of the lot between inner side yard lines. In the case of through lots and corner lots, there will be no rear yards, but only front and side yards. 
Depth of a required rear yard shall be measured in such a manner that the yard established is a strip of the minimum width required by district regulations with its inner edge parallel with the rear lot line. 
    Yard, special. A yard behind any required yard adjacent to a public street, required to perform the same functions as a side or rear yard, but adjacent to a lot line so placed or oriented that neither the term "side yard" nor the term "rear yard" clearly applies. In such cases, the administrative official shall require a yard with minimum dimensions as generally required for a side yard or a rear yard in the district, determining which shall apply by the relation of the portion of the lot on which the yard is to be located to the adjoining lot or lots, with due regard to the orientation and location of structures and buildable areas thereon. 
Section 11. - Amending the ordinance. 
    The regulations and the number, area, and boundaries of districts established by this ordinance may be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed by the municipal governing body, but no amendment shall become effective unless it is first submitted to the municipal planning commission for its recommendation. The municipal planning commission, upon its own initiative, may hold public hearings, public notice of which shall be given, for the consideration of any proposed amendment to the provisions of this ordinance or to the zoning map and report its recommendations to the Clanton city council. The provisions of Title 37, Chapter 16, Article 2, Sections 778 and 779, Code of Alabama, 1940, as the same may be amended, shall apply to all changes and amendments. 
    Every petition for amendment shall be accompanied by a payment in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to partially defray the cost of processing the petition. 
Editor's note- 
Zoning amendments are now provided for in Code of Ala. 1975, §§ 11-52-77 and 11-52-78.
Section 11A. - [Application for amendment.] 
    All applications to amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal the said ordinance must be commenced by the filing or submitting of an application in writing to the proper municipal authorities, which said application or petition, among other things and other statutory requirements, must be signed or executed by all owners or joint owners of the property in question and the same must be executed in the presence of a notary public and, in addition thereto, shall have attached a statement from all adjoining land owners or the owners of all adjacent land, including all owners of land on the opposite side of streets, alleys, or other thoroughfares, and said petition or application must state the present zoned classification and the new zoning classification requested. 
(Ord. No. 8-85, § 1, 11-25-85) 
Section 12. - Complaints regarding violations. 
    Whenever a violation of this ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint stating fully the causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the municipal building inspector. He shall record properly such complaint, immediately investigate, and take action thereon as provided by this ordinance. 
Section 13. - Legal status provisions. 
1.	Interpretation and purpose. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be considered minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the community. Where other ordinances or regulations which may be adopted hereafter impose greater restrictions than those specified herein, compliance with such other ordinances is mandatory. This ordinance shall not lower the restrictions of plats, deeds, or private contracts, if such are greater than the provisions of this ordinance. 
2.	Saving clause. If any section, clause, provision or portion of this ordinance shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect any other section, clause, provision, or portion of this ordinance which is not in and of itself invalid or unconstitutional. 
3.	Effective date. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and adoption. 
Editor's note- 
The zoning ordinance was revised on August 29, 1977.

APPENDIX B - SUBDIVISIONS 
;sz=8;App. A. Certificates 
App. B. Preliminary and Final Plat Review and Approval Form 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- This appendix contains the subdivision regulations of the city, as adopted by the planning commission on November 13, 1969. Amendments will be designated in parentheses following the amended section. Where no history note appears the provisions remain unchanged from the original regulations. Any provisions in brackets [] were added by the editors for purposes of clarity. A uniform system of capitalization has been used. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; flood damage prevention, Ch. 8; housing, Ch. 9; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 10; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 18; utilities, Ch. 20; zoning, App. A; planning commission, § 2-3; subdivision proposals under flood damage prevention ordinance, § 8-89; future street lines under zoning ordinance, App. A, § 9(11). (Back)
State Law reference- Control of subdivisions generally, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-30 et seq.; reservation of lands in subdivisions for future acquisition for public streets, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-50 et seq. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - PURPOSE AND TITLE 

Section 1. - Purpose. 
    It is with the intent of creating a climate conducive to the orderly and progressive growth of the City of Clanton, Alabama; a climate of mutual and reasonable understanding, with prompt and just consideration to the various interests involved in subdivision work, that these procedures and requirements have been established. 
    Also, community interest requires the regulation and control of development to insure reasonable protection of property values, and to promote a healthy environment for the citizens of Clanton. 
    These regulations are designed, intended, and should be administered in a manner to: 
1.	Implement the general plan.
2.	Provide neighborhood conservation, by preventing the development of slums and blight.
3.	Harmoniously relate the development of the various tracts of land to the existing community and facilitate the future development of adjoining tracts. 
4.	Provide that the cost of improvements which primarily benefit the tract of land being developed be borne by the owners or developers of the tract, and that the cost of improvements which primarily benefit the whole community be borne by the whole community. 
5.	Provide the best possible design for each tract of land being subdivided.
6.	Establish adequate and accurate records of all land subdivision.
    The regulations contained herein have been formulated and adopted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety and the general welfare of the people of the City of Clanton, Alabama. 
Section 2. - Title. 
    These regulations shall be known as the "Official Subdivision Regulations of the City of Clanton, Alabama, 1969," and may be so cited. 
ARTICLE II. - AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION 

Section 1. - Authority. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted by Title 37, Article 3, Sections 797 through 803, inclusive, of the 1940 Code of Alabama (recompiled 1958) which provisions are hereby made a part of these regulations, the following regulations are hereby adopted by the planning commission for the City of Clanton, Alabama, at its meeting on November 13, 1969. These subdivision regulations amend, not repeal, those regulations previously adopted by the planning commission. A copy of these regulations shall be certified to the probate judge of Chilton County, Alabama. 
Editor's note- 
The control of subdivisions is now governed by Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-30 et seq.
Section 2. - Jurisdiction. 
    From and after the effective date hereof, these regulations shall govern the subdivision of all land located in the City of Clanton, Alabama. 
    Any owner of land within the limits of said subdivision jurisdiction wishing to subdivide land shall submit to the planning commission a plat of the subdivision which shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in these regulations. No plat of a subdivision lying within such territory or part thereof shall be filed or recorded in the office of the probate judge, and no subdivider may proceed with improvement or sale of lots in a subdivision until such subdivision plat shall have been approved by the planning commission and such approval entered in writing on the plat by the secretary of the planning commission and said plat is filed for record in the office of the judge of probate of Chilton County, Alabama. 
(Ord. No. 2-14, 7-14-2014) 
State law reference- Territorial jurisdiction of planning commission, Code of Ala. 1975, § 11-52-30. 
Section 3. - Scope. 
    Any owner of land lying within the area of jurisdiction of these regulations who wishes to divide such land into two (2) or more lots, sites, or divisions, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development, or who wishes to resubdivide for this purpose, shall submit a plan of such proposed subdivision to the Clanton planning commission for approval, and shall obtain such approval prior to the filing of his subdivision plat for record. Any such plat or subdivision shall conform to the minimum standards of design for the subdivision of land as set forth in Article V of these standards, and shall be presented in the manner specified in the following sections of this article. No plat of a subdivision of land within the area of planning jurisdiction of the City of Clanton shall be filed or recorded by the probate judge without the prior approval of the planning commission as specified herein. 
    In order to secure review and approval of a proposed subdivision by the planning commission, the prospective subdivider shall, prior to making any street improvements or installations of utilities, submit to the planning commission a preliminary plat as provided in Article IV. After approval of said preliminary plat, he may proceed with the preparation of the final plat and other documents required in connection therewith as specified in Article IV. 
Section 4. - Administration. 
    The Clanton planning commission is hereby authorized and directed to administer and coordinate these regulations. Final approval of plats and other data shall be the responsibility of the planning commission as prescribed by law. The building inspector is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of these subdivision regulations. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
ARTICLE III. - DEFINITIONS 

Section 1. - General. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, all words shall have the customary dictionary meaning. The present tense includes the future tense. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular. The word "person" includes a firm, corporation, association, organization, trust or partnership. The word "lot" includes "plot" or "parcel." The word "building" includes "structure." The word "shall" is mandatory. The word "may" is permissive. 
Section 2. - Specific definitions. 
    When used in these regulations, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section: 
2.01.	Alley shall mean a minor public way having a narrow right-of-way and affording a secondary means of access to service abutting properties. 
2.02.	Block shall be a tract or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. 

2.03.	Building setback line shall mean a line parallel to the property line in front of which no structure may be erected. 

2.04.	City shall mean the City of Clanton, Alabama. 
2.05.	City clerk shall mean the duly designated clerk of the City of Clanton, Alabama. 
2.06.	City council shall mean the city council of the City of Clanton, Alabama. 
2.07.	City engineer shall mean the duly designated engineer of the City of Clanton, Alabama. 
2.08.	City specifications shall mean all construction specifications which have been adopted by the city council or as required by the city planning commission and all utility departments. 
2.09.	Comprehensive plan shall mean any part or element of the comprehensive plan of the City of Clanton or its environs. This may include, but is not limited to: community facilities, major thoroughfare plan, land development plan, capital improvements plan, zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations, etc. 
2.10.	Corner lot shall be a lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection. 
2.11.	Double front lot shall be a lot having frontage on two (2) nonintersecting streets as distinguished from a corner lot. 

2.12.	Easement shall mean a grant of rights by the property owner for use of a strip of land for specified purposes. 
2.13.	Final plat shall mean a plat of a tract of land which meets the requirements of these regulations and is in form for recording in the office of the probate judge of Chilton County, Alabama. 
2.14.	Group development shall mean a development comprising two (2) or more structures, built on a single lot, tract, or parcel of land, and designed for occupancy by separate families, firms, or other enterprises. 
2.15.	Governing body shall mean the mayor and city council of the City of Clanton, Alabama. 
2.16.	Half-street shall mean a street which does not meet the minimum right-of-way widths set forth in these regulations. 
2.17.	Hardship shall be an unusual situation on the part of an individual property owner which will not permit him to enjoy the full utilization of his property which is given to others within the city. A hardship exists only when it is not self-created, or when it is not economic in nature. 
2.18.	Health department shall mean the Chilton County Health Center and the State of Alabama Health Department. 
2.19.	Lot shall mean a parcel of land intended for transfer of ownership or for building development. 
2.20.	Monument shall mean any permanent object serving to indicate a limit to or mark a boundary. 
2.21.	Open space shall be any land either publicly or privately owned which is designated as being permanently undeveloped and used for recreation, conservation, or preservation. 
2.22.	Owner's engineer shall mean the engineer or land surveyor registered and in good standing with the state board of registration of Alabama who is the agent in his professional capacity of the owner of land which is proposed to be subdivided or which is in the process of being subdivided. 
2.23.	Planning commission shall mean the planning commission of the City of Clanton, Alabama. 
2.24.	Preliminary plat shall mean a tentative plan of proposed subdivision submitted to the Clanton planning commission for its consideration. 
2.25.	Probate judge shall mean the judge of probate of Chilton County, Alabama. 
2.26.	Sidewalk shall mean a walkway constructed for use by pedestrians. 
2.27.	Single tier lot shall mean a lot which backs upon an arterial street, a railroad, a physical barrier, or a residential or nonresidential use, and to which access from the rear of the lot is usually prohibited. 

2.28.	Streets, arterial, are those which are used primarily for moving fast or heavy traffic as shown on the major thoroughfare plan. 
2.29.	Streets, collector and secondary, shall mean a street which carries traffic from minor streets to the system of major streets. 
2.30.	Streets, cul-de-sac, shall mean a short street designed to have one (1) end permanently closed; the closed end terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
2.31.	Streets, marginal access, shall be a street which is parallel with and adjacent to an arterial street and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
2.32.	Streets, minor, are used primarily to provide access from abutting properties to collector streets. 

2.33.	Subdivider shall mean the person(s), firm(s), or corporation engaged in the process of creating a subdivision or having completed a subdivision of said land. 
2.34.	Subdivision shall mean the division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, plats, sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of subdividing or resubdividing. Also, when appropriate to the context, this term relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or territory being subdivided, including changing of lot size, private or public streets and alleys, and extension of major utility locations. A division of land for agricultural purposes not involving a new street and not involving the construction of any dwelling shall not be deemed a subdivision. 
2.35.	Thoroughfare plan, major, shall mean the Clanton major thoroughfare plan, prepared as an element of the comprehensive plan. 
2.36.	Zoning ordinance shall mean the official zoning ordinance of the City of Clanton, Alabama. 
Cross reference- Zoning, App. A. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROCEDURE FOR PLAT APPROVAL 

Section 1. - General. 
    The procedure for review and approval of a subdivision plat consists of two (2) separate steps. The initial step is the preparation and submission to the planning commission of a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision. The second step is the preparation and submission to the planning commission of a final plat, together with required certificates. This final plat becomes the instrument to be recorded in the office of the probate judge, when duly signed by the secretary of the planning commission. 
Section 2. - Preapplication. 
    The subdivider is encouraged to consult early and informally with the planning commission to obtain advice and assistance before he begins to prepare the preliminary plat. This will enable him to become familiar with the major thoroughfare plan and other official plans which might affect the area. 
Section 3. - Preliminary plat approval. 
    The application for preliminary plat approval, including six (6) prints of the subdivision plan, shall be submitted to the planning commission at least ten (10) days prior to the planning commission's regularly scheduled meeting. A fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) plus one dollar ($1.00) per lot proposed on the preliminary plat shall be required. 
    The planning commission, before its review, shall transmit prints of the preliminary plat to the electrical department, water department, sewer department, health department, fire department, and any other city or county department for review and recommendations in relation to specific service problems. 
    Prior to approval of the preliminary plat, the planning commission shall afford a public hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be sent to all adjoining land owners as their names appear upon the plats in the Chilton County tax assessor's office. Notice of the public hearing shall be sent at least five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
    The preliminary plat, which shall meet the minimum standards of design and the general requirements for the construction of public improvements set forth in these regulations, shall give the following information: 
1.	Vicinity sketch map at a scale of one (1) inch equals eight hundred (800) feet showing the following: 
a.	Name and location of subdivision;
b.	Names of owner and designer;
c.	North point, graphic scale, and date;
d.	Boundaries and approximate dimensions;
e.	Amount of acreage to be subdivided;
f.	Major traffic arteries, utilities, and community facilities (major shopping areas, schools, parks, hospitals, churches) which are pertinent to the proposed design. 
2.	Preliminary sketch plan of subdivision at a scale of not more than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet showing the following: 
a.	Name and location of subdivision;
b.	Names and addresses of owner and designer;
c.	North point, graphic scale, and date;
d.	Amount of acreage to be subdivided;
e.	Topography at a five-foot contour interval unless a closer interval is required by the planning commission; 
f.	Street plan which includes:
(1)	Location of all existing and proposed streets within the subdivision and adjacent to it; 
(2)	Widths of existing and proposed rights-of-way;
(3)	Clear identification of right-of-way location and width for any street which is considered as part of the major thoroughfare plan; 
(4)	Street names which are subject to approval by the planning commission;
(5)	Plan and profile of all streets;
(6)	Typical cross-section of proposed streets;
(7)	Complete curve data for the centerline of each street;
g.	Blocks and lots with dimensions shown for all lot lines;
h.	Building setback line along each street;
i.	Plans of proposed utility layouts showing feasible connections to existing or proposed utility systems. When such connections are not practical, all proposed individual water supply and/or sewage disposal systems shall meet the approval of the health center; 
j.	All proposed culverts;
k.	Location, width, and purpose of all easements;
l.	Location and dimension of land to be dedicated or reserved for parks, open space or other public use; 
m.	Any portion of the land in the subdivision subject to periodic inundation by storm drainage, overflow, or ponding shall be clearly shown and identified on the plat; 
n.	The existing zoning classification of subdivision and all contiguous land. If the proposed subdivision does not lie within the force and effect of the existing zoning ordinance, the preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a plan indicating the proposed use of the lots and a copy of the instrument to be used in establishing restrictions; 
o.	The names of adjacent subdivisions and the names and addresses of record owners of adjoining parcels of land as they appear on the current tax records. 
    Within thirty (30) days after the first regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission which is held ten (10) or more days after the submission of the preliminary plat, the planning commission shall review the plat and indicate its approval, disapproval, or approval subject to any required modifications. If a plat is disapproved, the reasons for such disapproval shall be stated in writing. If approved subject to modifications, the nature of the required modifications shall also be indicated in writing. Failure of the planning commission to consider any preliminary plat within these thirty (30) days shall be considered as approval of same as submitted. 
    One (1) copy of the preliminary plat shall be retained in the planning commission files, and one (1) copy shall be returned to the subdivider at the time of approval or disapproval, with the specific notations of any changes or modifications required. 
    Approval of the preliminary plat by the planning commission shall not constitute acceptance of the final plat, except when the final plat is completed during the specified time in substantial accordance with the layout shown on the preliminary plat. 
    Approval of the preliminary plat shall lapse unless a final plat in substantial conformance therewith is submitted within twelve (12) months from the date of such approval, unless an extension of time is specifically applied for by the subdivider and expressly granted by the planning commission. 
Section 4. - Final plat. 
    The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved; and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which he proposed to record and develop at that time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to all of the requirements of these standards. 
    At least ten (10) days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered, the subdivider shall submit the original drawing of the plat, done in black drawing ink, along with three (3) copies (black and white or blue line prints), together with any street profiles or other plans which may be required by the planning commission. 
    The plat shall be drawn to a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, on sheets not larger than twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches. When more than one (1) sheet is required, an index sheet of the same size shall be filed as a key, showing the entire subdivision, with the sheets in alphabetical order. 
    The final plat shall give the following information: 
1.	Vicinity sketch map at a scale of one (1) inch equals eight hundred (800) feet showing the site in relation to its surroundings. The map submitted with the preliminary plat may be used. 
2.	Final plan of the subdivision including the following:
a.	Name and location of subdivision;
b.	Name of owner and designer;
c.	North point, graphic scale and date;
d.	Location, width, and name of all streets, roads and alleys and other rights-of-way;
e.	Location of all blocks and lot lines with all lots numbers in numerical order;
f.	Building setback lines along each street;
g.	Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce on the ground the location, bearing, and length of every road line, lot line, boundary line, block line, and building line, whether curved or straight, and including the radius, central angle, and tangent distance, and the length of curve for the centerline of all curved roads and property lines which are not the boundary of the property being subdivided. The length of all dimensions shall be to the nearest one-tenth of one foot, and bearings of all angles to the nearest one (1) minute; 
h.	Location, dimensions, and purpose of all easements;
i.	Location and description of all monuments and iron pins;
j.	Name and location of adjoining subdivisions, roads, and the location and ownership of adjoining unsubdivided property. 
    The following certifications shall be presented along with the final plat (see appendix for forms): 
1.	Certification showing that the applicant is the legal owner of the land, and that he formally dedicates all streets, rights-of-way, and any other sites for public use. 
2.	Certification by a registered surveyor or engineer of the accuracy of the survey and plat, and the placement of all required monuments. 
3.	Certification of approval by the city or county health officer when individual sewage disposal or water systems are to be installed. 
4.	Certification by the street superintendent that the subdivider has complied with one (1) of the following alternatives: 
a.	Installed all improvements according to the requirements of these regulations; or
b.	Posted a surety bond in an amount sufficient to assure the completion of all required improvements. 
5.	Certification of approval to be signed by the secretary of the planning commission.
6.	A certification from the city clerk indicating that sufficient bond has been posted.
    When the plat has been approved by the planning commission, one (1) copy with the approval of the planning commission certified thereon shall be returned to the subdivider to be used for filing with the probate judge as the official plat of record. The original tracing containing all required certifications shall be returned to the subdivider for his records, and one (1) copy shall be retained in the records of the planning commission. The planning commission must consider a final plat with thirty (30) days after its first regularly scheduled meeting which is held ten (10) or more days after the submission of the final plat. Failure of the planning commission to act on a final plat submission within these thirty (30) days shall be considered an approval of same. If the plat is disapproved, grounds for such disapproval shall be stated in writing in the official minutes of the planning commission. 
    Approval of a final plat by the planning commission shall not constitute acceptance by the public of the dedication of any street or other public way or ground. After approval of the final plat and the construction of streets shown thereon, the planning commission may recommend to the governing body that it accepts these streets as public roads and take over their perpetual maintenance. 
REQUIREMENTS FOR PLATS TO
BE SUBMITTED 
Preliminary
PlatFinal
PlatVicinity sketch map (scale
1 inch = 800 feet): Name and locationxxOwner and designerxxNorth point, graphic scale, datexxBoundaries, approximate dimensions, and acreage of sitexxMajor traffic arteries and utilitiesxxCommunity facilitiesxxSubdivision plan (scale
1 inch = 100 feet max): Name and locationxxOwner and designerxxNorth point, graphic scale, datexxLocation of streetsxxStreet namesxxLot linesxxLot numbersxSetback linesxxExisting utilitiesxProposed utilitiesxProposed culvertsxDimensions (lots, roads)xxAngles and bearings, monumentsxContours at 5-foot intervalsxPresent zoningxAdjoining property namesxxTotal acreage of subdivisionxCertificates as requiredxProposed improvements requested of the city (utility extensions)x 
ARTICLE V. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Section 1. - Conformity to comprehensive city plan. 
    All proposed subdivisions shall conform to any comprehensive city, county, or regional plan and zoning regulations. 
1.1.	The population densities established by the zoning ordinance and the land development plan shall be observed by the subdivider and developer. 
1.2.	All thoroughfares in the major thoroughfare plan shown crossing or bordering a proposed subdivision are required to be provided for in the location and at the right-of-way width designated on the major thoroughfare plan. 
1.3.	To insure development of the community in substantial conformity with the general principles set forth in the official plans and maps of the City of Clanton, the planning commission may require that the subdivider reserve open spaces for parks, schools, fire stations, playgrounds, and any other use essential to the welfare of the community. However, no more than ten (10) percent of the total subdivision may be required by donation. If additional area over ten (10) percent of a proposed subdivision is necessary to fulfill the requirements of the community, the additional area shall be offered for sale to the city at its fair market value. Such offer shall extend for a period of not less than ninety (90) days from the date of receipt by the city of such written offer. 
1.4.	Clearly noted on the preliminary plat should be all the improvements the owner proposes to make pursuant to the development of the subdivision. These improvements shall relate to drainage, utilities, and other improvements necessary to permit development of the subdivision. Also, clearly noted on the preliminary plat should be all the improvements the owner proposes to request the City of Clanton to make, relative to off-premise improvements necessary to the development of the subdivision. These improvements shall relate to drainage improvements necessary to carry runoff to a major drainage channel, and also all extensions of water mains, sewers, and other utility extensions. 
Cross reference- Zoning, App. A. 
Section 2. - Street plan. 
2.1.	General. The arrangement, character, extent, location, and grade of all streets shall be laid out according to good land planning principles and shall be integrated with all existing and planned streets. New streets shall consider topographical conditions, orientation to vistas, public convenience and safety, and the proposed uses of land to be served by them. 
    The proposed street system shall also be coordinated with the street system of the surrounding area. However, the number of streets converging upon any one (1) point which would tend to promote congestion shall be held to a minimum. Creation of multiple street intersections shall not be permitted. The street pattern shall be in conformity with a plan for the most advantageous development of the entire neighboring area. 
    Sufficient proposed streets shall be provided to create normal circulation of traffic within the vicinity. Land abutting a proposed subdivision shall not be left landlocked by such proposed subdivision. Street design shall provide connections to abutting properties at intervals not to exceed the maximum block length of twelve hundred (1200) feet. 
    In addition, if in the opinion of the planning commission it is desirable to provide street access to an adjoining property, said street shall extend by dedication to the boundary of such property. A temporary turnaround, as defined in design standards for street cul-de-sac, shall be provided for these streets. Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic in the subdivision will be discouraged. 
    Subdivisions which abut or have included within the proposed area to be subdivided any freeway or arterial street shall provide the following: 
(a)	A marginal access street; or
(b)	Reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property lines; or 
(c)	Deep lots with rear service drives; or
(d)	Other treatment which may be necessary to provide for the adequate protection of properties, and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
    Intersections of minor subdivision streets with major and arterial streets shall be held to a minimum. 
2.2.	Private reserve strips. Private reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited. 
2.3.	Land subject to flooding. Land subject to flooding, or land deemed to be topographically unsuitable for urban usage, shall not be platted for residential occupancy, nor for any other uses which may increase danger to health, life, or property, aggravate erosion, or increase flood hazard. 
2.4.	Half-streets. Where there exists a dedicated or platted half-street adjacent to the tract to be subdivided, the other half shall be platted. New half-streets or half-alleys shall be prohibited. 
2.5.	Cul-de-sacs. Streets designed to have one (1) end permanently closed shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having a minimum right-of-way diameter of one hundred (100) feet, and a minimum roadway diameter of eighty (80) feet. 
2.6.	Street intersections. Street intersections with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall not be permitted. 

2.7.	Minimum street right-of-way widths. In developed or vacant areas, the planning commission shall have the discretion of identifying or classifying streets. 
    The widths of rights-of-way for the various streets (arterial streets, collector streets, minor streets and alleys) are indicated below. Widths shall be not less than as follows: 
Street typeRight-of-wayArterial street120 feetCollector street60 feetMinor street and cul-de-sac50 feetAlleys20 feetMarginal access(included in R/W of
arterial) 
    In cases where topography or other physical conditions make a street of the required minimum width impracticable, the planning commission may modify the above requirements. Through proposed neighborhood or local business areas, the road widths shall be increased ten (10) feet on each side to provide for movement of vehicles into and out of necessary off-street parking areas without interferences to traffic. 
    Additional width on existing roads. Subdivisions that adjoin existing roads shall dedicate additional right-of-way to meet the above minimum road width requirements. 
(a)	The entire right-of-way shall be provided where any part of the subdivision is on both sides of the existing road. 
(b)	When the subdivision is located on only one (1) side of an existing road, one-half of the required right-of-way, measured from the centerline of the existing roadway, shall be provided. 
2.8.	Minimum roadway widths. The minimum pavement widths for the various classifications of streets shall be as follows: 
Street TypePavement Width
(Measured from
Pavement Edge to Pavement Edge)Arterial streetAs requiredCollector streetAs requiredMinor street and cul-de-sac34 feetAlleys20 feet 
2.9.	Street grades. Street grades shall not exceed the following unless otherwise recommended and approved by the street superintendent: 
Street TypeGradeArterial street4 percentCollector street6 percentMinor street7 percentMarginal access street7 percent 
    Minimum grades of all roadways shall not be less than five-tenths (0.5) percent. 
    Surface cross-drainage shall not be permitted on any street. 
    Vertical curves shall be constructed so as to afford a minimum sight distance being measured from the driver's eyes (four and one-half (41/2) feet above pavement surface) to an object four (4) inches high on the pavement surface. 
2.10.	Alignment and visibility. 
(a)	Minimum radii of horizontal curves shall be not less than one hundred (100) feet.
(b)	There shall be a tangent for one hundred (100) feet provided between all reverse curves.
(c)	Angular breaks in right-of-way alignment of more than two (2) degrees are not permitted.
(d)	Visibility. Clear horizontal visibility, measured along the centerline, shall be provided for at least six hundred (600) feet on freeway and arterial streets; three hundred (300) feet on collector streets; and at least two hundred (200) feet on minor access and rear service. 
(e)	Where an existing road or other right-of-way falls within a proposed subdivision tract and the subdivider proposes to abandon this right-of-way, the planning commission shall review this proposal in light of its effect on neighboring properties, and forward its recommendations to the governing body prior to its taking legal action on the matter. 
(f)	Where there are roads and rights-of-way in existence and [which] are proposed to be retained, they must be designed so as to eliminate all bends, crooks, and other undesirable hazardous conditions. 
2.11.	Intersections. 
(a)	Submission of a grading plan showing existing conditions and a detailed design for intersections which are unusual or located on difficult terrain may be required by the planning commission. 
(b)	Acute angles at street intersections are to be avoided; in no case will an angle of less than sixty (60) degrees be permitted. 
(c)	Minimum radii of intersections.
(1)	Property lines at arterial and major street intersections shall be rounded with a radius of twenty-five (25) feet. An increased radius shall be required when the angle of intersection is less than ninety (90) degrees. 
(2)	Roadway and curb intersections shall be made concentric and shall be rounded by a radius of not less than ten (10) feet. 
(d)	Sight lines. Local and collector streets shall have a clear sight triangle of seventy-five (75) feet (one hundred fifty (150) feet for arterial streets) from the point of intersection; this shall be indicated on all plans. No buildings or other obstructions higher than thirty-six (36) inches shall be permitted in this area. 

2.12.	Alleys. 
(a)	Alleys may be required in commercial and industrial districts, except that the planning commission may waive this requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading, and parking facilities consistent with zoning requirements. 
(b)	Alleys are not permitted in residential districts, except when the planning commission determines special conditions warrant a secondary means of access. 
2.13.	Names. 
(a)	No street name shall be used which will duplicate by spelling or sound or otherwise be confused with the name of existing streets. Street names are subject to the approval of the planning commission. 
(b)	Subdivision names and apartment project names shall not duplicate or be confused with existing names. 
Subdivision and apartment project names are subject to approval by the planning commission. 
Cross reference- Flood damage prevention, Ch. 8; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 18. 
Section 3. - Blocks. 
    The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
(a)	Provisions of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; 
(b)	Zoning ordinance and health department requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions;
(c)	Needs for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of street traffic; and
(d)	Limitations and opportunities of topography.
    Block lengths shall not be less than four hundred (400) nor more than twelve hundred (1200) feet and shall normally be wide enough to allow two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depth. 
    Pedestrian crosswalks not less than ten (10) feet wide may be required where deemed essential in blocks over eight hundred (800) feet long by the planning commission to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, bus stops, and other community facilities. 
Cross reference- Zoning, App. A. 
Section 4. - Lots. 
4.1.	The lot size, width, depth, shape, and orientation, and the minimum building setback line shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated. 
4.2.	Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of the zoning ordinance and the requirements of the county health department. In cases where requirements conflict, the greater requirement shall govern. 
4.3.	Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for off-street parking and loading for the use contemplated. 
4.4.	Corner lots for residential use shall have an extra fifteen-foot width to permit appropriate building orientation and setback from both streets. 
4.5.	Each lot shall be provided with access to a public street and front upon a dedicated street not less than fifty (50) feet in width. 
4.6.	Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided, except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries, or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
4.7.	Side lot lines shall normally be at right angles to streets, except on curves where they shall be radial. 
Cross reference- Zoning, App. A. 
Section 5. - Easements. 
5.1.	Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities and drainage where necessary, and shall not be less than a total of fifteen (15) feet wide, unless otherwise approved by the engineering department of the specific utility. 
5.2.	Where a subdivision is traversed by an existing or proposed watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a storm drainage easement or right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such existing or planned drainageway. The width of such drainage easement or right-of-way shall be sufficient to contain the ultimate channel and maintenance way for the tributary area upstream. 
5.3.	Lots and easements shall be arranged in such a manner as to eliminate unnecessary easement jogs or offsets, and to facilitate the use of easements for power distribution, telephone service, drainage, water, and sewer services. 
Section 6. - Drainage and inundation. 
    A drainage plan shall be made for each subdivision by the owner's engineer, which plan shall take into consideration the ultimate or saturated development of the tributary area in which the proposed subdivision is located. Adequate provisions shall be made to provide drainage easements needed within the subdivision, taking into consideration the saturated development of the tributary area. 
    The storm and sanitary sewer plans shall be worked out prior to the development of the other utility plans. Engineering considerations shall give preferential treatment to these gravity flow improvements, as opposed to other utilities and improvements. Off-premise drainage easements and improvements may be required to handle the runoff of subdivisions into a natural drainage channel, but under no condition shall storm drainage be emptied into the sanitary sewer system, or vice versa. 
    Low areas subject to periodic inundation shall not be developed or subdivided unless and until the planning commission establishes that: 
(a)	The nature of the land use (i.e., recreational areas) would not lend itself to damage by water inundation to an appreciable extent; 
(b)	The area may be filled or improved in such a manner to prevent such periodic inundation; or 
(c)	Minimum floor elevations be required to prevent damage to buildings and structures.
    The planning commission may require whatever additional engineering information it deems necessary to make a decision on subdivisions and other development which contains an area of questionable drainage. Lakes, ponds, and similar areas will be accepted for maintenance only if sufficient land is dedicated as a public recreation area, or if such area constitutes a necessary part of the drainage control system. 
Section 7. - Nonresidential subdivision. 
    Nonresidential subdivisions shall be reviewed and processed in the planning commission in accordance with appropriate sections of the zoning ordinance. 
Cross reference- Zoning, App. A. 
Section 8. - Vacating a street. 
    No street may be vacated unless such action is recommended by the city planning commission to the governing body and approved by the governing body. 
ARTICLE VI. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

Section 1. - General. 
    The subdivider is required to install or construct the improvements hereinafter described prior to having released the bond or other securities which guarantee installation of such required improvements. 
    All improvements required shall be constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in these regulations, and under the inspection of the street superintendent or his duly authorized representative and the engineering department of the respective utility. 
    All water mains, sanitary sewers and laterals, and storm sewers shall be installed as necessary to prevent the future cutting of the pavement of any street, sidewalk, or other required pavement. 
1.1.	Streets and alleys. On all streets and alleys within the jurisdiction of these regulations, a suitable hard surfaced permanent type of pavement shall be constructed in accordance with the City of Clanton's construction specifications. 
1.2.	Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be placed on both sides of all streets in a commercial subdivision and may be required in residential subdivisions in the vicinity of schools and other community facilities. Sidewalks, when required, shall be a minimum of four (4) feet wide in residential areas and seven (7) feet wide in business areas, and shall be constructed according to city specifications. 
1.3.	Curbs and gutters. Standard approved type curbs and gutters shall be placed on both sides of all new streets within the area of jurisdiction of these regulations in accordance with the city specifications. 
1.4.	Water mains. The design and specifications of the distribution system shall meet the Clanton water system requirements. Water mains shall be extended the full length or width of the pavement. If a well is required for each lot, the location, construction, and use of such a well shall meet health department requirements. If a well is to serve more than one (1) lot, a public water system is required. The design and specifications of such distribution system shall meet health department specifications, and shall be installed under inspection of the city water department. 
1.5.	Fire plugs. Fire plugs shall be installed along each street every five hundred (500) feet, or at the ends and center of each block. The water supply and pressure shall be sufficient to adequately serve the potential needs of the intended land use. 
1.6.	Sanitary sewers. Sanitary sewers shall be installed in each subdivision. All sanitary sewer lines shall be installed in such a manner as to serve adequately all lots. 
    Septic tanks may be permitted in lieu of sewer lines wherever sanitary sewerage will not be available within a reasonable period of time. Special approval must be obtained from the state health department. 
    Lot size shall not be less than the minimum standard and of satisfactory size for the proper installation of a septic tank sewage system as indicated by percolation tests. 
1.7.	Storm sewers and drainage. Storm sewers and drainage structures shall be designed and installed as required in accordance with good engineering practice. In no case shall the size of pipe used for storm drainage be less than twelve (12) inches in diameter. The subdivider shall provide Portland cement concrete or asphaltic concrete curb, the face of which shall be not less than six (6) inches in height, with backfill sloping toward the curb and higher than the curb to ensure drainage of surface water into the storm drainage system. 
1.8.	Property markers. 
(a)	Concrete monuments four (4) inches in diameter or four (4) inches square and three (3) feet long with a flat top shall be set at all street corners, at all points where the street lines intersect the exterior boundaries of the subdivision, at the intersection of curves and tangents along the street lines, and at all corners of the plat. The top of the monument shall have an indented cross to identify properly the location, and shall be set flush with the finished grade. 
(b)	All other lot corners shall be marked with iron pipe not less than three-fourths inch in diameter and twenty-four (24) inches long, and driven so as to be flush with the finished grade. 
1.9.	Oversize facilities. The governing body may participate in the cost of "oversize" improvements within a subdivision, if in its judgment such oversize improvements are necessary to serve large areas of land not in the subdivision, and if the cost of such oversize improvements is an unreasonable burden on the subdivider. 
1.10.	Street trees. Although not required by these standards, the planting of street trees is considered a duty of the subdivider as well as good business practice. 
    Street trees protect against excessive heat and glare, and enhance the attractiveness and value of abutting property. The planning commission will assist the subdivider in the location of trees and species to use under varying conditions. 
    It is recommended that trees be planted five (5) feet inside (or behind) property lines where they will be less subject to injury, decrease the chances of motor accidents, and enjoy favorable conditions for growth. If trees are to be planted within a planting strip in the right-of-way, their proposed locations and species to be used must be approved by the planning commission since the public inherits the care and maintenance of such trees. 
1.11.	General. Where a public water or sewer is within three hundred (300) feet, the subdivider shall connect with same. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 18; utilities, Ch. 20. 
ARTICLE VII. - GUARANTEE OF COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS 

Section 1. - General. 
    The subdivider shall be responsible for the provision of all required improvements to the subdivision. This may be accomplished by either the full installation of all required improvements by the developer at the time that the final plat is to be submitted to the planning commission or by the provision of a financial guarantee of performance. 
1.1.	Subdivision improvement bond. The guarantee of performance by the subdivider shall be in the form of a subdivision improvement bond and shall meet the following requirement: 
(a)	Acceptance of bond. Bond must be approved by the governing body. 
(b)	Value of bond. The bond should be of an amount sufficient to cover the total cost of installing all improvements, including grading, paving of the streets, and installation of all required utilities and fees encountered during execution of improvements. 
1.2.	Failure to complete work. If within twelve (12) months after filing said bond the subdivider has not completed all necessary improvements, or if in the opinion of the planning commission said improvements have not been satisfactorily installed, the bond shall be used by the city to complete the improvements in satisfactory fashion, or the city may take such steps as may be necessary to require performance under the bond. 
ARTICLE VIII. - GUARANTEE AGAINST FAULTY MATERIAL 

Section 1. - General. 
    Final approval of street improvements shall be granted and streets accepted for maintenance by the City of Clanton, only in accordance with one of the following provisions: 
1.1.	Said street improvements shall have been completed and in place for a period of one (1) year and shall, upon inspection, following such period of time, be found to be free from defective workmanship or material and free from sinkholes or other settling. 
1.2.	Following otherwise satisfactory completion of such work, the subdivider shall post with the City of Clanton a guaranty bond in an amount equal to ten (10) percent of the street and utility improvement cost for the street for which acceptance is sought. Said bond will guarantee the city that said street has been installed in a workmanlike manner, that same is free from defects caused by faulty material or workmanship, and that said street will remain in acceptable condition for a period of at least one (1) year. Said guaranty bond shall be effective for a period of one (1) year. If at the end of the one-year period the street is found to have settled or be otherwise unacceptable because of faulty workmanship or material, said defective street shall be repaired at the cost of the subdivider up to the amount of the guaranty bond, and upon his failure or refusal to do so within ninety (90) days after demand is made upon him by the governing body, then the City of Clanton shall make such repairs as are reasonably necessary, and recover the cost thereof. 
ARTICLE IX. - VARIANCES 

Section 1. - Hardship. 
    Where the planning commission finds that extraordinary hardships may result from strict compliance with these regulations due to unusual topographic or other conditions beyond the control of the subdivider, it may vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided, however, that such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the intent or purpose of the subdivision regulations, zoning ordinance, major thoroughfare plan, or other elements of the Clanton comprehensive plan. Any variance thus authorized is required to be entered in writing in the minutes of the planning commission and the reason which justified the departure to be set forth. 
Section 2. - Experimental subdivisions. 
    The planning commission may waive, vary, or modify the standards and requirements of these regulations if, in its judgment, an unusual or experimental subdivision might prove of considerable merit toward: 
(a)	The use of unusual materials in constructing required improvements.
(b)	A new or untried design concept in the Clanton area which appears promising.
    Special attention may be given to experimental subdivisions which are related to low-cost housing design in an effort to provide housing for lower-income families. The planning commission shall require the subdivider to provide a written proposal stating the nature of the experiment, and a cost-benefit study following the implementation of same. 
Section 3. - Comprehensive group housing development. 
(a)	A comprehensive group housing development to be constructed on a plot of ground of at least four (4) acres, including construction of two (2) or more buildings, together with the necessary drives and accessways, and which is not subdivided into the customary lots, blocks and streets, may be approved by the planning commission if, in the opinion of the commission, departure from the foregoing regulations can be made without destroying the intent of the regulations. 
(b)	Plans for all such developments shall be submitted to be approved by the planning commission whether or not such plat is to be recorded. No building permits shall be issued until such approval has been given. 
Cross reference- Housing, Ch. 9. 
Section 4. - Conditions. 
    In granting variances, modifications, and approval for experimental subdivisions, the planning commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied, modified, or approved. These may include, without being limited to: personal, surety, performance, or maintenance bonds; affidavits; covenants; or other legal instruments. 
ARTICLE X. - PENALTIES FOR TRANSFERRING LOT IN UNAPPROVED SUBDIVISIONS 
    Whoever, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land located within a subdivision, transfers or sells any land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat of a subdivision, before such plat has been approved by the planning commission and recorded or filed in the office of the appropriate county probate office, shall forfeit and pay a penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each lot or parcel so transferred or sold; and the description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other documents used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided. The municipal corporation may enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by action for injunction brought in any court of equity jurisdiction or may recover the same penalty by a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
ARTICLE XI. - SEVERABILITY AND SEPARABILITY 
    Should any article, section, subsection, or provision of these subdivision regulations be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the subdivision regulations as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
ARTICLE XII. - AMENDING REGULATIONS 
    Any article, section, subsection, or provision of these subdivision regulations proposed for amending shall be published as provided by law for the publication of ordinances. Before adoption, a public hearing, as described by law, shall be held thereon. Following its adoption, a copy of the amendment shall be certified by the planning commission to the probate judge of Chilton County. 
ARTICLE XIII. - EFFECTIVE DATE 
    These subdivision regulations shall supersede all previous subdivision regulations and shall take effect and be in force from and after the date of their adoption. 
Editor's note- 
The subdivision regulations were adopted on November 13, 1969.
APPENDIX A. CERTIFICATES 
FORM 1-OWNER'S CERTIFICATES 
OWNER'S CERTIFICATE AND DEDICATION. We, the undersigned (name of owner) do hereby certify that we are the owners of and the only person having any right, title, or interest in the land shown on the Plat of (name of subdivision), and that the Plat represents a correct survey of the above described property made with our consent, and that we hereby dedicate to the public use all the streets as shown on said plat. The easements as shown on the plat are created for the installation and maintenance of public utilities. We hereby guarantee a clear title to all lands so dedicated from ourselves and our heirs or assigns forever, and have caused the same to be released from all encumbrances so that the title is clear, except as shown in the abstractor's certificate. 
RESTRICTIONS: (if any, follow here) 
Witness ____________ hand ____________ this ;#rule; day of ;daterule;, 19____________. 
Witness ____________ 
FORM 2-SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE 
SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE, I, ____________ the undersigned, do hereby certify that I am a professional land surveyor or civil engineer and that the annexed map of (name of subdivision) consisting of ;#rule; sheets, correctly represents a survey made under my supervision on the ;#rule; day of ;daterule;, 19____________; and that all of the monuments shown hereon actually exist and their positions are correctly shown. 
Signature: _____
Witness _____ 
FORM 3-CERTIFICATION OF THE APPROVAL OF WATER AND SEWERAGE SYSTEMS 
I hereby certify that the water supply and sewage disposal utility systems installed or proposed for installation in the subdivision plat entitled ____________ fully meet the requirements of the Alabama State Health Department, and are hereby approved as shown. 
;daterule; 19____________. 
_____
City Health Officer
or his
Authorized Representative 
FORM 4-CERTIFICATION OF THE APPROVAL OF STREETS AND UTILITIES 
I hereby certify: (1) that streets, utilities, and other improvements have been installed in an acceptable manner according to city specifications in the subdivision entitled ____________ or, (2) that a security bond in the amount of $;$rule; has been posted with the Planning Commission to assure completion of all required improvements in case of default. 
;daterule;, 19____________. 
_____
City Street Superintendent
or other
Approving Agents 
FORM 5-CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL FOR RECORDING 
I hereby certify that the subdivision plat for ____________ subdivision has been found to comply with the Subdivision Regulations for Clanton, Alabama, with the exception of such variances, if any, as are noted in the minutes of the Planning Commission, and that it has been approved for recording in the office of the Probate Judge of Chilton County. 
;daterule;, 19____________. 
_____
Secretary, Planning Commission 
FORM 6-PERFORMANCE BOND 
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS: 
That we, ____________ as Principal and the undersigned Surety, are held and firmly bound unto the City of Clanton, Alabama, hereafter called City, in the full sum ;$rule; DOLLARS ($;$rule;), for the payment of which, well and truly to be made, we, and each of us, bind ourselves jointly and severally, by these presents. 
Dated this ____________ day of ;daterule;, A.D., 19____________. 
The conditions of this obligation are such that, 
WHEREAS, PRINCIPAL has submitted to the Planning Commission a preliminary plat for subdivision of a tract of land described as follows: _____ 
AND, WHEREAS, PRINCIPAL has, pursuant to the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Clanton, elected to file this bond in lieu of actual completion of improvements and utilities in the above subdivision. 
Now, THEREFORE, if the PRINCIPAL shall, within one (1) year from the date of approval of the final plat of the subdivision, faithfully install complete improvements and utilities in the subdivision according to requirements or ordinances, approved plans, specifications, subdivision rules and regulations of the City and pay all bills for contractors, subcontractors, labor and materials incurred in completion thereof; and shall hold harmless and indemnify the City and all interested property owners against liability, loss or damage by reason of failure of PRINCIPAL to faithfully perform the conditions hereof, then this obligation shall be null and void, otherwise to remain in full force and effect; PROVIDED, however, that actions upon this bond by contractors, subcontractors, laborers or materialmen shall be limited to six months from and after completion of the improvements and utilities above referred to. 
Signed, sealed and delivered the day and year first above written. 
_____
PrincipalATTEST:_____
SecretaryBy: __________
_____ATTEST:_____
SecretaryBy: _____ 
Approved as to form and legality this ;#rule; day of ;daterule; A.D., 19____________. 
_____
Attorney 
Approved by the City Council of the City of Clanton this ____________ day of ;daterule; A.D., 19____________. 
ATTEST:_____
Clerk_____
Mayor 
FORM 7-MORTGAGE RELEASE 
RELEASE OF MORTGAGE: In consideration of the platting of the property shown on the annexed map of (name of subdivision), and other good and valuable considerations, receipt of which is hereby acknowledged ____________ do hereby release, relinquish and forever discharge a certain mortgage made by ____________ and dated the ____________ day of ;daterule;, 19____________, to ____________ which is recorded in Book ;#rule; of Mortgages at Page ;#rule; of the records of Chilton County, State of Alabama, insofar as the same covers all property dedicated for streets, alleys, parks, boulevards, easements or other public use, as shown on said map. 
Witness ____________ hand ____________ this ____________ day of ;daterule;, 19____________. 
Signature: _____
Witness: _____ 
FORM 8-CITY COUNCIL ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC DEDICATION 
Be it Resolved by the City Council of the City of Clanton, Alabama, that the dedications shown on the attached plat of (name of subdivision) are hereby accepted. 
Adopted by the City Council of the City of Clanton, Alabama, this ____________ day of ;daterule;, 19____________. 
_____
MayorATTEST:_____
Clerk 
FORM 9-SEPTIC TANK CERTIFICATION 
(Applicable only where septic tanks are to be used) 
I, ____________ a registered engineer in the State of Alabama, certify that a soil survey of ____________ subdivision has been completed by (name of testing laboratory) on (date) and that this test shows that a soil to be sufficiently porous to permit septic tanks for each lot shown on the plat. 
_____
Registration Number_____
Signature 
FORM 10-CERTIFICATE OF CITY CLERK 
CERTIFICATE OF CITY CLERK: I, ____________, Clerk of the City of Clanton, State of Alabama, hereby certify that I have examined the records of the said City and find that all deferred payments or unmatured installments upon special assessments have been paid in full, and that there is no special assessment procedure now pending against the land as shown on the plat of (name of subdivision). 
Dated this ____________ day of ;daterule;, 19____________. 
_____
Clerk_____
Witness 
APPENDIX B. PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLAT REVIEW AND APPROVAL FORM 
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
Name of Subdivision _____ 
Name of Owner(s) _____ 
Date Submitted _____ Checked by _____ 
Required Number of Copies of Plat Submitted _____ 
Topographic Map Required:   Yes ____________ No ____________ 
Location of Subdivision (Section, Range, Leir) _____ 
_____
Has Plat Been Prepared at the Appropriate Scale:   Yes ____________ No ____________ 
Present Zoning Classification of Area _____ 
Preliminary
PlatFinal
PlatYesNoYesNoGENERAL PLATTING REQUIREMENTS1.Is the Subdivision laid out to conform with the approved master plan of the area?;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;2.Does the street pattern discourage through traffic?;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;3.Do the streets intersect at as nearly 90;deg; angles as possible?;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;4.Are the number of streets converging at one point kept to a minimum?;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;5.Have provisions been made for principal local streets to be continued in adjacent subdivisions without creating hazardous jogs or angles in the thoroughfare pattern? ;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;6.If cul-de-sacs are shown, do they:a.Have adequate turn around facilities? (100 feet diameter minimum);#rule;;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;b.Remain a conventional length of not more than 600 feet?;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;7.Are blocks a normal size (approximately 1,000 feet in length)?;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;8.If a block is excessively long (1200;ft;), has a pedestrian crossing been provided in the middle of the block? ;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;;#rule; REQUIRED PHYSICAL IMPROVEMENTS1.Has due consideration been given by the subdivider regarding dedication of that portion of land necessary for public use? (school sites, park sites, etc.) ;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;2.Have all necessary easements for utilities been checked to determine whether they meet the requirements of the utility company? ;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;3.Have the locations, widths, and other dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, lots, easements, and other open spaces been clearly shown? ;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;4.Are all blocks and lots properly numbered?;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;5.Do all streets and courts shown on the plat bear tentative names?;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;6.List of names of streets, courts, or boulevards shown on the plat.a.  _____b.  _____c.  _____d.  _____Do any of the tentative names listed conflict with any existing street names?;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;7.Is the accurate location and description of all monuments clearly shown? (Permanent monuments of natural stone or concrete should be set to finish grade at such critical points as will enable any skilled surveyor to lay out correctly any lot in the subdivision.) ;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;8.Has the length of lines of all lots, the length and bearing of the lines of all streets, alleys, and easements, the length of all arcs, and radii, the points of curvature, and the tangent bearings in the case of curved lines been checked by the Street Superintendent? ;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;9.Do all necessary signatures appear on the plat?;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;10.Is the north point, date, scale, and name of the firm which designed the plat clearly shown? ;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;;#rule; ZONING ORDINANCE REQUIREMENTS1.Does the zoning classification of all parcels of land appear on the plat?;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;2.Are all lots delineated of adequate size to meet the requirements of the appropriate zoning classifications? ;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;3.Will a performance bond (to run to the city) be required?;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;;#rule;4.Performance bond set at $;$rule;.APPROVAL GRANTED1.Preliminary Plat:;#rule;;#rule;2.Final Plat:;#rule;;#rule;LIST OF ALL SUGGESTED REVISIONS OR CHANGES1._____2._____3._____4._____ 

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1979 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1979 Code which are included herein. Sections of the 1979 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1979 Code
SectionSection 
this Code1-1-1-7 1-1-1-7 1-8 1-9 2-1-2-4 2-31-2-34 2-6 2-35 2-716-2 2-816-1 2-9, 2-107-2, 7-3 2-112-2 2-122-4 2-12.120-53 2-12.220-51 2-12.320-54 2-12.420-52 2-12.5, 2-12.620-55, 20-56 2-132-3 2-18-2-212-56-2-59 2-262-60 2-382-1 3-1, 3-24-26, 4-27 3-3-3-54-29-4-31 3-64-33 3-74-32 3-84-34 3-94-28 3-124-1 4-1 5-26 7-36 4-2 5-27 4-4, 4-55-54, 5-55 4-6, 4-75-51, 5-52 4-85-71 4-95-55 4-10, 4-115-73, 5-74 4-125-72 4-135-75 4-14-4-165-56-5-58 4-175-76 4-185-53 4-1920-1 4-3820-8 4-40 20-10 4-41 20-9 4-42 20-2 4-44 20-36 4-48 20-11 4-49, 4-50 20-4, 20-5 4-51-4-53 20-5-20-7 4-54 20-2 5-1, 5-2 6-1, 6-2 6-1, 6-2 5-1, 5-2 6-77-36 7-4 17-14 7-7, 7-8 17-16, 17-17 8-1 10-28 8-2 10-45 8-3 10-26 8-4, 8-5 10-31, 10-32 8-6-8-9 10-34-10-37 8-1010-33 8-1110-38 8-1210-26 8-13-8-1610-39-10-42 8-1710-30 8-1810-27 8-1910-29 8-2110-44 8-2210-43 8-33, 8-3410-69, 10-70 8-3510-66 8-36 10-91 8-37-8-40 10-110-10-113 8-4110-108 8-4210-107 8-4310-92 8-4410-114 8-4510-93 8-46-8-4810-115-10-117 8-4910-94 8-5010-109 8-5210-106 8-5310-151 8-54, 8-5510-154 8-56, 8-5710-155, 10-156 8-58, 8-5910-158, 10-159 8-60(a), (b)10-153 8-60(c)10-152 8-60(e)10-157 8-61-8-66 19-26-19-31 9-21-9 9-37-5 9-5-9-77-6-7-8 9-87-4 9-97-1 9-10, 9-1113-1, 13-2 9-1313-3 9-15, 9-1613-10, 13-11 9-1813-5 9-2013-6 9-21-9-2310-196-10-198 9-2513-7 9-31 13-8 9-3313-64 9-3413-63 9-3513-62 9-3613-61 9-37, 9-3810-221, 10-222 9-3910-225 9-40, 9-4110-223, 10-224 9-4210-226 9-4310-251 9-44-9-4610-253-10-255 9-4710-252 9-48, 9-4910-258, 10-259 9-50-9-5310-261-10-264 9-5410-257 9-5512-5 9-5610-256 9-58, 9-5910-265 9-6010-266 10-312-1 10-4, 10-512-3, 12-4 10-612-2 10-1012-6 10-12, 10-1312-5 11-1 14-26 11-2, 11-3 14-28, 14-29 11-4 14-29 11-5 14-31 11-6 14-27 11-7 14-32 11-814-30 12-1-12-3 15-1-15-3 12-4, 12-5 15-5, 15-6 12-6 15-4 12-6615-31012-71, 12-7215-371, 15-37212-73-12-7715-391-15-39512-7915-39612-80, 12-8115-34612-8215-34712-8315-713-1-13-4 18-1-18-4 13-6, 13-7 18-41, 18-42 13-8, 13-9 18-42, 18-43 14-111-1 14-8, 14-911-3, 11-4 14-1211-1 14-1311-5 14-1811-31 14-29 11-78 14-30 11-77 14-31 11-76 14-32 11-74 14-3410-291 14-35-14-4010-306-10-311 14-4110-292  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1979 Code, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1979 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede the old Code, but which were never included in the 1979 Code for various reasons. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance
Number DateSection Section
this Code11-13-69App. B, Art. I, § 1-Art. XIII 8-29-77App. A, §§ 1-139-7812-11-7819-27 29-26 39-29 49-28 69-31 5-80 7-28-80120-3 320-3 1-81 1-12-81I10-356 II-V10-358-10-361 VI10-357 3-81  3- 9-81I10-387 II10-386 III(1-3)10-390 III(4)10-391 IV(1), (2)10-388 IV(3), IV(4)10-392, 10-393 V10-394 VI10-389 6-81 6- 8-81118-41 418-43 8-81 7-27-81117-1 217-15 9-81 9-14-811, 217-1, 17-2 317-8 417-13 5, 617-4, 17-5 717-7 8, 917-9, 17-10 1017-9 1117-12 1217-11 1317-6 10-81 9-28-81120-1 1-83 3-28-8315-26 35-28 5-83 4-11-83113-4 13-83 8- 8-831-313-37 413-36 511-2 4-84 4- 9-84110-196 5-84 4-23-84111-41 2, 311-45, 11-46 411-48 511-72 6, 711-43, 11-44 811-42 6-84 5-14-84I6-3 9-8411-13-8417-3 4-85 8-26-85I10-68 6-85 9-23-8518-42 7-8511-25-851, 211-6 8-8511-25-851App. A, § 11A 2-86  1-13-86116-3 3-86  1-27-8612-5 2, 310-67 13-8610-27-861App. A, § 615-86 10-27-861, 27-52, 7-53 37-51 16-8611-10-861, 211-71, 11-72 411-73 511-72 11-75-11-77 9-7812- 1-86310-67 4-87 3-23-87art. 18-36 art. 1, § B-8-37-8-39 art. 1, § Dart. 28-1 art. 3, § A-8-2-8-9 art. 3, § Hart. 4, § A-8-61-8-64 art. 4, § Dart. 5, § A-8-86-8-90 art. 5, § E5-87 3-23-871, 213-9 6-87 3-26-872App. A, § 515-87  9-28-878-663-27 8-673-32 8-683-56 8-693-28 8-703-57 8-713-26 3-34 8-723-71 8-72(a)-8-72(q)3-72-3-88 8-73-8-763-101-3-104 8-773-33 8-783-58 8-79-8-813-35-3-37 8-823-41 8-83-8-853-131-3-133 8-86 3-42 8-87 3-38 8-88 3-43 8-89 3-117 8-90 3-116 8-913-116 
3-118 8-93-8-953-29-3-31 8-97, 8-983-39, 3-40 16-8711- 9-873-42 3-56, 3-57 3-78 3-82 1-88 1-11-88I, II2-33, 2-34 3-88  2- 8-88 1(art. I, §§ 1, 4)15-311(art. I, § 1)-15-32-15-341(art. I, § 3)1(art. I, § 5)15-351(art. II, § 1)-15-66-15-74 1(art. II, § 9 1(art. III, § 1),15-86, 15-87 1(art. III, § 2)1(art. IV, § 1)-15-101-15-1111(art. IV, § 11 1(art. V, § 1)-15-221-15-2321(art. V, § 12 1(art. VI, § 1)-15-246-15-2511(art. VI, § 6)1(art. VII, § 1),15-261, 15-2621(art. VII, § 2)1(art. VIII, § 1),15-276, 15-2771(art. VIII, § 2)1(art. IX, § 1)15-2921(art. IX, § 2)15-2911(art. IX, § 3)-15-293-15-2951(art. IX, § 5)1(art. X, § 1)-15-306-15-3091(art. X, § 4)1(art. X, § 5)15-3111(art. XI, § 1)-15-321-15-3231(art. XI, § 3)1(art. XI, § 4)15-3101(art. XIII, § 1)-15-46-15-501(art. XIII, § 5)1(art. XIII, § 6)15-51, 15-525-88 3-14-88App. A, § 9 6-88 6-27-88I6-4 7-8811- 7-883-58 12-12-88(Mo.)     Rpld3-58 1-89 3- 6-891, 210-45 7-89 8-28-891-310-332-10-334 410-331 11-8912-20-891-410-172-10-175 510-171 8-90 11-26-90IIIApp. A, § 5.1, 5.2.d.1IVApp. A, § 5.1, 5.2.d.29-9012-10-90I, II10-1 10-91  5-13-9110-2 12-91 5-13-9115-26, 7-36 35-28 15-91 10-14-911-7Adopting Ordinance, p. vii1-92 1-20-92111-7 2-92 1-27-92I2-33 3-92 2-10-92I2-34 4-92 2-24-923-78 10-92  9-28-921, 24-26, 4-27 3-54-29-4-31 64-33 74-32 84-34 94-28 11-9210-12-921-713-12 2-93 2- 8-93I10-45 3-93 2-22-93I-III13-13 4-93 3-22-93II-V10-411-10-414 5-93 3-22-93I15-307(c)(2)a.4.8-93 6-28-93I-VI     Added10-441-10-446 16-9311- 8-93II-A     Added10-411(b) 3-94 2-28-94I-VI10-441-10-446 7-94 4-11-941, 217-1, 17-2 317-8 417-13 5, 617-4, 17-5 717-6, 17-7 817-9(a) 917-10 1017-9(b) 1117-12 1217-11 14 17-3(a) 1517-15 16 17-5(c) 18 17-18 14-94 9-12-94II, II-A10-411 III-V10-412-10-414 1-95 1- 9-95I11-78 II11-77 III11-76 IV11-74 VII11-79 6-95 4-24-95I11-78 II11-77 III     Added11-76.5 IV11-76 V11-74 7-95 6-12-95I-IX13-101-13-109 10-95 9-25-95I10-31(c) 1-96 1-22-96Art. I, §§ 1-5     Added15-1-15-5, Art. II, §§ 1-915-21-15-29, Art. III, §§ 1, 215-41, 15-42 Art. IV, §§ 1-715-61-15-67, Art. V, §§ 1-1215-81-15-92, Art. VI, §§ 1-615-111-15-116, Art. VII, §§ 1, 215-131, 15-132 Art. VIII, §§ 1, 215-151, 15-152, Art. IX, §§ 1-515-171-15-175, Art. X, §§ 1-515-191-15-195, Art XI, §§ 1-415-211-15-214, Art. XII, §§ 1-715-231-15-237, Art. XIII, §§ A-D15-251-15-254, Art. XIII, § 315-255 2-96 1-22-96I, II2-33, 2-34 6-96 4-22-961-5     Rpld13-36, 13-37      Added13-36, 13-37 9-96 6-10-961-56-5 11-96 8-12-96I-VII2-81-2-87 15-9611- 6-961-3, 511-32 16-9611- 6-96     Rpld3-58      Added3-58 17-9611- 6-96     Added3-56(a), (b)      Rnbd3-56(a), (b)      as3-56(c), (d) 18-9611- 6-96     Rpld14-31 2-97 2-10-9710-45 7-97 5-12-9715-192(b)(1)a.2. 14-97 8-27-9715-26(1), (3)-(7) 5-98 1-26-98Art. 1, §§ A-D8-36-8-39 Art. 2, §§ A-H8-2-8-9 Art. 3, §§ A-C8-61-8-63 Art. 4, §§ A-C8-86-8-88 Art. 4, § D, E8-90, 8-91 Art. 4, § F8-89 Art. 58-64 Art. 68-1 20-9812-14-98I2-101-2-114 6-99 3-22-99I-V     Added13-120-13-124 9-9 4- 7-9714-40-4-58 15-99 5-24-99I, II10-45 16-99 6-28-99111-81-11-86 21-9912-13-99     Added21-25-21-31 22-9912-22-99     Added10-425      Added10-426 3-2000 2-14-0012-33 22-34 13-200011-13-00I10-68 3-2001 5-14-0117-1 17-12 17-23(e)04-01 5-23-01     Added15-153-15-155 05-01 7-23-01     Rpld4-40-4-58      Added4-40-4-54 06-0110- 1-01(eff.)1-13     Added10-66-10-78 08-01 8-27-011     Added2-131 09-01 8-27-013     Added2-132 10-0111- 7-0115-27(1)-(3) 15-28(1), (2) 12-0112-20-0115-81, 15-111, 15-113 01-02 2-25-023-26 2-02 3-25-025-26 4-02 4- 8-02     Rpld15-151, 15-152 5-02 4- 8-02     Added15-176 7-0210-28-0211-77 5-03 9-22-0315-26(2) 6-03 9-22-0315-26(6) 2-03 6-23-03     Rpld13-101-13-109 1-11     Added13-101-13-111 3-03 8-11-031-13     Added10-461-10-473 4-03 8-25-0310-172 4-04 2- 9-0412-33 22-34 10-04 6-14-0413-109(d) 1-05 1-10-0513-107(e)(3)      Added13-107(e)(4) 2-05 2-28-05I-X     Added10-181-10-188 3-05 3-28-05I-III13-120-13-122 7-05 7-25-053-86 9-05 9-12-057-52 7-53 10-0510-10-051-26     Added2-36 2-06 1-23-0615-194 14-0611-13-06     Added12-7 2-07 1-22-07     Rpld13-13      Added13-151-13-160 3-07 2-12-071-7     Added18-13-18-19 8-0710- 8-071-2010-26-10-45 21-24     Added 10-46-10-49 9-0711-12-07     Rpld3-56      Added3-56 1-08 1-14-08     Rpld4-29, 4-30      Added4-29, 4-30 4-08 4-28-083-57(c)(1) 8-0810-13-08     Added4-2, 4-3 2-09 2- 9-09     Rpld8-1-8-9, 8-36-8-39, 8-61-8-64, 8-86-8-91      Added8-1-8-9, 8-36-8-39, 8-61-8-64, 8-86-8-90 1-10  2-22-201010-47(122) 2-10 4-12-20101, 2     Added2-6 3-10 4-26-2010     Added12-10 4-10 4-26-2010     Added12-9 5-10 4-26-2010     Added12-8 7-10 7-26-2010     Added16-4(a) 8-10 8- 9-201015-26(tit.) 9-1010-11-2010     Added15-65(3) 1-11 5-23-201112-8 4-1110-10-201117-13 5-1110-24-2011     Added16-4(b) 6-1111-28-2011II10-411(a) 1-12 1-23-2012     Added20-100-20-107 4-12 3-12-2012     Added12-21-12-26 6-1210-22-201210-28(3) 1-13 3-11-2013     Added16-4(c) 2-13 3-25-2013     Added7-54 3-13 6-24-2013I10-387 II10-390(b) 2-14 7-14-2014App. B, Art. II, § 2 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Code of Alabama. 
Code of Ala.
1975
SectionSection 
this Code1-1-11-2 1-1-161-4 2-10-90 et seq.10-40 2-10-10510-40 2-25-1 et seq.10-45 2-28-1 et seq.10-45 3-1-1 et seq.Ch. 4 3-6-1 et seq.Ch. 4, Art. II 3-7-1 et seq.Ch. 4, Art. II 3-7-24-29 3-7-44-30 3-7A-44-29 4-30 3-7-74-33 3-7-13Ch. 4 4-6-9 et seq.App. A, § 9 6-5-12113-63 6-5-122Ch. 13, Art. III 6-5-332Ch. 7 6-5-335Ch. 7 8-14-1 et seq.Ch. 10, Art. XI 8-17-210 et seq.Ch. 7 9-11-230 et seq.13-1 tit. 11Ch. 2 tit. 11, ch. 19, §§ 1-24 8-36 tit. 11, ch. 52, §§ 1-848-36 11-40-1 et seq.Ch. 2 11-40-101-2 2-5 10-43 13-111 11-40-12Ch. 2 11-43-26-2 11-43-5Ch. 16 11-43-62-33 11-43-82-33 11-43-40 et seq.2-31 11-43-48 et seq.2-36 11-43-502-36 11-43-55Ch. 16 11-43-59Ch. 5 Ch. 7 11-43-80 et seq.2-31 11-43-140 et seq.Ch. 7 11-43-180 et seq.Ch. 16 11-45-11-9 Ch. 11, Ch. 12 13-152 11-45-2Ch. 2, Art. III 11-45-61-7 11-45-71-1 11-45-8Ch. 5 Ch. 7 11-45-91-9 11-45-9.113-159 11-46-12-33 11-46-1 et seq.Ch. 6 11-46-26-1 6-5 11-46-20 et seq.6-1 11-46-212-32 11-47-3Ch. 20 11-47-5, 11-47-6Ch. 2, Art. III 11-47-7.112-8 11-47-18Ch. 18 11-47-221-2 2-2 Ch. 20, Art. II 11-47-110Ch. 4 4-33 11-47-110 et seq.Ch. 13 11-47-112Ch. 3 11-47-114Ch. 11 11-47-117Ch. 13, Art. III 13-111 11-47-117 et seq.Ch. 3 11-47-118Ch. 13, Art. III 11-47-130 et seq.Ch. 4 Ch. 17 11-47-131Ch. 5 11-47-135Ch. 17 11-47-14013-111 11-48-1 et seq.Ch. 18 Ch. 20 11-48-1-11-48-10613-111 11-48-16Ch. 8 11-49-1 et seq.Ch. 18 11-50-1 et seq.Ch. 20 11-50-50 et seq.Ch. 20, Art. II 11-50-5520-56 11-50-108Ch. 20, Art. II 11-50-310 et seq.20-1 11-50-313Ch. 20 11-51-1Ch. 19 11-51-1 et seq.Ch. 10 Ch. 19 11-51-40Ch. 19 11-51-4319-28 11-51-4410-38 11-51-4519-26 11-51-5019-28 11-51-7419-30 11-51-90 et seq.Ch. 10 11-51-90B10-27 11-51-9110-28 11-51-9210-45 11-51-102Ch. 10, Art. VIII 11-51-10510-40 11-51-12210-28 11-51-12910-27 10-45 11-51-150 et seq.10-40 11-51-180 et seq.Ch. 10 10-27 11-52-11-2 11-52-2 et seq.2-3 11-52-32-3 11-52-30App. B, Art. II, § 211-52-30 et seq.App. BApp. B, Art. II, § 111-52-50 et seq.App. B11-52-70 et seq.App. A11-52-75Ch. 9 11-52-75.1Ch. 9 11-52-77, 11-52-78App. A, § 11 11-52-80App. A, § 811-52-818-64 App. A, § 811-53-1 et seq.Ch. 5 Ch. 9 11-54-80 et seq.Ch. 2 11-80-1 et seq.Ch. 2 11-87-1 et seq.2-4 11-88-1 et seq.Ch. 7 11-90-1 et seq.2-1 12-1-3Ch. 12 12-1-7 et seq.Ch. 12 12-1-18Ch. 12 12-14-1 et seq.Ch. 12 12-14-10 et seq.12-2 12-14-1412-2 tit. 13ACh. 13 13A-7-2913-6 13A-10-3Ch. 5 13A-11-14Ch. 4 13A-11-8416-2 17-1-1 et seq.Ch. 6 21-7-9Ch. 9 tit. 222-131 22-4-1 et seq.2-4 22-18-1 et seq.2-4 22-21-50 et seq.2-2 22-22-1 et seq.Ch. 20 22-22A-1 et seq.Ch. 20 22-23-30 et seq.Ch. 20 22-27-1 et seq.Ch. 17 22-27-3Ch. 17 17-14 22-27-3(g)17-3 22-27-5Ch. 17 22-27-5(e)17-14 22-27-717-14 22-30-1 et seq.Ch. 17 vol. 23Ch. 11, Ch. 12 tit. 23Ch. 18 24-1-1 et seq.Ch. 9 24-1-20 et seq.Ch. 2 tit. 283-41 28-1-1 et seq.Ch. 3 28-3-190 et seq.3-72 3-74 3-101 28-3A-1 et seq.3-72-3-74 3-76-3-88 28-3A-123-26 28-3A-133-34 28-3A-21Ch. 3 28-3A-23Ch. 3 28-7-1 et seq.3-73, 3-74 3-101 tit. 32, ch. 5A11-1 32-5-1Ch. 11 Ch. 14 32-5-31Ch. 11 32-5-190 et seq.16-3 32-5A-1 et seq.Ch. 11 32-5A-30Ch. 11 32-5A-1911-9 11-2 13-37 32-5A-19416-3 32-13-3-32-13-613-107 34-6-1 et seq.Ch. 10, Art. VIII 10-45 34-6-310-45 34-6-710-264 34-6-910-259 34-6-1110-260 34-6-1510-45 34-6-3010-257 34-6-30 et seq.10-45 34-27-1 et seq.Ch. 9 34-36-1 et seq.Ch. 5, Art. III, Div. 2 34-37-1 et seq.Ch. 5 35-4-201-2 35-11-150 et seq.Ch. 10, Art. XI 36-19-3Ch. 7 36-21-1 et seq.Ch. 16 36-21-40 et seq.16-1 36-32-1 et seq.Ch. 7 tit. 37Ch. 20 tit. 39Ch. 18 tit. 4010-46 10-66 Ch. 19 tit. 40, ch. 21 
arts. 2, 3 10-27 40-2-1 et seq.10-27 40-2A-310-27 40-2A-710-69 40-12-1 et seq.Ch. 10 40-12-72, 40-12-73Ch. 10, Art. V 40-12-102Ch. 7 40-12-106Ch. 10, Art. IV 40-12-139Ch. 10, Art. VI 40-12-163Ch. 10, Art. VII 40-12-174Ch. 10, Art. VI 40-12-190 et seq.Ch. 10, Art. IV 40-12-22410-48 40-12-33010-40 40-12-34310-40 40-17-30 et seq.Ch. 10, Art. IV 40-17-220 et seq.Ch. 10, Art. IV 40-23-1 et seq.Ch. 10, Art. III 40-23-24Ch. 10, Art. VI 40-23-2510-48 40-23-6210-72 40-23-8210-48 40-23-10410-70 40-23-10710-70 40-25-1 et seq.Ch. 10, Art. V 40-25-29Ch. 10, Art. V 40-26-1 et seq.10-333 tit. 41, ch. 9, § 166 8-36 41-4-110 et seq.Ch. 2, Art. III 41-9-160 et seq.Ch. 5 41-9-1668-36 41-16-1 et seq.Ch. 2, Art. III 41-16-50 et seq.Ch. 2, Art. III 41-16-512-59  
